
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16849/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th August 2020                   |On 13th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     VG
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Directions were issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 6  May  2020
    indicating  the  provisional  view,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, that this case was suitable to determine whether  there  was
    an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  if  so,
    whether that decision should be set aside, without a hearing.

 2. The Appellant conditionally opposes the determination of  these  issues
    on the papers if the Upper Tribunal do not agree  that  the  Respondent
    has effectively not opposed the grounds of appeal.  Reference  is  made
    to a  number  of  cases  about  procedural  fairness  but  no  specific
    submissions are made as to why this particular appeal  requires,  as  a
    matter of fairness or in the interests of justice, an oral  hearing  to
    determine the issues of whether there is an error of  law  and  if  so,
    whether the decision should be set aside.

 3. The Respondent has made no submissions as to whether the error  of  law
    stage of this appeal could or should be determined on the papers,  such
    that there has  been  no  objection  by  her  in  proceeding  with  the
    provisional view of Judge Lindsley.

 4. In my view, this is a case in which it is suitable for  the  issues  of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision materially erred in law  and
    if so, whether the decision should be set aside, to  be  determined  on
    the papers on the basis of the written submissions made.   This  is  in
    light of the unprecedented circumstances surrounding Covid-19  and  the
    need to take precautions to prevent the spread of the  disease;  is  in
    accordance with the overriding objective for the Upper Tribunal to deal
    with cases fairly and justly in rule 2(1), (2) and (4) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and in circumstances where on the
    facts; there are comprehensive written submissions  from  both  parties
    covering all of the relevant issues.  This decision has therefore  been
    made under rule 34.

 5. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Barton promulgated on 10 December  2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
    claim in the context of deportation dated 14 August 2018 was dismissed.



 6. The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 12 December  1985,  who
    last entered the United Kingdom in October 2011 with entry clearance as
    the spouse of a British  Citizen,  further  to  which  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to  remain  on  11  November  2013.   The  Appellant's
    application for naturalisation was refused on 7  October  2015  on  the
    basis that he had previously entered the country illegally in 2007.

 7. On 2 February 2018,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  one  count  of
    conspiring to conceal, disguise, convert, transfer or  remove  criminal
    property for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  12  months'  imprisonment.
    Further to this, the Respondent issued the Appellant with a decision to
    make a deportation order on 7 March 2018 and following consideration of
    submissions made by the Appellant; refused his human rights claim on 14
    August 2018.  The Appellant's submissions were on the basis  of  family
    life with his partner, an  Albanian  national  with  limited  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a refugee.

 8. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not meet either of the exceptions to deportation on the basis that  the
    Appellant's partner was not a qualifying partner (not being  a  British
    Citizen or settled in the United Kingdom) and  that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for her to remain in the United Kingdom if  the  Appellant
    were to be deported; and the Appellant did not meet  the  private  life
    exception as he had not been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
    for the majority of his  life  and  would  not  face  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in Albania.  Finally, there were no very
    compelling  circumstances  to   outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.

 9. Judge Barton dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  10
    December 2019 on all grounds.   In  summary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the Appellant could not meet either  of  the  exceptions  to
    deportation and in particular that the  Appellant's  deportation  would
    not be unduly harsh on his partner and there were  no  very  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh his deportation.

The appeal

10. The Appellant appeals on four grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons  for  its  findings
    that the Appellant's deportation would  not  be  unduly  harsh  on  his
    partner; setting out the competing factors but without any  explanation
    of why the conclusion was reached or  what  weight  was  given  to  the
    different factors.  Secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider the likely effects of deportation on the facts of  this  case;
    referring to  the  option  of  a  long-distance  relationship  and  the
    Appellant and his partner meeting  or  residing  together  in  a  third
    country; but without any specific reference to the particular facts  of
    this appeal and the practical realities  of  whether  the  relationship
    could be maintained by these means or not.  Thirdly,  that  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  material  evidence  or  give   it
    appropriate weight in assessing the public interest in deportation.  In
    particular,  when  considering  whether  there  were  very   compelling
    circumstances, there  was  no  consideration  that  the  Appellant  was
    committed in 2015, nearly four and a half years before the  deportation
    appeal hearing and that he was only in custody  for  six  months;  that
    there was delay considered  by  the  sentencing  Judge  and  that  this
    offence was at the lower end of the seriousness scale with  a  sentence
    of 12 months' imprisonment and following which the  Appellant  has  not
    reoffended,  has  rehabilitated  and  is   in   full-time   employment.
    Fourthly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  deal  with  the
    Appellant's integration and private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with  CI  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2027; failing to assess social and  cultural
    integration at the time of the appeal hearing rather  than  during  his
    criminal activities and failed to take into account that the  Appellant
    had indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, had a history  of
    employment and study (before and after his imprisonment) and was  in  a
    permanent relationship.

11. In the further written submissions filed  pursuant  to  the  directions
    sent on 6 May 2020, the Appellant relied  on  the  written  grounds  of
    appeal and added the following.  In relation to  the  first  ground  of
    appeal, the Appellant submits that setting out the legal  framework  is
    not sufficient in circumstances where there is no adequate  explanation
    of how the facts are assessed, weighed and  applied  against  competing
    factors and in this case, the First-tier Tribunal had simply  rehearsed
    the facts but not evaluated them.

12. In relation to the third ground of appeal, the Appellant  submits  that
    the First-tier Tribunal has failed to analyse the weight to be attached
    to the public interest in this particular case given  that  the  public
    interest in deportation is only minimally fixed and with some degree of
    flexibility.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to  consider  the  matters
    relevant to the weight to be attached to the public interest,  such  as
    the length of the Appellant's sentence.

13. The Respondent filed written submissions on 5 June  2020  opposing  the
    Appellant's appeal on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal  properly
    directed itself as to the primary issue of whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh on the Appellant's  partner  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without the Appellant.  It is submitted on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    that the grounds of appeal are  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
    findings made.

14. In relation to the second  exception  to  deportation,  the  Respondent
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal's decision is adequately  reasoned
    and results from the correct consideration of extant case law; set  out
    together with reference to the Appellant's partner's circumstances  and
    medical evidence.  The seriousness of the Appellant's offending is  not
    relevant  to  the  question  of  whether  the   Appellant   meets   the
    requirements of the second exception.

15. As to whether there were very compelling circumstances to outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation, the Respondent submits that the  First-
    tier Tribunal took into account all  relevant  matters,  including  the
    Appellant's partner's medical issues and it was open to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to conclude that there were no very  compelling  circumstances
    in this case.

16. In reply to the Respondent's submissions, the Appellant submitted  that
    the grounds of appeal were effectively unopposed by the  Respondent  in
    that there was no direct challenge to  them  and  submissions  only  on
    exception 2 in section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002, whereas the Appellant's submissions focused on  the  decision
    that there were no very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public
    interest in deportation.

Findings and reasons

 1. The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  follows  the  usual  structure  of
    setting out the facts,  the  legal  framework  and  then  findings  and
    conclusion.  The decision  has  a  lengthy  section  on  the  law  from
    paragraphs 38 to 49 and also in paragraphs 60 to 68 within the  section
    headed 'findings'.  In terms of the findings  of  fact  actually  made,
    these are contained in paragraph 52 (matters which were  common  ground
    upon which there was no dispute between the parties; paragraphs  55  to
    57 as to the Appellant's conviction  and  circumstances  since  release
    from custody (in terms of compliance with the terms of his licence  and
    employment); and then in paragraphs 69 onwards.  However,  in  relation
    to the findings about the Appellant's partner and his relationship with
    her, the decision is in the main a summary of  the  largely  undisputed
    evidence, including by reference other documents (paragraphs 69  to  73
    and 75 to 76)  without  any  actual  findings  or  evaluation  of  that
    evidence by the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In paragraph 74 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal set  out  what
    are described as 'balancing against'  factors;  being  the  Appellant's
    partner's medical treatment, education, employment,  social  circle  in
    the United Kingdom and options for the relationship to  continue  after
    deportation.  Again, there is no specific assessment or  evaluation  of
    these factors and they are stated more as a recitation  of  uncontested
    facts.

 3. In relation to the second  exception  to  deportation,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's only actual findings and conclusion are in paragraphs 81 and
    82 of the decision as follows:

         "81. I now turn to Exception 2.  The Respondent accepted  that  the
         Appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
         partner.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant's
         partner is a qualifying  partner.   I  find  that  the  Appellant's
         partner is not a qualifying partner.  She is not a British  citizen
         and she is not  settled  in  the  UK  within  the  meaning  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971.  She has leave to remain as a  refugee  until
         2020.

         82.  I find that the effect of the Appellant's deportation  on  his
         partner does not meet the requirements  of  being  "unduly  harsh".
         The decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and the  decision
         of the Court of Appeal in KF (Nigeria)  makes  it  clear  that  the
         "unduly harsh" requirement involves an additional factor or factors
         that take the case outside the expected consequences of deportation
         on a partner.  It is  inevitable  that  deportation  of  a  foreign
         criminal will have a real and potentially damaging  effect  on  the
         partner of the deportee.  On the basis  of  the  evidence  in  this
         appeal I find that the Appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of
         Exception 2 in s.117C and paragraph 399 of the Rules."

 4. Whilst it is no longer in dispute  that  the  Appellant  can  not  meet
    exception  2  because  of  his   partner's   immigration   status;   in
    circumstances where she is a recognised refugee  from  the  country  to
    which the Appellant is to be deported, it is still relevant to consider
    whether the impact of his deportation would be unduly harsh on her when
    considering overall if  there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  to
    outweigh deportation.

 5. As can be seen from paragraph 82 of the decision  above,  there  is  no
    explanation or reasoning at all by the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  why
    the effect of the Appellant's deportation would not be unduly harsh  on
    his partner and there is no reference at all to the  specific  evidence
    relevant to this issue upon which the decision is based.  It  is,  from
    this paragraph and from reading the decision as a whole, impossible for
    the Appellant to understand why the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  reached
    this decision.  This is particularly so in circumstances where there is
    unchallenged evidence of the Appellant's partner's previous trauma  and
    ongoing mental health problems directly related to the  possibility  of
    deportation which  are  not  self-evidently  comparable  to  the  usual
    adverse impact on a partner  such  that  no  reasons  are  required  to
    explain why this does not go  beyond  the  usual  degree  of  harshness
    expected.

 6. Further, although not expressly within the first ground of  appeal,  it
    is noted that the First-tier Tribunal has not made a  specific  finding
    as to whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's  partner  to
    relocate to Albania with  him.   In  circumstances  where  despite  the
    Respondent having accepted that she is refugee  from  Albania,  it  was
    submitted that it would not be unduly harsh for  her  to  return  to  a
    country where there is an accepted real risk of persecution; the  issue
    should have been resolved and it is potentially relevant in the overall
    consideration of the appeal.  For  these  reasons  and  those  set  out
    above, I find an error of law on the first ground of  appeal  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  has  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings made.

 7. The second ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal has  failed
    to consider the likely effects of deportation of the Appellant  and  in
    particular  whether  their  relationship  could  be  maintained   after
    deportation.  As above, there is no finding either way  as  to  whether
    the Appellant's partner could relocate to Albania or whether  it  would
    be unduly harsh for her to  do  so;  and  also  no  resolution  of  the
    different positions between the parties as to whether there could be  a
    long-distance relationship or one in a third country.   The  Respondent
    had clearly submitted that there could be, the Appellant's evidence was
    that they  could  continue  to  meet  in  Kosovo  and  the  Appellant's
    partner's evidence was that  there  was  not  an  alternative  workable
    option to maintain the relationship  at  all.   Although  often,  these
    standard possibilities may have no clear  or  weighty  relevance  to  a
    case, on the facts of this appeal, it was a matter on which I find that
    there should have been a  finding  of  fact  and  one  which  would  be
    relevant to the impact of the Appellant's deportation  on  his  partner
    and whether it would be unduly harsh.  The impact on a person could  be
    worse if deportation would end the relationship completely compared  to
    a lesser impact if it could be maintained elsewhere or through  regular
    visits and contact.  Although alone this may not have been  a  material
    error of law; I find that there is an error of law on the second ground
    of appeal on the particular facts of this case.

 8. The third ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    properly assess the public interest  in  deportation  when  considering
    whether there were very compelling circumstances to  outweigh  it.   In
    paragraph 84 of the  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  states  that
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest; not only to
    prevent further offences being committed by the Appellant  but  also  a
    matter of marking the seriousness with which crime is treated and as  a
    deterrent to other foreign nationals from committing crime.  The First-
    tier Tribunal does not however go on to consider the seriousness of the
    Appellant's offence, length of sentence or likelihood  of  reoffending.
    Although it is correct as a starting  point  that  there  is  a  public
    interest in deportation of foreign criminals, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has not  expressly  considered  section  117C(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that the more serious the offence,  the
    greater the public interest, nor has it assessed on the facts  of  this
    case the strength of the public interest; which is not fixed.

 9. Further, the First-tier Tribunal then go on to  simply  state  that  in
    this case it is clear that the public interest outweighs the effect  on
    the Appellant and his partner, relying again on the earlier, unreasoned
    finding that deportation would not be unduly harsh on her.  There is no
    balancing of any competing factors, no explanation and no  reasons  for
    this conclusion which is not  self-evidently  clear  when  reading  the
    decision as a whole.  As in the first ground of appeal,  it  is  simply
    impossible for the  Appellant  to  understand  the  conclusion  in  the
    absence of any reasons or in fact proper  findings  on  matters  to  be
    balanced.  I therefore also find an error of law on the third ground of
    appeal.

10. The final ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  has  failed
    to properly consider the Appellant's integration and  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom, simply finding that at the time of  his  offending,
    he was not socially and  culturally  integrated  due  to  his  criminal
    activity and discounted the Appellant's employment, qualifications  and
    tax paid because of this and because there was no  evidence  of  clubs,
    societies or places of study.

11. In paragraph 78 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal relies  on  the
    case of Binbuga v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 551 as to criminal associations and the  Appellant's  lack  of
    acceptance of the core values, customs, social behaviours and  rule  of
    law in the United Kingdom.  However, this  is  not  a  case  where  the
    Appellant's only claimed integration is with criminal  associates;  but
    one in which he had been in the United Kingdom lawfully for over  eight
    years  at  the  date  of  hearing,   with   uncontested   evidence   of
    qualifications, employment and  relationships  here;  together  with  a
    relatively short period of imprisonment after which  he  continued  his
    relationship  and  obtained  full-time  employment.    It   is   wholly
    unexplained why on the facts this did not amount to social and cultural
    integration, even taking  into  account  the  criminal  offending.   Of
    itself, and in circumstances where the clear focus of the appeal was on
    the Appellant's relationship with his partner, that is not  necessarily
    a material error of law, but it is a further error of law on which  the
    findings can not stand.

12. For the reasons set out above, I find errors of law on all  grounds  of
    appeal set out by the Appellant; which are material to the  outcome  of
    the appeal and as such it is necessary to set aside the decision.   Due
    to the nature of the errors and lack of findings and  reasons  for  the
    decision; it is not possible to preserve any findings of fact from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and it is appropriate to remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House hearing centre) to  be  heard  by  any
Judge except First-tier Tribunal Judge Barton.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson     Date 7th August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
