
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16359/2017
                                                               HU/16364/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 8th April 2019      On 30th April 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                               MAHMOOD KHALIL
                                 SABAR BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant: Mr S Woodhouse (Solicitor, HS Immigration Consultants)
For the Respondent: Miss S Cunha (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants in this appeal are nationals of Afghanistan who are
    currently living in Pakistan. Their application to come to the UK for
    settlement to join their son was refused for the reasons given in the
    Refusal Notice of the 10th of October 2017. Their appeals were heard by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman at Birmingham on the 8th of November
    2018 and dismissed for the reasons given in the decision promulgated on
    the 12th of November 2018.

 2. The Judge found that the Appellants were supported financially in
    Pakistan by their son, the Sponsor, who had refugee status in the UK
    and is now a British citizen. The Judge found that the Appellants could
    relocate away from Nangahar province to Kabul where another lives and
    that they would not be in danger there. Alternatively the Judge found
    that the Appellants could continue to reside in Pakistan and that the
    circumstances were not such that their exclusion from the Appellant
    would be disproportionate.

 3. The Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
    grounds of the 22nd of November 2018. It was argued that the Judge
    erred in the assessment of the risk to the Appellants in Kabul having
    accepted the risk to them in Nangahar. This was based on the First
    Appellant's profile as former government employee who had been targeted
    by the Taliban and the expert evidence had been misrepresented.
    Secondly it was argued that the Judge was wrong to reject the evidence
    relating to the Appellants' circumstances in Pakistan and also in
    respect of the proportionality assessment. Permission was granted with
    it being observed that it was arguable that the Judge not have
    considered AS (Afghanistan) and the failure to consider the case may
    have adversely affected the consideration of the other evidence.

 4. There was no rule 24 response from the Home Office. At the hearing the
    parties made submissions in line with their respective positions. These
    are set out in the Record of Proceedings and are referred to where
    relevant below.

 5. At the start of the hearing it was accepted that the Appellants did not
    meet the Immigration Rules and it is not suggested that that was wrong.
    Not only do the Appellants not meet the requirements for family reunion
    it is also clear that the Appellants do not meet the requirements for
    admission as adult dependent relatives under Appendix FM. This was
    dealt with in paragraph 60 of the decision in which the Judge noted the
    absence of evidence to support their claimed difficulties. That is also
    relevant to the second principal basis of the appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal and is considered further below.

 6. The first point raised by the Appellants is that they maintain that
    they would be at risk in Kabul by virtue of the First Appellant's
    profile. The Home Office submit that having resigned from his role the
    First Appellant no longer has a profile that would attract the interest
    of the Taliban in Kabul whatever the position would be in Nangahar.

 7. The report of Dr Giustozzi considered the danger to collaborators in
    paragraphs 11 and 12. Most significantly in paragraph 12 he observed
    that quitting the collaborator job or activity would not be enough to
    avoid targeting by the Taliban. Given the discussion of the reach of
    the Taliban and the danger to the First Appellant in Nangahar it
    follows that there would be a risk to the Appellants in Kabul. The
    Judge appears to have overlooked the view of Dr Giustozzi referred to
    in paragraph 12 and that has not been dealt with in respect of the
    findings made regarding the efficacy of internal relocation, even with
    the support of a son in Kabul.

 8. That does not dispose of the challenges to the appeal as the Judge had
    found that the Appellants could continue to live in Pakistan. The
    Appellants' circumstances in Pakistan were considered in paragraphs 58
    to 61 of the decision. The Judge found that the evidence did not show
    that their circumstances were unjustifiably harsh. In this regard the
    observations of the Judge granting permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal are not relevant as the country guidance relating to
    Afghanistan has no bearing on the discussion below.

 9. In attaching little weight to the evidence of the Appellant's neighbour
    in paragraph 60 that was not solely by reference to the Judge's view of
    her independence or lack of it but also in the context of other
    evidence that had been submitted. That evidence did not support the
    claims that had been made about the level of support required or their
    claimed inability to care for themselves. If the lack of independence
    had been the only reason given there might have been some argument but
    the complaint made in that respect took that part of the findings out
    of context and does not show an error.

10. While Dr Giustozzi referred to a possibility of constant harassment
    there is nothing in the evidence that suggests that the Appellants are
    suffering from such difficulties. As it stands Dr Giustozzi's
    observation remains just that and is not a statement of the
    circumstances of the Appellants. The evidence does not show that the
    Appellants cannot continue to live in Pakistan as they have now done
    for some time and it cannot be said that their circumstances are unduly
    harsh.

11. In the concluding paragraphs of the decision Judge Chapman found that
    the Appellants' circumstances did not justify a grant of leave under
    article 8 outside the rules. The Appellants rely on the case of AT and
    another (Article 8 ECHR - Child Refugee - Family Reunification) Eritrea
    [2016] UKUT 00227 (IAC). That case is somewhat different from this in
    that the UK based Sponsor was a minor rather than an adult and the
    Appellants were living in circumstances described as destitute. The
    circumstances in that case were very different from both the point of
    view of the Sponsor and the Appellants themselves and much reliance was
    placed on the Sponsor being a minor. In the circumstances I find that
    the observations based on minor refugee do not assist with this the
    assessment that had to be made in this appeal.

12. Whilst the Judge may have erred in respect of the Appellants' ability
    to live in Kabul given the observations of the expert with regard to
    the danger to the First Appellant from the Taliban that error is not
    material. When the Judge dismissed the appeal he observed that the
    Appellants had options, the alternative was to remain in Pakistan and
    the findings made in respect of that aspect of the case are sustainable
    and are not infected by any error.

13. With regard to the position under article 8 the case of AT is not of
    any real assistance. The circumstances under consideration were very
    different from those in this appeal and covered the unusual situation
    where a family had fled and a minor child had managed to get to the
    safety of the UK in essence revealing a gap in the Immigration Rules
    for the circumstances that prevailed. The evidence that related to the
    Appellants circumstances did not show that their position in Pakistan
    could be said to be unduly harsh and the Judge was entitled to find
    that the circumstances were not such that leave to enter the UK could
    be justified under article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

14. In summary the decision, read fairly and as a whole, does not disclose
    any material error with regard to the assessment under article 8 of the
    ECHR and there is no justification for setting the decision aside.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and I make no
order.



Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed: [pic]
 Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 25th April 2019

