
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16838/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 March 2020                     |On 19 May 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                shakeb imran
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Mughal, instructed by Osmans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He appealed  to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against decisions of the Secretary of State  to
    make a deportation order and also refusing a human rights claim.

2.   The appellant was given  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 6 May 2004 as a dependant of an EEA  national,  his  father,
    who is a Dutch national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.



3.   Between 28 May 2008 and 8 June 2017, the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    eighteen separate offences.   On  8  June  2017  he  was  convicted  of
    possession with intent to supply a controlled drug, class A heroin  and
    was sentenced to four years' imprisonment.

4.   The judge heard evidence from the  appellant's  parents  and  siblings.
    He noted the evidence of the family members concerning efforts they had
    put in to assist the appellant to move away from crime and specifically
    from drugs,  but,  the  judge  concluded,  they  had  failed  in  their
    endeavours.  The appellant lived in his parents' home yet according  to
    their evidence they were completely unaware that he had been dealing in
    drugs on a significant scale.  Although in his father's evidence it was
    said that the appellant was keen to help the police  to  identify  drug
    suppliers this, the  judge  commented,  was  not  compatible  with  the
    appellant's evidence in that he denied knowledge  of  supplying  drugs,
    claiming merely in fact to have found them and taken  them  home.   The
    judge noted also that the appellant had  previously  faced  deportation
    and had a successful appeal against the deportation decision  following
    a hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 14  June  2010.   He  had  expressed
    remorse for his actions as, indeed, he had done throughout the  current
    hearing, but the judge rejected  the  claim  that  that  expression  of
    remorse was genuine.  The family had said at the  previous  proceedings
    that they were convinced that he could now subsist without the  use  of
    drugs.  The family had clearly made  some  effort,  or  at  least  gave
    assurances that they would make efforts with  the  appellant  following
    the last appeal, but it had proved in vain.  He had not  only  returned
    to using drugs himself but had been convicted of a  much  more  serious
    offence of dealing in class A drugs.

5.   The judge accepted the appellant's evidence  that  he  had  found  some
    employment and was attending his counselling sessions once a  week  and
    had been tested and found to be free from drugs,  but  the  judge  bore
    very much in mind that the appellant had made all of  these  assurances
    previously, and commented that of  course  it  was  very  much  in  his
    interest with the hearing pending that he should behave  himself.   The
    judge said that he had no confidence at all that once the  hearing  was
    over, should it go the appellant's way, he  would  not  return  to  old
    habits, and he was reinforced in this view by the content of the  OASys
    Report.  At page 65 of that report it was suggested that the  appellant
    acted without considering the consequences of his behaviour, though the
    officer assessed that there was no current significant  risk  posed  by
    him to the public.  The judge remarked that the appellant was a  person
    with poor decision making  skills  who  lacked  consequential  thinking
    around  his  antisocial  behaviour,  had  an  established  pattern  for
    dishonest, acquisitive and drug-related offending and had  very  little
    insight into the serious nature of his antisocial behaviour  and  would
    give into temptation  to  carry  acts  of  criminality  and  associated
    offending behaviour on occasions that  presented  themselves.   He  was
    assessed as presenting a medium risk to the public  and  the  community
    according to the synopsis at pages 66 and 68 in the report, but in  the
    judge's view, on the  evidence,  the  risk  of  reoffending  was  high.
    According to the passage at  page  61  the  offending  was  financially
    motivated.  The judge noted that the OASys report  had  only  partially
    been reproduced and so he  was  not  fully  aware  of  the  supervising
    officer's view of the likelihood of future conviction as  against  risk
    of harm to the public.

6.   The judge also noted that the appellant had completed  his  heroin  and
    crack awareness course.   It  was  assessed  in  the  report  that  the
    appellant's desire to receive help in the area was genuine and that his
    motivation to tackle the issue was very high, but it was also  recorded
    that prior to his arrest he had misused crack cocaine and heroin  on  a
    daily basis using fairly large amounts  of  both  substances.   On  the
    evidence it was also clear that the appellant  had  been  resorting  to
    drugs since school days.  Whilst the judge accepted that the  appellant
    had a period of about seven years since the last hearing without coming
    to the police's attention, he considered that it was impossible to  say
    when his drug habit resumed  because  his  parents  claimed  they  were
    completely unaware of what was going on, even though he was  living  in
    their house.  He also remarked that, notwithstanding the length of time
    the appellant did not come to police attention, when  he  did  reoffend
    the offence was very much more serious and that of course was reflected
    in the four year prison sentence.

7.   As regards the appellant's position under the EEA Regulations,  it  was
    common ground that he had permanent residence as a family member of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.   It  was
    not argued that imperative grounds of public security  applied.   As  a
    consequence, it was necessary to  establish  that  there  were  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security in issue.

8.   The judge found that there were serious grounds of public policy.   The
    decision was based exclusively on the conduct of the appellant and this
    was judged to represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    risk threatening one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society.   The
    judge remarked that  the  question  of  rehabilitation  was  of  course
    important, but though the appellant had  committed  to  a  course  with
    Turning Point, and it was judged by Spinney Hill  Recovery  House  that
    this would be of benefit to him, he had had  earlier  opportunities  to
    rehabilitate himself with family support and had failed to make good on
    that.  Given the nature and seriousness of the most recent offence, his
    long-standing association with drugs,  the  previous  opportunities  to
    rehabilitate himself that had been  spurned  and  the  failure  of  his
    family effectively to deal with his criminal behaviour, the judge found
    that he represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.



9.   As regards integration, the judge noted the appellant was  now  35  and
    had been living in the United Kingdom for twenty  years.   He  had  had
    past employment and had been educated in the United Kingdom  and  spoke
    English.  His economic situation was not such as to  prevent  him  from
    committing offences of dishonesty to fund his  drug  habit.   He  lived
    with his parents.  The judge considered that there was little  evidence
    of any real, social or cultural integration into  the  United  Kingdom,
    and was not satisfied that he had been told the truth about the  extent
    of any links the appellant might have  with  Pakistan.   He  considered
    that for obvious reasons the appellant and his parents had said that he
    had no such links, but he noted the  appellant's  father  had  been  in
    Pakistan for a period of three  weeks  at  the  time  of  the  previous
    hearing because of the death of a friend.  That was a  commitment  that
    had been considered so important that he was unable to attend the first
    hearing.  An application for an adjournment had been made on the  basis
    that the appellant's father had a business interest in  Pakistan.   The
    appellant had admitted that he spoke the language,  as  a  national  of
    Pakistan and the judge was not persuaded that  he  had  no  links  with
    Pakistan.

10.  The judge noted that the appellant also relied on Article  8.   Counsel
    before him did not seek to argue  that  the  finding  of  the  Tribunal
    previously that he did not have  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    could be departed from, but that he did have  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, having lived here for twenty years  and  that  part  of
    that private life was his connection to other adult family members.  He
    had employment and had begun to engage in a rehabilitation course.  The
    judge accepted that Article 8 was engaged  and  that  the  decision  to
    deport represented an interference with his right to private life.  The
    judge noted that the appellant was  subject  to  automatic  deportation
    under section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Deportation of a  foreign
    criminal was conducive to the public good, though  an  exception  arose
    where deportation would  breach  a  person's  Convention  rights.   The
    decision was in accordance with the law and in pursuit of a  legitimate
    aim, and the judge  went  on  then  to  consider  proportionality.   He
    acknowledged that the appellant's private  life  had  been  established
    whilst he had been present with leave, but  noted  that  under  section
    117C(1) of the 2002 Act, the deportation of foreign  criminals  was  in
    the public interest and the more serious the offence  the  greater  the
    public interest in deportation.  In the case of a foreign criminal  who
    had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four  years,
    as here the public interest required deportation unless there were very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in  sections  1
    and 2 of section 117C.

11.   The  judge  went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of  "very   compelling
    circumstances", noting what had been said by the Upper Tribunal  in  MS
    [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC).   A case specific analysis was required as  to
    the nature of the public interest to be weighed against any  factor  on
    the foreign criminal's side in the  balance.   The  judged  noted  that
    there were no medical issues at play  in  this  case  and  nor  was  it
    necessary to take into account the welfare of any children or impact on
    a spouse or partner.  The appellant had had the  benefit  of  practical
    support from his family  whilst  he  had  been  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and the judge saw no reason why  they  should  not  make  some
    provision for him in Pakistan to help  him  re-establish  himself.   He
    would be deprived of attending the counselling course he was  currently
    undertaking and it had been asserted that no such course was  available
    in Pakistan, though there was no independent  evidence  of  that.   The
    judge noted also that the appellant said in his most  recent  statement
    that he genuinely believed that he no longer was dependent on drugs and
    did not suffer from withdrawal symptoms.  The judge concluded there was
    nothing by way of very compelling circumstances applying in this  case.
    He bore in mind the health problems of the appellant's mother  and  the
    impact on her of his deportation, but he  considered  this  was  not  a
    sufficiently strong reason taken alone or  in  conjunction  with  other
    matters to outweigh the public interest in having the appellant removed
    from the United Kingdom.  The proportionality balance fell on the  side
    of the public interest.  The appeal was dismissed.

12.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the  judge  should  have  adjourned  the  hearing  to  enable  the
    respondent to produce the complete OASys Report, that he had failed  to
    consider Exception 1 of section 117C, had  erred  with  regard  to  the
    issue of very significant obstacles to integration and with  regard  to
    the issue of very compelling circumstances.

13.  Mr Mughal  provided  a  skeleton  argument.   He  did  not  pursue  the
    adjournment issue,  but  otherwise  the  grounds  were  relied  on  and
    developed.  Mr Mughal argued that in line with what had been said in AM
    [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1634,  the  OASys  assessment  had  to  be  properly
    considered and it was necessary to  engage   with  the  evidence  which
    caused the probation officer to reach the conclusion he  did  and  with
    the appellant's conduct since his release.   The  judge  had  therefore
    failed to give proper weight to the  OASys  assessment  and  failed  to
    consider the evidence of  the  information  leading  to  the  probation
    officer's conclusion as to the genuineness of  the  desire  to  receive
    help.  In the absence of such an  assessment  there  was  no  basis  to
    conclude that the appellant would return to his old habits  should  the
    hearing go his way.

14.  Also, at paragraph 48 of his decision where the judge referred to  page
    65 of the OASys Report there was no current significant risk  posed  by
    the appellant to the public and again there was no consideration of the
    evidence which led to the probation officer's  conclusions  as  to  low
    risk, so no basis to conclude that the appellant posed a high  risk  of
    reoffending.  There was therefore no basis for the judge  to  conclude,
    as he did at paragraph  54,  that  the  appellant  was  a  sufficiently
    serious threat, and no basis to conclude as he did to  the  grounds  of
    public policy requiring his deportation.

15.  As regards the point  made  in  the  grounds  about  Exception  1,  the
    Article 8 element of the claim was addressed at paragraph 58 onwards of
    the judge's decision.  Prior to that  there  was  no  consideration  of
    Article 8.  Mr Mughal referred to paragraph 9 of his skeleton  argument
    and the reference there to NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662.   It  was
    necessary to consider the exceptions before considering  whether  there
    were compelling circumstances going beyond.  In NA  it  was  emphasised
    that all the factors in  the  Exceptions  had  to  be  considered.   At
    paragraph 55 the judge considered the integration point on the question
    of any  significant  obstacles  to  integration,  and  that  seemed  to
    conclude on the basis entirely of rejecting that the appellant  had  no
    links in Pakistan.  It was solely on that point that  the  judge  found
    the appellant would not have very significant obstacles to  integrating
    into Pakistan.  Reliance was placed on paragraphs  18  and  20  of  the
    grounds, in particular what was said about the idea of "integration" in
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  Reliance was also placed on what had  been
    said by the Court of Appeal in Sanambar  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1284.   The
    issue of integration was not limited to links to the country of return.
     Overall, it was argued with respect to the exemption  that  no  proper
    consideration  had  been  given  to  whether  the  appellant  satisfied
    Exemption 1.  He had spent more than half of his life lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom and hence it was necessary to consider integration  into
    Pakistan.  So even if the Tribunal found the  judge  did  in  principle
    look at Exception 1, that assessment was incomplete and confusing.   It
    was unclear on what principles the judge had acted in respect  of  very
    compelling circumstances beyond the exceptions.   With  regard  to  the
    Secretary of State's skeleton argument, the point was  reiterated  that
    consideration by the judge of Exception 1 was inadequate.

16.  In her submissions Ms Cunha argued that  the  case  concerned  the  EEA
    Regulations and in combining what was said about section  1  the  judge
    might not have applied Schedule 2  to  the  Regulations.   It  was  not
    necessary for Article 8 to be considered.  The decision of the Court of
    Appeal in Shrestha  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  2810  was  put  in.   Particular
    reference was made to paragraphs 30 to 34.  The Tribunal had to  decide
    whether the judge had made a safe decision about risk and the appellant
    representing a threat to fundamental  interest  of  society.   Anything
    about Article 8 was irrelevant as this was not an Article 8 appeal.

17.  As to how Regulation 27 worked, it was necessary to look  at  the  risk
    that the appellant posed and balance it out  proportionately  and  take
    into account the risk of reoffending.

18.  Ground 1 argued that there was an error at paragraphs 47 and 48 of  the
    judge's decision concerning the  less  weight  attached  to  the  OASys
    Report.  This was not true however.  The judge had  not  attached  less
    weight but dealt with the report in the context of the overall  appeal,
    including the 2010 appeal.  The appellant had an ongoing  drug  problem
    and he had tried and failed  to  stop  it  and  hence  there  had  been
    persistent offending and these  were  egregious  offences.   Therefore,
    notwithstanding the OASys Report, the judge took the view he did of the
    appellant's likelihood of reoffending if  he  were  successful  in  his
    appeal.  It was said in the OASys  Report  that  the  appellant  lacked
    consequential thinking  around  his  antisocial  behaviour.   This  was
    relevant to the question of Treaty integration whether his pattern  and
    history showed he would change his ways.

19.  It could be seen at paragraph 43  of  the  judge's  decision  that  the
    appellant did not accept his recent conviction.  Paragraph 44 addressed
    the family context, and this was an argument similarly  made  in  2010.
    So the appellant had already been through this process once.  The judge
    highlighted this.  The appellant lived at his parents'  but  they  were
    unaware of his drug activities.  They were unclear what  was  going  on
    when he was living under their roof.  So they had no control  over  him
    and he was not seeking their help: he could not have done as they would
    have known.

20.  As regards rehabilitation there was a contradiction.  He  had  said  he
    did not commit the offence so he would not help the police, as noted by
    the judge at paragraph 44.  Weight was attached to the OASys Report but
    the judge looked at the documents and the wider  scope  of  things  and
    considered them in the context of the correct legal test.  This  was  a
    drugs crime and as had been held in Bouchereau drugs on their own could
    amount to a sufficiently serious offence.  The judge's  conclusions  at
    paragraph 54 were wholly appropriate.

21.  For completeness Article 8  was  considered  in  Exception  1  and  the
    compelling circumstances test and integration of the  very  significant
    obstacles.  The decision in AS  (Iran)  put  Kamara  into  context.   A
    person had to be considered in the capacity of  being  an  insider  and
    whether they would be able to move there, so even if this was necessary
    to be considered the judge had done so properly.  The  appellant  would
    be enough of an insider if he returned.  His spoke English  and  had  a
    work history.  The judge had considered the evidence  about  links,  at
    paragraph 55 of his decision.  No reasons had been given as to why  the
    appellant could not return.  He was aged 35 and was capable of  working
    and his father had business interests in  Pakistan.   He  could  be  an
    insider and good reasons  had  been  given.   Offending  could  not  be
    considered with regard to evidence of integration, as held in  Binbuga.
    He had shown disregard to the law and authority and demonstrated little
    integration.  The judge gave proper consideration  to  very  compelling
    circumstances.  The appellant did not meet  the  exceptions.   But  the
    judge did not need to address these matters anywhere as it was  an  EEA
    deportation appeal.

22.  By way of reply Mr  Mughal  pointed  to  paragraph  1  of  the  judge's
    decision and the fact there had been  a  decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim and the appeal had been against a human rights decision so
    the judge had to consider section 117C properly.  Certainly EEA law was
    relevant to the appeal but there was the human rights element also.

23.  The cases that Ms Cunha relied on  did  not  deal  with  the  situation
    where there was a human rights decision with an EEA element.   She  had
    argued that the judge had properly assessed the appellant but then said
    that there was no evidence that he would not return to his  old  habits
    and he denied the offence.  Again, reference was made to what had  been
    said in AM quoted at paragraph 6 of the grounds to the  context  of  an
    appellant who was anxious to minimise and even deny his criminality and
    nevertheless the report had to be addressed properly, as had been  held
    there.  There had to be an  analysis  of  the  reasons  or  information
    leading to the  Probation  Officer's  conclusion  that  the  desire  to
    rehabilitate was genuine.  This ought to have been assessed before  the
    decision that the appellant would return to his old ways.  The  absence
    of such an assessment meant the overall assessment was inadequate.

24.  With regard to the issue of very significant obstacles to  integration,
    it was  quite  clearly  not  just  answered  on  deciding  whether  the
    appellant had links  to  Pakistan  or  not.   The  judge  had  done  so
    erroneously and found no links  so  there  were  not  very  significant
    obstacles to integration.  Kamara was relied on in this context.  There
    were clearly other  considerations  which  had  to  be  considered  and
    determined with regard to obstacles to integration.

25.  I reserved my decision.

26.  At the outset, it is clear that there was  not  just  an  EEA  decision
    which was appealed but also a human  rights  decision.   As  Mr  Mughal
    pointed out, the decision was made  to  refuse  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim on 31 July 2018, there having been a decision on  30  July
    2018 to make a deportation order by virtue of section 32(5) of  the  UK
    Borders Act, and the EEA Regulations element comes in  because  of  the
    act of the appellant being a dependant of an EEA national, his  father,
    who is a Dutch national.  Accordingly, it must be right that there  was
    an Article 8 appeal to be considered as well as an EEA appeal.

27.  I have set out above the appellant's history and the reasons the  judge
    gave for dismissing his appeal.  Ground 1 is concerned with the judge's
    findings about risk of reoffending in light of the OASys assessment and
    the guidance in AM from which I have quoted above.  In  essence  it  is
    argued that there  was  an  unacceptable  contrast  between  the  OASys
    assessment, noted by the judge at paragraph 48 of  his  decision,  that
    the appellant posed no current  significant  risk  to  the  public  and
    presented a medium risk to the public and the community and the judge's
    conclusion at paragraph 54 of his decision that the appellant  posed  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.

28.  It does not seem to me that the judge erred as  contended  or  at  all.
    The conclusion in the OASys Report was that the  appellant  presents  a
    medium risk to the public and the community, the judge noting the pages
    of the report where that was set out, and also noted what was  said  in
    the  report  that  the  appellant   acted   without   considering   the
    consequences of his  behaviour,  and  although  there  was  no  current
    significant risk posed by him to the public he was a person  with  poor
    decision making skills who  lacks  consequential  thinking  around  his
    antisocial  behaviour,  has  an  established  pattern  for   dishonest,
    acquisitive and drug-related offending and has very little insight into
    the serious nature of his antisocial behaviour  and  will  give  in  to
    temptation to carry out acts of criminality  and  associated  offending
    behaviour on occasions that present themselves.   The  judge  therefore
    gave detailed consideration to the contents of the OASys Report.  I  do
    not consider that the judge can properly be said  to  have  come  to  a
    conflicting view from that in the report in concluding, as he  did,  at
    paragraph 54 of the level of threat the appellant poses bearing in mind
    that the OASys Report concluded that the appellant  presents  a  medium
    risk to the public and the community.  The judge was entitled  to  take
    the view he did at paragraph 48 of the  heightened  risk  of  offending
    bearing in mind his careful and  detailed  overall  assessment  of  the
    appellant's history and behaviour, and, as he noted  at  paragraph  48,
    the OASys Report had only been partially reproduced so he was not fully
    aware of the supervising officer's view of  the  likelihood  of  future
    conviction as against risk of harm to the public.

29.  As a consequence, I consider the judge did  not  err  as  contended  in
    respect of ground 1.

30.  Ground 2 is concerned with the  contention  that  the  judge  erred  in
    respect of Exception 1 as set out at section 117C of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This applies where, as in this  case,
    the appellant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
    of his life.  In such a case the  appellant  has  to  be  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom and  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into the country to  which  it
    is proposed that he would  be  deported.   It  is  clear  from  section
    117C(6) that in the case of a foreign criminal such  a  this  appellant
    who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four
    years, the public interest requires deportation unless there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2.  It is argued that the judge erred in not addressing Exception 1
    and in any event in what  he  said  with  regard  to  very  significant
    obstacles to integration, noting that the  appellant  had  admitted  he
    spoke the language as a national of Pakistan  and  the  judge  was  not
    persuaded he had no links with that country in that the whole notion of
    integration was a more complex and nuanced matter than had been done by
    the judge.

31.  Thus, in Kamara, to which  I  have  referred  above,  it  was  said  as
    follows:

         "The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

32.  The judge considered  the  issue  of  integration  essentially  in  the
    context of his evaluation of the EEA element of the  claim.   He  noted
    that the appellant was now 35 and had been living in the United Kingdom
    for twenty years.  He had been  employed  in  the  past  and  had  been
    educated in the United Kingdom and spoke English.  The  judge  observed
    that his economic situation  was  not  such  as  to  prevent  him  from
    committing offences of dishonesty to fund his drug  habit.   The  judge
    considered there was little evidence of any real,  social  or  cultural
    integration in the United Kingdom and was not  satisfied  he  had  been
    told the truth about any links the appellant might have with  Pakistan.
    It was said that he had no links but his father had  been  in  Pakistan
    for a period of three weeks at the time of the last hearing because  of
    the death of a friend and an application for an  adjournment  had  been
    made that he had business interests in  Pakistan.   The  appellant  had
    admitted he spoke the language, was a  national  of  Pakistan  and  the
    judge was not persuaded that he had no links with that country.

33.  The judge went on thereafter to address Article 8.   He  addressed  the
    question of  whether  there  were  very  compelling  circumstances,  at
    paragraph 58 and paragraph 59 of his  decision.   He  noted  that  what
    constitutes "very compelling circumstances" requires  a  case  specific
    analysis of the nature of the public interest to be weighed against any
    factor on the foreign criminal's side of the balance.  The judge  noted
    that there were no medical issues in play nor is it necessary  to  take
    into account the welfare of any children  or  impact  on  a  spouse  or
    partner.  The appellant had the benefit of practical support  from  his
    family whilst living in the United Kingdom and the judge saw no  reason
    why they should not make some provision for him in Pakistan to help him
    re-establish himself.  He noted that the appellant would be deprived of
    attending the counselling  course  he  was  currently  undertaking  and
    though it had been asserted  that  no  such  course  was  available  in
    Pakistan, there was no  independent  evidence  of  that.   The  judge's
    conclusion was that there was really nothing by way of very  compelling
    circumstances applying in this case.

34.  Although clearly it  would  have  been  preferable  if  the  judge  had
    addressed the issues of integration in  the  United  Kingdom  and  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Pakistan  in
    the context of the Article 8 evaluation, it is clear that these  issues
    were in his  mind  and  were  given  consideration,  in  particular  at
    paragraph 55 of his decision.  It is clear that he concluded  that  the
    appellant is not socially and culturally  integrated  into  the  United
    Kingdom, and he gave reasons for this, as he  did  in  respect  of  his
    conclusion that he was not persuaded the appellant has  no  links  with
    Pakistan bearing in mind he speaks the language and is  a  national  of
    that country.  It is relevant to note, with regard to the  guidance  in
    Sanambar, that the judge had observed earlier in  that  paragraph  that
    the appellant had had past employment and  had  been  educated  in  the
    United Kingdom and spoke English.  It seems to me that the  points  the
    judge made at paragraph 55 of his decision taken as a whole are such as
    to satisfy the requirement as set out in Kamara and in Sanambar of  the
    need to make a broad evaluative judgment, as to the appellant, will  be
    enough of an insider in terms of understanding how  life  is  lived  in
    Pakistan and a capacity to participate in  it  so  as  to  be  able  to
    operate there on a day-to-day basis.

35.  But in any event, the judge considered as he was  required  to  whether
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2, and, as I have noted  above,  found  that  there
    were none.  Again, it seems to me that these were conclusions to  which
    he was entitled to come.  It is, as the judge properly noted, a  matter
    acquiring a case specific analysis for the relevant factors  on  either
    side of  the  balance,  and  in  my  view  the  judge  came  to  proper
    conclusions in this regard in his evaluation of  this  element  of  the
    claim at paragraphs 58 and 59 of his decision.

36.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              12 May 2020

