

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16787/2019
                                                               HU/16788/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2020                   |On 10 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               GURVINDER SINGH
                                NAVDEEP KAUR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bellara instructed by Legend Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Swaniker ('the Judge') promulgated on the 27  February
       2020 in which the Judge dismissed  the  appellants  appeal  on  human
       rights grounds.




Background

    2. The first appellant, Mr Singh, was born on the 2  October  1986.  The
       second appellant, his wife was born on 6 July 1986 and  is  dependent
       upon his claim.
    3. On 30 September 2019, the respondent refused  their  application  for
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  their  family
       and private life.
    4. Having considered the documentary and oral evidence  the  Judge  sets
       out findings of fact from [15] of the decision challenge.
    5. The Judge noted that the decision  maker  did  not  accept  that  the
       appellants satisfied the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276
       ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  that  there  were   exceptional
       circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  respondent's  right  to
       operate an effective system of immigration control on the basis  that
       such circumstances would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
       as per paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM.
    6. The Judge noted an allegation that the first appellant had  submitted
       a false document in  relation  to  a  previous  application  and  had
       practised deception.
    7. This is an ETS case.
    8. The Judge sets out the correct legal self-direction that in the first
       instance there is an evidential burden  the  Secretary  of  State  to
       establish the alleged  deception.  The  Judge,  having  examined  the
       evidence relied upon, which included the Look Up Tool, found at  [18]
       that the respondent had discharged  the  initial  burden  to  provide
       prima facie evidence of deception by the appellant  in  his  previous
       application on 12 December 2012.
    9. The Judge then correctly  directed  that  the  onus  shifted  to  the
       appellant to rebut the allegation which the Judge,  for  the  reasons
       set out between [19] - [24], found the first appellant had failed  to
       do as he had not provided a plausible  innocent  explanation  to  the
       respondent's allegation and that the totality  of  the  evidence  and
       material before the Judge warranted a finding that the appellant  had
       acted fraudulently in obtaining a TOEIC certificate;  leading  to  it
       being found the appellant's application properly fell for refusal  on
       suitable grounds under paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i).
   10. The Judge records that Mr Bellara confirmed that the appellants  were
       not relying on an insurmountable obstacles argument but were  relying
       on exceptional circumstances outside the Immigration Rules, which the
       Judge finds was effectively a concession that  the  appellants  could
       not meet the requirements of the Rules.
   11. The Judge commenced the  assessment  of  the  merits  of  the  appeal
       pursuant to article 8 ECHR having regard to the guidance set  out  in
       Razgar from [27] of the decision under challenge. At [30]  the  Judge
       finds the appellants can return to  India  and  readily  re-establish
       their lives there and that they  can  continue  to  peacefully  enjoy
       their family life together in India. The Judge finds it reasonable to
       expect the appellants to leave the UK  and  that  there  will  be  no
       interruption to their family life if they were to  return  to  India.
       The Judge then examines the question of private  life;  finding  such
       did exist and that the key question is whether  the  interference  in
       such private life was proportionate to  the  respondent's  legitimate
       aim of maintaining an effective system of immigration control [31].
   12. The Judge examined the arguments relied upon  by  the  appellant  and
       respondent  in  relation  to  the  proportionality  question   before
       recording at [36 - 39]:

           "36.   I also find little if any reliable evidence going to  the
                extent and quality of such private lives as  the  appellants
                have established in the UK. They did not  have  any  friends
                attend the hearing to give evidence in support  of  appeals,
                there were no supporting  witness  statements  submitted  in
                this regard and, despite  the  appellant's  account  in  his
                witness statement that he had deep social, family,  economic
                and emotional ties in the UK,  I  find  he  provided  little
                supporting evidence before me  in  this  regard.  I  further
                consider that the appellants would be free  to  continue  to
                maintain contact with any friends/associates in  the  UK  by
                the various means of modern communications. I do not  accept
                that  the  appellant's  have  demonstrated  that  they  have
                established a private life in the UK of such significance as
                would  be  disproportionately  interference  with  by  their
                removal from the UK.


           37.    For all these reasons, I find the appellants have  failed
                to establish that the respondent's decisions  constitute  or
                would constitute a disproportionate interference with  their
                private lives established in the UK.


           38.    Given the fact as I have found them  and  my  conclusions
                thereupon, I find the appellants have  failed  to  establish
                that they qualify for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  human
                rights grounds, Article 8, within or without the Immigration
                Rules. I find no other human rights claim/s made out.


           39.    The appellant  appeals  are  dismissed  on  human  rights
                grounds, Article 8."

   13. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
       another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  16  April  2020,  the
       operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

           "3.    Amongst the extensive grounds however it is asserted that
                the Judge has erred when considering whether  the  appellant
                had discharged to the evidential burden upon him  identified
                in SM and Qadir (ETS-Evidence-Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT
                00229.  In respect of this ground it is  arguable  that  the
                Judge's reasoning at [25] suggests  the  Judge  applied  the
                wrong standard of proof  when  considering  this  evidential
                burden and instead imposed a legal  burden  of  establishing
                the truth of the  explanation  on  the  appellant.  To  this
                extent the application for permission to appeal is granted."

   14. Mr Bellara in his submission to the Upper Tribunal accepted it was  a
       narrow grant of permission but argued  it  related  to  an  important
       point as the wrong standard of proof had been applied in placing  the
       legal burden upon the appellant.
   15. It was pointed out the first appellant gave his evidence  in  English
       and that none of the issues identified by the Tribunal in SM &  Qadir
       in support of the appellant's case appeared to have been  taken  into
       account by the Judge.
   16. When it was put to Mr Bellara that although the first appellant  gave
       his evidence in English the Judge had difficulties  in  understanding
       him, he responded by claiming that the Judge did not set this out  at
       [10] of the decision which he should have done and that  it  was  not
       accepted the Judge had to clarify the first appellant's evidence with
       him.
   17. This point was raised with Mr Bellara  as  a  result  of  the  Judges
       Record Proceedings being available to the  Upper  Tribunal  recording
       the evidence given by  the  first  appellant.  The  content  of  that
       document would have been known to  Mr  Bellara  who  represented  the
       appellants before the First-tier Tribunal. That  document  shows  the
       Judge recording that the Home Office Presenting Officer  raised  with
       the appellant that he was finding  it  difficult  to  understand  the
       first  appellant,  that  the  Presenting  Officer  asked  the   first
       appellant to repeat some of his answers, that  the  Judge  asked  the
       first appellant to speak up and to speak  slowly  and  clearly  as  a
       result and difficulty in understanding everything he was saying,  and
       difficulty in understanding specific issues which the first appellant
       was asked to repeat on more than one occasion, which are not  matters
       the Judge was require to set  out  in  [10],  the  failure  of  which
       amounts to an error of law, but which were clearly matters which  the
       Judge was entitled to take into account when  assessing  whether  the
       first appelanst had demonstrated he  had  the  required  standard  of
       English at the relevant time,  such that he would not have needed  to
       employ a proxy to undertake the English language test.
   18. The appellant also asserts in addition to applying  the  wrong  test,
       the Judge failed to give sufficient reasons in relation  to  findings
       concerning the use of deception in taking the English language test.
   19. At [7 - 8] of the decision under challenge the Judge writes:

           "7.    In human rights appeals the burden of proof rests on  the
                appellant. It is for the appellant to show  that  there  has
                been and/or would be an interference with a  right  s/he  is
                entitled to enjoy under the ECHR. If that is established and
                the relevant Article permits, it is then for the  respondent
                to establish that the interference is lawful, justified  and
                proportionate in the pursuit of a legitimate objective. This
                applies  except  where  the  relevant  Article  relied  upon
                permits no derogation. The burden of proving compliance with
                any relevant Immigration Rule or Rules is on the appellant.


           8.     Where the respondent  makes  an  allegation  against  the
                appellant  it  is  for  the  Respondent  to  make  out   the
                allegation  to  the  civil  standard   of   a   balance   of
                probabilities."

   20. The Judge was therefore aware of the burden  and  standard  of  proof
       that applied as noted in addition at [15] in which the Judge state "I
       have directed myself as to the requisite burden and standard of proof
       and have taken into account the whole of the  evidence  and  material
       before me". At [17] the Judge writes  "On  the  allegation  that  the
       appellant had submitted a false document in relation to his  previous
       application and practised deception, the  initial  burden  of  course
       falls on the respondent to make  out  the  allegation  to  the  civil
       standard of a balance of probabilities".
   21. The Judge  considered  the  evidence  that  was  available  from  the
       respondent which is set out at [18] of the decision under  challenge.
       That  material  clearly  supports  the  finding,  to  the   requisite
       standard, that the respondent had discharged the  initial  burden  of
       proof to establish deception by the appellant in the  application  of
       12 December 2012.
   22. The grant of  permission  specifically  refers  to  [25]  but  it  is
       necessary to consider the Judges findings from [19 - 25] in total  to
       ascertain the Judges  approach  and  findings  in  relation  to  this
       matter.
   23. The evidential burden compels a party to produce evidence in  support
       of an issue they seek to raise, i.e. in this appeal for the appellant
       to provide evidence establishing an innocent explanation.
   24. The Judge clearly examined with  the  required  degree  of  care  the
       points relied upon by the appellant in support of his argument he had
       not used deception. The Judge noted that the appellant had sat an ETS
       in 2012 and that although he came to the  UK  to  study  he  had  not
       completed any courses and the only English certificate he has was the
       one in relation to which it is alleged he used  a  proxy.  The  Judge
       took into account the fact the appellant had studied to degree  level
       in India which is specifically mentioned at [24].
   25. The Judge attached the weight of the  evidence  that  the  Judge  was
       entitled to do in relation to the key  findings  which  are  properly
       evidenced.  These  include  finding  that  the  appellant   had   not
       demonstrated that his standard of English at the time  of  his  TOEIC
       test in 2012 was of such standard it would have made  the  use  of  a
       proxy at the test unlikely, that there was no  reliable  evidence  of
       any further education which would or  could  go  to  demonstrate  the
       appellant's level of proficiency in English at the time of the  TOEIC
       test, especially in relation to a matter  in  which  the  appellant's
       results were not considered questionable but  were  declared  invalid
       [20].
   26. The Judge noted the appellant  conducted  an  interview  in  2016  in
       English, nearly 4 years  after  the  TOEIC,  during  which  time  the
       appellant had remained in the United Kingdom before making a  finding
       that "I accordingly do not accept that weight can be attached to  the
       appellant's English proficiency at this interview,  such  as  it  may
       have been, as  a  factor  of  itself  demonstrating  the  appellant's
       English language ability at the time of his  TOEIC  test  some  years
       earlier" [21].
   27. The Judge also records the appellant having given what was  found  to
       be discrepant and/or unclear accounts of how he prepared for the test
       when it was reasonable to expect the appellant to address all of  the
       methods of preparation;  leading  to  a  finding  that  "I  find  the
       appellant's evidence as  to  his  preparation  for  the  TOEIC  lacks
       clarity and consistency. I  consider  the  lack  of  clarity  in  the
       appellant's account in this regard further undermines the reliability
       of his evidence on having sat the TOEIC test himself".
   28. The Judge rejects the appellant's argument  that  the  'Lookup  Tool'
       software  results  were  inaccurate  and  found   it   material   the
       appellant's results were ruled 'invalid' as opposed to 'questionable'
       and that out of the results from the  London  College  of  Media  and
       Technology 82% were stated to be invalid with 18% found questionable,
       which was said to be indicative of widespread cheating in the tests.
   29. The Judge noted the first appellant has a degree  certificate  taught
       in English but concludes  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  a
       reasonable  explanation  for,  or  response  to,  the  allegation  of
       deception made by the respondent; having assessed the  facts  in  the
       round and having applied the correct legal test [24].
   30. At [25] the Judge writes: "I find the appellant has failed to provide
       a plausible innocent explanation to the  respondent's  allegation.  I
       conclude from the totality of the evidence  and  material  before  me
       that the respondent has discharged  the  burden  to  prove  that  the
       appellant used deception in his application of 12  December  2012  in
       his use/submission of a fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate".
   31. I do not find the appellant has established an error of law  material
       to the decision in  the  manner  in  which  the  Judge  assessed  the
       evidence made available in this appeal.  The  Grounds  challenge  the
       weight the Judge gave to the appellant's written and  oral  evidence,
       the interview process in relation to the ETS  issue,  the  appellants
       previous qualifications, other issues, in a case in which I find  the
       Judge considered the evidence with the  required  degree  of  anxious
       scrutiny and has made findings supported  by  adequate  reasons.   As
       such, the weight to be given to the evidence was  a  matter  for  the
       Judge. It has not been established that  the  Judge  has  attached  a
       degree of weight that is in  any  way  irrational  or  made  findings
       outside the range of those available to the Judge on the evidence.
   32. As noted, this is a human rights appeal.  In  his  reply  Mr  Bellara
       raised no contention concerning the Judge's article 8 assessment  nor
       challenge to the same; arguing the question of deception was the core
       question which may impact upon the article 8 assessment.
   33. As noted above, I do not accept Judge  erred  in  assessing  the  ETS
       issue on the evidence made available. The Judge clearly  undertook  a
       structured appraisal of the merits of the article  8  case,  weighing
       carefully the competing arguments relied upon by  the  appellant  and
       the respondent. The Judge's conclusion,  having  done  so,  that  the
       respondent's decision is proportionate is within the range  of  those
       reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence and has not  been  shown
       to be infected by legal error material to the decision to dismiss the
       appeal on human rights grounds.
   34. Whilst the appellants disagree with the outcome, expresses concern in
       relation to the impact of the finding of use of deception in relation
       to any future application, and wish to remain in the United  Kingdom,
       the grounds fail to  establish  any  basis  for  the  Upper  Tribunal
       interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

   35. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   36. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed..................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 November 2020
