
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16688/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th June 2019                    |On 01st July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                         miss Kalaimani Subramanian
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The court makes no  order  in  respect  of  anonymity.   The  Appellant
    appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson promulgated on
    8th March whereby he dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse to grant entry clearance as a child.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted at the First-tier  Tribunal  by  Judge
    Keane on 22nd May 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give an adequately  consideration  to
    the Human rights grounds of appeal, restricting his  fact  finding  and
    analysis to the Immigration rules rather than Article 8 ECHR.

 3. Neither the  Appellant  nor  the  representative  appeared  before  me.
    Although it appears that the representative may not have known that the
    application for an adjournment had been refused it was  incumbent  upon
    them  to  assume  the  hearing  was  to  proceed  unless  notified  the
    application  had  been  granted.   Instead  they  simply   resent   the
    application by fax on the day of hearing.

 4. In the event Mr Tarlow conceded that the FT TJ had erred in law because
    he had not conducted an Article 8 enquiry. On the face of the  decision
    although there was correct self-direction the FT TJ  had  not  followed
    through neither making sufficient findings of fact upon  which  to,  or
    conducting an Article 8 assessment.

 5.  Mr  Tarlow  indicated  because  the  fact-finding  exercise  has  been
    insufficient, and the decision must be remade on the position as at the
    date of hearing, and I am unable to remake the decision,  as  the  case
    involves a minor, in fairness there should be the opportunity of a full
    hearing and the opportunity of adducing further evidence.

 6. I find that the decision of the First  tier  Tribunal  is  vitiated  by
    legal error but for which the outcome might be  different.  Because  of
    the incomplete factual findings and the extent to which it is necessary
    to hear evidence I remit the matter to be heard de novo  at  the  First
    -tier Tribunal.

Signed   [pic]         Date 27 June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge











