
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16719/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th January 2019                          |On 5th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                yamikani [j]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss H Masih of Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Malawi born [~] 1978 making him 40  years
    of age at the date of hearing.  He appeals against a decision of  Judge
    Courtney (the judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the  FtT)  promulgated
    following a hearing on 7th June 2018.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK as a visitor on  9th  November  2016  with
    leave to enter and remain until 10th April 2017.  On 5th April 2017  he
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of family life with  his  wife
    Margaret [J] and their daughter born [~] 2015.

 3. The application was refused on 18th  November  2017.   The  appeal  was
    heard by the FtT on 7th June 2018.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 4. The judge noted that the Appellant had been refused a visa on 18th  May
    2015 when he had applied to join the Sponsor for settlement in the  UK.
    The Appellant then applied  for  a  visit  visa  on  14th  August  2015
    indicating that he intended to visit the Sponsor and his newborn  child
    and that he would return to Malawi after six months.  The  judge  found
    that the Appellant had practised deception in his application for entry
    clearance on the basis that he had not intended to return to Malawi.

 5. The judge therefore found that the Respondent had correctly relied upon
    S-LTR.4.2 of Appendix FM in refusing the application.

 6. The judge also found that the Appellant could not satisfy  Appendix  FM
    because his application for leave to remain was made while  he  was  in
    the UK as a visitor and therefore he could not satisfy E-LTRP.2.1.  The
    judge also  found  that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(1) and therefore his appeal must be considered under  Article  8
    of the 1950 European Convention outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    judge found that the Appellant had established a genuine and subsisting
    relationship and had established family life together in  the  UK.  The
    judge found that the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his daughter who is a British citizen.

 7. The judge found, at paragraph 28, that  it  was  in  the  child's  best
    interests, although not overwhelmingly so, to remain  in  the  UK  with
    both her parents as part of a family unit.

 8. The judge found at paragraph 33 that the Sponsor earned  �19,310.09  in
    the last financial year and therefore  earned  more  than  the  minimum
    annual income requirement.  At paragraph 35 the  judge  found  that  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect the Sponsor to relocate  to  Malawi
    as she had been born in that country and lived there until the  age  of
    22, coming to the UK in November 2008.

 9. The judge accepted that at the date of hearing the Sponsor was fourteen
    weeks pregnant.  The judge concluded that the Appellant could return to
    Malawi and make an application for entry clearance.  The judge found at
    paragraph 41 "that the legitimate aim  of  proper  immigration  control
    outweighs the right of the Appellant to  respect  for  his  family  and
    private life in the UK on the basis claimed."





10. The judge dismissed the appeal under Article 8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention.

Permission to Appeal

11. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Gibb and I set out below,  in
    part, the grant of permission  which  summarises  the  grounds  seeking
    permission;

         "2.  The grounds which were in time, complain that the judge  erred
             in

             (1)  treating the Appellant as a visitor,

             (2)  his finding of deception on original entry as a visitor,

             (3)  his approach to derivative right to reside,

             (4)  failing to consider the impact  of  the  entry  clearance
                  option on the Appellant's child, and  the  impact  of  the
                  deception finding on any future application,

             (5)  not considering the significance of the pregnancy, and

             (6)  not considering section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

         3.   The first and third grounds appear to me to be misguided.  The
             others  do   raise   legal   points   that   justify   further
             consideration.  At [17] the judge notes that  the  Appellant's
             failure to return in itself raised a deception issue,  but  it
             is arguable that the finding that the account was not one that
             could reach even a minimal level of plausibility was  not  one
             open on the evidence, and given the  serious  consequences  it
             remained the case that the burden was  on  the  Respondent  to
             show deception at the date of application and entry.  Although
             the section 117B(6) question is set out at [24] it is arguable
             that the judge did not answer it or consider the impact of the
             answer on the public interest question."

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. Miss Masiah relied upon the grounds, the grant of permission,  and  her
    skeleton argument.  It was submitted that the judge  erred  in  finding
    that the Appellant had deceived the Entry Clearance Officer.  There had
    been a change of circumstances following the grant of entry  clearance,
    and there was no evidence of deception and the judge was wrong to  find
    otherwise, and had failed to follow the principles in Shen [2014]  UKUT
    236 (IAC).  It was submitted that the Respondent had not submitted  any
    evidence to counter the explanation given by  the  Appellant.   It  was
    contended that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  engage  with  the
    Sponsor's oral evidence that she had looked for alternative  jobs  with
    flexible working hours.  It was contended,  regarding  deception,  that
    the judge had given insufficient reasons.

13. With reference to Article 8 it was submitted that the judge  had  erred
    by not following a  "balanced"  approach.   The  judge  had  failed  to
    consider when accepting that an entry clearance  application  would  be
    decided in 60 days, the adverse finding in relation to deception, which
    would affect the entry clearance application.  The judge had failed  to
    take into account the Sponsor's pregnancy when  considering  separation
    of the family, and the impact of separation on the child.



14. The judge had materially erred by failing to consider  section  117B(6)
    of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act.  It was  submitted  that
    the judge's proportionality assessment was materially flawed by  reason
    of the failure to consider section 117B(6).

15. Mrs Aboni submitted that the judge had provided  adequate  reasons  for
    findings made.  The judge had correctly considered the  best  interests
    of the British child.  It was not perverse to make a finding  that  the
    Sponsor would return to Malawi. It was accepted that the judge had  not
    made a finding on section 117B(6) but it was submitted  that  this  was
    not a material error.  In the absence of a material error I  was  asked
    to find that the decision of the FtT should stand.

16. In response Miss Masiah submitted that the failure to consider  section
    117B(6) adversely affected the balancing exercise carried  out  by  the
    judge when considering proportionality.

17. I indicated that I intended to reserve my decision to reflect upon  the
    submissions  in  relation  to  error  of  law.   Both   representatives
    submitted that if an error of law was found, which  was  material,  the
    decision could be remade by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that had been before the FtT, and there would be no need for a
    further hearing.

My Conclusions and Reasons

Error of Law

18. The decision of the FtT is comprehensive and  has  been  prepared  with
    considerable care, but I am persuaded that the judge erred in  law  for
    the following reasons.

19. I find the judge erred when considering the issue  of  deception.   The
    judge correctly set out the principles to be followed  in  Muhandiramge
    [2015] UKUT  00675  (IAC).   The  first  stage  is  that  there  is  an
    evidential burden on the Secretary of State where deception is alleged.
     This requires that sufficient evidence be adduced to raise an issue as
    to the existence or non-existence of a fact in issue.

20. The second stage, assuming that the first stage is satisfied,  is  that
    the  Appellant  has  an  evidential  burden  of  raising  an   innocent
    explanation, by providing an account which satisfies the minimum  level
    of plausibility.

21. The third  stage  arises  if  the  Appellant  has  raised  an  innocent
    explanation. The burden is then on the  respondent  to  show  that  the
    Appellant's innocent explanation is to be rejected.  I find  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the  initial  evidential  burden  on  the
    Secretary of State had  been  satisfied.   It  was  relevant  that  the
    Appellant had been refused a visa on 18th May 2015, when he had applied
    to join the Sponsor in the UK as her spouse.  He  then  applied  for  a
    visit visa on 14th August 2015 indicating that he intended to return to
    Malawi.  He arrived in the  UK  on  9th  November  2016,  and  made  an
    application to remain on 5th April 2017, shortly before his leave as  a
    visitor expired on 10th April 2017.

22. In my view the error of law is in  paragraph  17  in  which  the  judge
    concludes that the Appellant has not discharged the  evidential  burden
    of  raising  an  account  which  satisfies   the   minimum   level   of
    plausibility.  I do not find that the judge  has  adequately  explained
    why this is the case.  There appears to be little consideration of  the
    length of time that had elapsed.  The spousal visa was refused on  18th
    May 2015, and the application for leave to remain was made on 5th April
    2017, almost two years later.  The Appellant provided  an  explanation,
    as did the Sponsor, which was that the Appellant initially intended  to
    visit but when he came  to  the  UK,  the  Sponsor  took  up  full-time
    employment, and the Appellant became the full-time carer for the child.
     His emotional bond with the child increased, and  it  was  because  of
    this, and following legal advice, that  he  was  entitled  to  make  an
    application, that the  Appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain, which would enable him to carry on caring for the child and the
    Sponsor to maintain her employment and to satisfy  the  minimum  income
    requirements.

23. My view is that the judge failed to fully engage with that explanation,
    which only had to satisfy  the  minimum  level  of  plausibility.   The
    burden of proving deception, which is a serious issue, should then have
    switched back to the Respondent.

24. I also conclude that the judge erred in  considering  Article  8.   The
    judge did not err in finding that the best interests of the child would
    be to remain in the UK.

25. The error was to fail to consider paragraph 117(6)  of  the  2002  Act.
    There is reference to section 117(6) at paragraph  24,  but  the  judge
    does not consider it, and makes no finding as to whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a British child to leave the UK.

26. The judge does, at paragraph 35, find that it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the Sponsor to relocate to Malawi, but makes no specific finding
    in relation to the British child.

27. I find that this amounts to a material error,  as  it  means  that  the
    balancing exercise, when considering proportionality is flawed.

28. For the reasons given above, I find that the  decision  is  unsafe  and
    must be set aside.

Remaking the Decision

29. The factual matrix is that the Sponsor originates from Malawi  and  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  She has resided in this  country
    since 2008.  The Appellant is a citizen of Malawi who arrived in the UK
    as a visitor on 9th November 2016 and prior to his leave as  a  visitor
    expiring, applied for leave to remain relying upon family life with the
    Sponsor and their daughter.

30. The daughter is 3 years of age, she will be 4 in April 2019.  She is  a
    British citizen.  The Appellant and Sponsor married in  Malawi  on  9th
    January 2015.

31. There is reference in the FtT decision to the Sponsor  being  pregnant.
    Very sadly the baby did not survive, and a funeral took  place  on  5th
    September 2018.

32. In considering this appeal the general rule is that the burden of proof
    is on the Appellant on a balance of probabilities.  There  are  however
    particular provisions referred to earlier, in relation to deception.

33.  I  have  taken  into  account  all  the  documentary  evidence.    The
    Respondent's bundle has Annexes A-F, and I  have  also  considered  the
    Grounds of Appeal to the FtT, the  Appellant's  bundle  comprising  451
    pages, additional evidence submitted under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  2008
    Procedure Rules, which relates to the death and funeral  of  the  baby,
    and skeleton arguments prepared on behalf of the Appellant.

34. Considering firstly deception, I find  the  evidential  burden  on  the
    Respondent has been satisfied, taking into account that the application
    for entry clearance as a visitor was made shortly after a spousal  visa
    had been refused.  It is therefore questionable whether  when  he  made
    his entry clearance application as a visitor, he intended to return  to
    Malawi after six months.

35. I do however find that the Appellant has raised an innocent explanation
    which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility.  I note that he  was
    not interviewed by the Respondent.  I do find the length of  time  that
    elapsed to be relevant.  I also find it plausible,  that  although  the
    Appellant did intend  to  return  when  he  made  his  entry  clearance
    application, circumstances changed when in the UK,  and  he  formed  an
    emotional bond with his daughter, for whom  he  is  the  primary  carer
    while the  Sponsor  is  at  work.   That  I  find  understandable,  and
    therefore in my view the burden switches  back  to  the  Respondent  to
    prove on a balance of probabilities that the innocent explanation  must
    be rejected.

36. I do not find that the Respondent has submitted evidence to prove  that
    the innocent explanation must be rejected.  I have already referred  to
    the lack of an interview.   I  do  not  find  that  evidence  has  been
    submitted  by  the  Respondent  which  proves   on   the   balance   of
    probabilities, that the Appellant when  he  made  his  entry  clearance
    application never intended to return to Malawi.  I  therefore  conclude
    that S-LTR.4.2 does not apply in this appeal.

37. I conclude that  the  Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in relation to family life because he  cannot  satisfy  the
    immigration status requirements at E-LTRP.2.1 as he was in the UK as  a
    visitor when he made his application for leave to remain.   This  means
    that EX.1 cannot be considered.

38. I do not find that the Appellant can satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of
    the Immigration Rules.  To succeed the Appellant must prove that  there
    are very significant obstacles to his integration into Malawi.  He  has
    not satisfied the burden of proof.  He is a citizen of Malawi.  He  has
    lived in Malawi for the majority of  his  life.   He  and  the  Sponsor
    married  in  Malawi  in  2015.   There  are  no  language  or  cultural
    difficulties.  In considering  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  I  follow  the
    guidance in Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 0013 (IAC) in  which  it  was  found
    that mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles,  mere  upheaval  and
    mere inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy  the
    test of very significant obstacles.

39. In relation to integration I follow the guidance in Kamara [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 813.  At paragraph 14 it is explained that there must  be  a  broad
    evaluative judgment.  It must be considered whether  an  individual  is
    enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society
    in the country of return is carried on.  The individual must  have  the
    capacity to participate in life in that country and have  a  reasonable
    opportunity to be accepted there and operate  on  a  day-to-day  basis.
    The individual must be able to build up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
    variety of relationships to give substance to their private  or  family
    life.

40. The Appellant has not provided any satisfactory  evidence  to  indicate
    that he could not re-establish himself in Malawi.  He has not  provided
    any satisfactory evidence to indicate that he could not find employment
    or accommodation.  This is not a  case  where  there  are  any  medical
    issues which could not be dealt with  satisfactorily  in  Malawi.   The
    Appellant fails to satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

41. Although I have found that the Immigration Rules cannot  be  satisfied,
    this does not automatically mean that the appeal  must  fail.   I  must
    consider whether there are any exceptional  circumstances  which  would
    mean that refusing leave to remain would result in unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the Appellant, Sponsor,  or  their  daughter.   It  is
    clear that Article 8 is engaged.  The FtT found this to be the case and
    that finding has not been the  subject  of  any  challenge.   There  is
    clearly family life between the Appellant, Sponsor and their  daughter.
    I accept that the Appellant has also established a private  life  since
    his arrival in the UK in November 2016.

42. Although I find a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Sponsor, I must follow  the  guidance  in  TZ  (Pakistan)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at  paragraph  31  which  indicates  that  I  must
    consider whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor carrying on family life outside the UK.  This is  the  case
    even though I am  considering  the  position  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

43. Insurmountable obstacles  means  very  significant  difficulties  which
    would be faced by an applicant or their  partner  in  continuing  their
    family life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or
    would entail very serious hardship for them.  The evidence in this case
    does not  indicate  that  insurmountable  obstacles  exist.   Both  the
    Appellant and Sponsor are citizens  of  Malawi.   They  would  have  no
    language difficulties if they returned.  They have family  and  friends
    in Malawi.  As previously stated  in  relation  to  the  Appellant,  no
    satisfactory evidence has been submitted to indicate  that  they  would
    have difficulties in finding accommodation and employment.

44. The best interests of the child are a primary consideration  and  would
    be served by remaining in the UK with both  parents.    This  does  not
    however mean that the appeal must be allowed. The best interests  of  a
    child can be outweighed by other considerations.

45. I must have regard to the considerations in section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  The maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public
    interest.   It  is  relevant  that  the  Immigration  Rules  cannot  be
    satisfied.

46. It is in the public interest that a person seeking leave to remain  can
    speak English.  The Appellant can speak English.   This  is  a  neutral
    factor in the balancing exercise.

47. It is in the public interest that a person seeking leave to  remain  is
    financially independent.  This means  financially  independent  of  the
    state.  The Appellant is financially independent  in  that  sense,  and
    this is another neutral factor in the balancing exercise.

48. Little weight should be placed on a private  life  established  when  a
    person is  in  the  UK  with  a  precarious  immigration  status.   The
    Appellant's immigration status has always been precarious.  I find that
    it is appropriate to place little weight upon the private life that  he
    has established.

49. I then consider section 117B(6) which is set out below;

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

50. I follow the guidance in SR (Pakistan) [2018] UKUT  334  (IAC)  to  the
    effect that the question of whether  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect a child to leave the UK in section 117B(6) does not  necessarily
    require a consideration of whether the child will in fact  or  practice
    leave.  I have also  considered  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53.   The
    question of whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the  UK
    must be decided without considering  the  immigration  history  of  the
    parents.  The reasonableness of the child  leaving  the  UK  is  to  be
    considered on the basis that the facts are as  they  are  in  the  real
    world, so that if one parent has no right  to  remain,  but  the  other
    does, or if both parents have no right to remain that is the background
    against which the best interests assessment is conducted.  The ultimate
    question is whether it is reasonable to expect the child to follow  the
    parent with no right to remain to their country of origin.

51. The Appellant's daughter is a qualifying child because she is a British
    citizen.  The question therefore is whether it would not be  reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the UK.

52. I take into account the Respondent's guidance on this  point  published
    on 19 December 2018. At page 68 of that guidance, it is stated that  in
    relation to a qualifying child,

         "The starting  point  is  that  we  would  not  normally  expect  a
         qualifying child to leave the UK.  It is normally in a child's best
         interest for the whole family to remain together,  which  means  if
         the child is not expected to leave, then the parent or  parents  or
         primary carer of the child will also not be expected to  leave  the
         UK."

    The child is very young.  In  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,  it  was
    decided  that  the  fact  that  a  child  is  British  is   a   weighty
    consideration and is of particular importance,  although  not  a  trump
    card.

53. If the child had to leave the UK, she would  be  living  in  a  country
    where she would not be  able  to  exercise  her  rights  as  a  British
    citizen.  She would in effect be deprived of the  benefits  of  British
    citizenship.  I am satisfied that the child could because of her  young
    age, adapt to life in  Malawi.   I  do  however  find  it  particularly
    important, that this would mean that she would not be able to  exercise
    her rights as a British citizen in  the  UK,  having  been  born  here.
    Taking into account that the Respondent accepts that the starting point
    for a qualifying child is that the child would not normally be expected
    to leave the UK, and taking into  account  the  importance  of  British
    citizenship, I find in this case, that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

54. It therefore follows from that finding, that the public  interest  does
    not require the Appellant's removal.

55. I take into account that in this case there is no criminality  alleged.
    I have found that the Appellant satisfies the suitability  requirements
    contained within Appendix  FM.   The  Sponsor's  income  satisfies  the
    minimum annual income requirements set out in Appendix FM.  I therefore
    conclude that the public interest  does  not  require  the  Appellant's
    removal.  There would be no useful  purpose  served  by  the  Appellant
    returning alone to Malawi and making an entry clearance application.  I
    find that the appeal falls to be  allowed  with  reference  to  section
    117B(6) and Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT contained an error of law  and  was  set  aside.   I
substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no request  made
for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make  an  anonymity
direction.

Signed                              Date 25th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 I make no fee award.  The appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Upper Tribunal which was not before the initial  decision-
maker.


Signed                              Date 25th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


