
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16500/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st August 2019                   |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               JATINDer kumar
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp of Counsel, instructed by SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 26 April 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge  Finch
    found an error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gribble promulgated on 5 November 2018 and set aside the decision.  The
    hearing was adjourned for remaking in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is an Indian national, born on 4 May 1971, who claims  to
    have entered the United Kingdom unlawfully  in  January  1997  and  has
    remained here without leave ever since.  His applications for leave  to
    remain in 2012 and 2014 were unsuccessful and he made a  further  human
    rights claim on 31 May 2017 on the basis of his relationship  with  his
    British citizen partner in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application in a decision dated 26 July 2018
    on the basis that the Appellant could not meet any of the  requirements
    of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to  remain
    on the basis of family life with his partner, specifically  because  he
    could not meet the immigration status requirement and could not in  the
    alternative establish  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life  continuing  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  satisfy
    paragraph EX.1.  The  application  was  also  refused  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  grounds  of  private  life,
    primarily because there would be no very significant obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration in India on return.  The Respondent  did  not
    consider that there were any exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom and in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's partner, medical treatment was available for her  in  India
    and also in the United Kingdom even if the Appellant were removed.

 4. The Appellant's claim is  on  the  basis  that  his  partner's  medical
    conditions are such that the couple face  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    continuing their family life in  India  such  that  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules is satisfied, as are the remaining
    conditions for a grant of leave  to  remain  where  this  paragraph  is
    applicable.  In the alternative, the Appellant  relies  on  exceptional
    circumstances under paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM.

Applicable law

 5. The requirements for limited leave to remain as a partner,  so  far  as
    relevant to the present appeal  are  contained  in  R-LTRP.1.1  (d)  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  There is  no  dispute  that  the
    Appellant satisfies  the  requirements  in  (d)(i)  and  (ii)  of  this
    section, the issue is as to whether satisfies (d)(iii)  that  paragraph
    EX.1 applies.

         "EX.1 This paragraph applies if

          a) ...

          b) The applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.   For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which would  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

 6. The stringency of the test of insurmountable obstacles  been  confirmed
    by both the Supreme Court in Agyarko v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 440 and by the Court of Appeal  in  Wasif  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 82.

 7. Paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM provides that where a person has  made
    an application for leave to remain which does not meet the requirements
    of Appendix FM or Part 9 of the Immigration Rules,  the  decision-maker
    must consider whether the circumstances  in  sub-paragraph  (2)  apply.
    That provides:

         "(2) Where sub- paragraph (1)  above  applies,  the  decision-maker
         must consider, on the basis of  the  information  provided  by  the
         applicant, whether there are exceptional circumstances which  would
         render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter or  remain,  a
         breach of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
         because  such  refusal  would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant child  or
         another family member whose Article 8 rights  it  is  evident  from
         that information would be affected by  a  decision  to  refuse  the
         application."

 8. In TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, confirmation was provided that in  the
    context of  a  human  rights  appeal,  where  a  person  satisfies  the
    requirements of a particular Immigration Rule so as to be  entitled  to
    leave to remain, provided that Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights is engaged, an appeal would be  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds as the refusal would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
    the right to respect for family and/or private life  given  that  there
    would be no public interest in the maintenance of  immigration  control
    in such a case.

 9. When considering the public interest  as  part  of  the  assessment  of
    proportionality  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights, a Tribunal is required by section  117A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to have regard in  all
    cases to the considerations listed in section 117B  of  the  same  act.
    Section 117B, so far as relevant, provides as follows:

          1) The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the
             public interest.


          2) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -


               a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


               b) are better able to integrate into society.


          3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -


               a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


               b) are better able to integrate into society.


          4) Little weight should be given to -


               a) a private life, or


               b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


          5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.


          6)  ...


The evidence

10. In his written statements, the Appellant states that he first  met  his
    partner in 2000 and began cohabiting with her from 2008.  Following the
    death of his partner's son in 2009, she developed  depression  and  her
    health deteriorated.  She had an  operation  on  her  kidney  in  2013,
    following  which  she  was  unable  to  return  to  work   and   became
    increasingly reliant on the Appellant for her  care.   The  Appellant's
    partner's health has deteriorated further and more recently  and  on  3
    January 2019 she was awarded  Personal  Independence  Payment  and  was
    provided with mobility aids for the home.

11. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, adopted his written statements
    dated 23 October 2018 and 18  February  2019  and  gave  oral  evidence
    through a court-appointed Punjabi interpreter.  The Appellant confirmed
    that his partner travelled to India in 2009 with her sister and sister-
    in-law and they stayed  in  her  sister's  old  house  in  India.   The
    Appellant's partner has no family remaining in India, they are  all  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Appellant's partner travelled to  India  again
    in 2016, also with her sister and sister-in-law and stayed in the  same
    place whilst there.  Her family were able to assist  with  daily  needs
    during the trip  but  the  Appellant  stated  that  her  condition  has
    deteriorated again within the last two years.  Those family members  do
    not live close enough to the Appellant's partner in the United  Kingdom
    to assist her on a regular basis here.

12. When asked about the Appellant's partner's condition  since  2016,  the
    Appellant stated that her condition  became  more  serious  after  this
    point, she was crying a lot, unable to lift her hands up, continued  to
    have problems with her kidneys and joint pains, and was unable to  move
    her head side to side.  The Appellant did not know if medical treatment
    was available or not for his partner in India.

13. In his written statement, the Appellant's partner's  son,  Mr  Gurpreet
    [S], confirmed that the Appellant was responsible for his partner's day-
    to-day care and had been a father figure to him.

14. Mr [S] attended the oral hearing, adopted his written  statement  dated
    23 October 2018 gave oral evidence in English.  He states that  he  has
    always lived with his mother, has worked in the past but at present  is
    looking for work with a  view  to  living  more  independently  in  the
    future.  Mr [S] has been to India maybe five times, the last time about
    four years ago and he has travelled both with friends and  with  family
    there.  In India, Mr [S] has an aunty (his mother's sister)  and  uncle
    (his father's brother) and his uncle's family.  He is in touch with his
    aunty more than with relatives on his father's side.

15. Mr [S] states that he helps his mother a lot  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    cooking for her and also driving her to appointments.  He  stated  that
    she is a lot of pain due to an accident many years ago, with  back  and
    elbow pain and following a kidney operation;  although  painkillers  do
    help.

16. In her written statements,  the  Appellant's  partner,  Balwinder  [B],
    states that she is unable to care for herself, with the  Appellant  now
    being responsible for all of her daily care.  Ms [B] is  on  medication
    for depression, diabetes, kidney pains and  neck  pains  and  has  very
    limited mobility, with aids in the home to assist her.  She states that
    she is suffering from anxiety and suicidal ideation at the  thought  of
    being separated from the Appellant and that  she  would  be  unable  to
    relocate to India because of a lack of access to medical treatment  and
    the stigma in relation to mental health there in  particular.   Ms  [B]
    further states that she would be unable to travel by air to India, even
    with painkillers and suppressants.  Although she travelled to India  in
    2009 and 2016, both trips were for compelling family circumstances  and
    her health has deteriorated since.

17. Ms [B] attended the oral hearing, adopted her written statements  dated
    23 October 2018 and 18 July 2019 and gave  evidence  through  a  court-
    appointed Punjabi interpreter.  Ms [B]  confirmed  that  the  Appellant
    provides much of her daily care for her, with her son helping a  little
    bit and driving her to appointments.  Ms [B] states that she could  not
    travel to India again  in  the  future  because  of  her  poor  health,
    specifically the level of pain she is in and the discomfort she suffers
    when sitting down for long periods.  She stated that  she  gets  relief
    from pain medication for a little bit but then the pain  returns.   She
    could not identify any particular detriment on her health caused by her
    travel to and from India in 2016, although she said she was  in  better
    health at that point.  Ms [B] confirmed that  she  has  a  brother  and
    sister in India and on the last occasion was able to  travel  and  stay
    with family.

18. The medical evidence in relation to the Appellant dates  back  to  June
    2016, which shows that the Appellant has been suffering from elbow  and
    neck pain from 2008, with back pain for 30 years; as well as continuing
    pains after the kidney operation in approximately December  2013.   She
    is stated to have recurrent depression and diabetes for one year.   The
    same conditions are confirmed by Ms [B]'s GP in April 2017 and  October
    2018, together with the same list of medication being prescribed  (with
    only paracetamol added).

19. In the letter from her GP dated 5 October 2018, the following  is  said
    about Ms [B]:

         "Regarding air travel, it is unlikely  she  can  manage  long  haul
         flights due to the chronic pains in her neck, elbow and back.   Her
         depression worsens before and during  a  flight  due  to  increased
         anxiety.

         Regarding personal care: it is very likely  she  will  become  more
         depressed if the care element provided by her partner is no  longer
         present.  I think with the death of her son, in 2009, she  has  had
         difficulties with her depression, understandably, which will not be
         made any easier by the potential loss of her long-term partner  and
         main carer, Mr J Kumar.

         I do not think her long-term personal care will be met if she is to
         return to India for any length of period.  Her best hope  would  be
         to remain in this country with extra support from her one and  only
         remaining son, Gurpreet [S]."

20. The most recent medical evidence is in a letter from  the  GP  dated  7
    June 2019 which sets out new findings from an x-ray of  Ms  [B]'s  neck
    and also that her depression is not improving such that an increase  in
    the dose of her anti-depressants  may  be  considered  in  the  future.
    Otherwise the medication prescribed remains  the  same  as  it  was  in
    previous letters and no new diagnosis or conditions are identified.

Closing submissions

21. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Chuna relied on the reasons for refusal
    letter dated 26 July 2018.  Although was accepted  that  the  Appellant
    provides care to his partner, it  was  not  accepted  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to their family life continuing in India.  The
    Appellant's partner has travelled to India in 2009 and 2016, after  the
    onset of her health problems and the second time  in  particular  after
    her kidney operation in 2013 and the continuing pain she  has  been  in
    since then.  The Respondent submits that the Appellant's partner  could
    travel again in the future and there is nothing to  suggest  she  would
    not be able to obtain stronger painkillers for the journey or  use  the
    assistance that is readily  available  from  airlines  for  those  with
    mobility needs.  It was submitted that there is simply no evidence from
    the Appellant that support would not be available for  his  partner  to
    travel to India, as she has in the past with family support.  On return
    to India, the  Appellant's  partner  has  family  support  and  medical
    treatment would be available for her.

22. In the alternative, it was submitted that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's relationship was formed at  a  time
    when his immigration status was not only precarious, but he had been in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully throughout with no legitimate expectation
    that he would be able to  remain  here  lawfully.   The  Appellant  has
    access to medical treatment for himself in the United Kingdom, to which
    he was not entitled and for which he  has  not  paid.   Overall,  there
    would be no unjustifiably harsh consequences on the  Appellant  or  his
    partner by the refusal of leave to remain and those consequences  which
    are likely would not outweigh the public interest in  removal  in  this
    case.

23. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr  Fripp  relied  upon  the  personal  and
    medical evidence available in relation to the Appellant's  partner  and
    submitted that there had been no substantive challenge to  the  factual
    situation as claimed.  On the facts of  this  case,  the  evidence  was
    sufficient  to  establish  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family   life
    continuing in India, primarily the  Appellant's  partner's  mental  and
    physical health which is an impediment to travel, although it  was  not
    claimed that medical treatment was not available for her in India.

24. In the alternative, the test of unjustifiably  harsh  circumstances  in
    paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM is met on the facts of this case.

Findings and reasons

 1. There is no dispute in the present appeal that the Appellant  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner, who is a  British
    Citizen; nor is  there  any  substantial  dispute  as  to  her  medical
    conditions nor the acceptance on behalf of the Appellant  that  medical
    treatment would be available on return to India for his partner.

 2. The facts are found as follows.  The Appellant's partner  suffers  from
    pain, in particular in her neck, elbow and  back  as  well  as  in  her
    stomach following a kidney  operation  in  2013  and  in  addition  she
    suffers from depression and diabetes.   The  joint  pain  has  been  in
    existence since at  least  2008  and  pain  in  her  stomach  since  an
    operation in 2013.  Ms [B]'s depression has been  recurring  since  her
    son died in 2009 and her diabetes  has  been  relatively  recent  since
    around 2015.  Her diagnosis and medication has  been  stable  since  at
    least 2016, save for the addition of  paracetamol  as  additional  pain
    relief medication in 2017.  The latest letter from Ms [B]'s GP in  June
    2019 refers to a lack of improvement in her depression  such  that  her
    medication may be reviewed in the future; but there is nothing else  in
    the medical evidence to show any specific or general  deterioration  in
    Ms [B]'s physical or mental health since 2016 and  there  has  been  no
    further conditions diagnosed or medication prescribed.   Other  than  a
    recent x-ray on her neck, there is  nothing  to  indicate  any  ongoing
    investigations or treatment other than repeat prescription medication.

 3. Ms [B] has mobility and care  needs,  as  reflected  by  her  award  of
    Personal Independent Payment for both components since early  2019  and
    the relatively recent provision of aids at home  to  assist  her.   The
    Appellant provides  significant  support  on  a  daily  basis  for  his
    partner, with some support also being provided by her  son.   There  is
    nothing to suggest that this support can not continue to be provided by
    the Appellant if the  couple  were  to  return  to  India,  nor  is  it
    contended that medical treatment is not available to Ms [B] in India.

 4. The GP letter dated 5 October 2018  is  contradictory  in  relation  to
    personal care, emphasising first the importance of care  continuing  to
    be provided by the Appellant  for  Ms  [B]'s  mental  health  but  then
    stating that long-term personal care could not  be  met  on  return  to
    India for any length of period and the best outcome for  the  Appellant
    would be to remain in the UK with  extra  support  from  her  son.   No
    reasons are given for either conclusion, nor is there  any  recognition
    that Ms [B]  would  only  realistically  relocate  to  India  with  the
    Appellant if he were not granted leave to remain in the UK,  such  that
    he could continue to provide personal care for her in India as he  does
    now.

 5. As to the practicalities of Ms [B] travelling to India, her evidence is
    that she is no longer able to do so and the letter from her GP dated  5
    October 2018 states that she is unlikely to manage a long  haul  flight
    due to chronic pain.  However, given the lack of any  medical  evidence
    supporting  the  witness  evidence  that   Ms   [B]'s   condition   has
    deteriorated significantly since her last long haul flights to and from
    India in 2016 and the lack of any consideration by the GP or  otherwise
    as to whether additional support or pain relief could be used to manage
    a long haul flight; I do not  find  that  taken  at  its  highest,  the
    evidence supports a conclusion that Ms [B] would not be able to  travel
    to India, nor would she face insurmountable obstacles in doing so.  The
    relatively recent award of Personal Independent Payment  and  provision
    of mobility aids does not of itself show a recent deterioration  in  Ms
    [B]'s condition, particularly against the medical evidence showing long-
    term pre-exiting conditions which have been stable and treated with the
    predominantly the same medication since at least 2016 when Ms [B]  last
    travelled.

 6. Ms [B] has family in  India  and  both  she  and  the  Appellant  speak
    Punjabi; such that they would be able to communicate and support  would
    be available for them both to integrate or re-integrate  on  return  to
    India.

 7. In these  circumstances  and  taking  the  evidence,  particularly  the
    medical evidence at its highest, I do not  find  that  there  would  be
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and his partner continuing to
    enjoy family life together outside of  the  United  Kingdom  in  India.
    Whilst it is appreciated that the journey is likely to be difficult for
    Ms [B], it is one that she has successfully completed a number of times
    before,  most  recently  in  2016,  and  whilst  there  may   be   some
    difficulties in adapting to life in India; these are not matters  which
    meet the stringent test of insurmountable obstacles in  that  they  are
    not, on the evidence, hurdles which could not  be  overcome  or  entail
    very serious hardship for either the Appellant or  Ms  [B].   There  is
    family support available in India, both speak the language and  medical
    treatment is available for Ms [B].  Ms [B]'s son is aged 33 and  is  an
    adult planning for greater  independence,  who  has  visited  India  on
    several occasions such that  their  relationship  could  be  maintained
    through modern means of communication and visits.  I do not  find  that
    the Appellant satisfies paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  nor  therefore
    does he satisfy the requirements in R-LTRP.1.1(d) of Appendix FM for  a
    grant of leave to remain as a partner.

 8. In the alternative, the Appellant relies on there  being  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences on the Appellant, his partner and/or her son by  the
    refusal of leave to remain such that he satisfies paragraph GEN.3.2  of
    Appendix FM and/or his removal would be a disproportionate interference
    with their right to respect for private and family life.

 9. The findings above are equally relevant to this  alternative  provision
    and no other factors  have  been  identified  or  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant over and above his partner's mental and  physical  ill-health
    to show unjustifiably harsh consequences on him, Ms  [B]  or  her  son.
    These matters must be weighted  against  the  public  interest  in  the
    Article 8 balancing exercise.  When considering proportionality and the
    public interest, I am required  to  take  into  account  the  following
    factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  These are that the maintenance of immigration control is in  the
    public interest; as is the ability to speak English and be  financially
    independent (neither of which the Appellant has established)  and  that
    little weight should be given  to  family  life  established  when  the
    Appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully, as this  Appellant  has
    always been.  Little weight should also be  given  to  the  Applicant's
    private life for the same reasons.

10. Taking all of these factors into account, I do not find that there  are
    any unjustifiably harsh consequences on the Appellant, Ms  [B]  or  her
    son in the refusal  of  leave  to  remain;  there  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances for a grant  of  leave  to  remain  and  the  Appellant's
    removal would not be a disproportionate interference with his right  to
    respect for private and family life.  For all  of  these  reasons,  the
    appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the decision of Upper Tribunal Finch  promulgated
on 26 April 2019, the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did
involve the making of a material error of law, such that  the  decision  was
set aside.

The decision is remade as follows:
The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]         Date         8th August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

