
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17314/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th November 2019                |On 25th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  MARY [N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar, Counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  She arrived in the UK in
    February 1999 with a visitor visa valid until 21 August 1999. She
    subsequently applied for a student visa in January 2000 and was granted
    leave to remain until 30 January 2002. After a period of inactivity, in
    August 2008 the appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights
    grounds. The appellant was granted leave to remain until 17th January
    2013 outside the immigration rules. In December 2013 she applied for
    further leave to remain and was granted discretionary leave until 26
    September 2016. On 8 September 2016 the appellant applied for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK relying upon her family and
    private life.


 2. On 22 October 2015 the appellant was arrested by police on suspicion of
    fraud. She was convicted on 9 February 2018 and on 15 February 2018,
    she was sentenced at Reading Crown Court to 15-months imprisonment.
    Following that conviction, on 5 March 2018 the appellant was informed
    that the respondent deems the appellant's deportation to be conducive
    to the public good under s3(5)(a) Immigration Act 1971 and s32(5) UK
    Borders Act 2007.  The appellant was invited to set out any reason that
    she has for wishing to remain in the UK. The appellant's
    representatives made representations relying upon Articles 3 and 8
    ECHR.   On 9 August 2018, a deportation order was made against the
    appellant and her human rights claim was refused for the reasons set
    out in a decision dated 14 August 2018.


 3. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed for the
    reasons set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-
    Harry promulgated on 12 July 2019. It is that decision, that is the
    subject of the appeal before me.


 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt
    on 12 August 2019.  In granting permission, the judge observed:


         "It is apparent from the record of proceedings that it was argued
         before the judge that the appellant's relationship with her adult
         children in the United Kingdom amounted to family life. The judge
         does not make any finding on this issue and refers only to the
         appellant's private life. It is arguable that a finding that the
         appellant enjoyed family life with her adult children could have
         had a material effect on the proportionality assessment. Likewise,
         the judge refers to the medical evidence only in the context of
         Article 3 and it is arguable that consideration of this evidence in
         the context of the Article 8 claim could have had a material effect
         on the proportionality assessment."


 5. I do not need to make any express reference to the findings and
    conclusions of the FtT Judge.  The respondent has filed a response
    under rule 24 and does not oppose the appeal. The respondent accepts
    the judge failed to make any findings on the appellant's level of
    dependency on her adult children, both physical and emotional,
    particularly in view of the medical evidence, and failed to make any
    findings as to whether the nature of that relationship discloses more
    than the normal emotional ties between a parent and adult children. The
    respondent also accepts that the judge failed to consider the
    circumstances that the appellant would face upon return to Zimbabwe.


 6. As to disposal, the parties agree that the Tribunal will need to hear
    further evidence regarding the appellant's relationship with her adult
    children, and the support they provide to her.  The appellant has filed
    further evidence that she seeks to rely upon in support of her appeal.
    I was also informed that on 15 November 2019, a confiscation hearing
    took place before Folkestone Magistrates Court and the court has
    sentenced the appellant to an 8-month sentence of imprisonment.  The
    appellant has subsequently been transferred to HMP Bronzefield.
    Because of these recent developments and the time constraints, it has
    not been possible to make the necessary arrangements for the appellant
    to attend before the Tribunal to give evidence.


 7. Mr Puar submits the appropriate course is that I should remit the
    appeal for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The assessment of
    a human rights claim such as this is always a highly fact sensitive
    task.  In all the circumstances, I have decided that it is appropriate
    to remit this appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh, having
    considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement
    of 25th September 2012.  The nature and extent of any judicial fact-
    finding necessary will be extensive. The parties will be advised of the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.








Notice of Decision


 8. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Young Harry
    promulgated on 12 July 2019 is set aside, and I remit the matter for re-
    hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


       Signed                                Date     20th November 2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


 9. I make no fee award as I have remitted the matter to the FtT for
    hearing afresh.


       Signed                                Date         20th November 2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

