
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17938/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Microsoft     |Decision promulgated                 |
|Teams)                               |                                     |
|On 4 June 2021                       |On 22 June 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          SYED AJAZ UL HASSAN NAQVI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Waqas, Public Access Barrister.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge T.R. Smith ('the Judge') promulgated on  29  January
        2020 in which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
        the refusal of his application for leave to remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom on human rights grounds on the basis  of  his  family  life
        with his partner Mrs Bibi.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  12  February  1972.
        The  Judge  notes  at  [17]  that  the  appellant's  representative
        conceded  that  he  could  not  satisfy  the  provisions   of   the
        Immigration Rules and that the core  issue  in  the  case  was  the
        proportionality of the respondent's decision pursuant to Article  8
        ECHR.
     3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [33] of the decision under
        challenge before setting out conclusions and  legal  analysis  from
        [81].
     4. The Judge gives considerable weight to the fact that the  appellant
        cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration   Rules   for
        continuing his family life in the United Kingdom  [87].  The  Judge
        confirms that  in  order  to  assess  the  proportionality  of  the
        decision he has adopted a balance sheet exercise [89], setting  out
        the factors both for and against the  appellant  in  the  following
        terms:


        95. The following factors weighed against the Appellant.


        96. The first, and a significant factor, is the Appellant does  not
        satisfy the Immigration Rules which are drafted in  a  manner  that
        seeks to address a person's right under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The
        maintenance of effective immigration control is  a  factor  that  I
        must take into account in assessing the public interest. This is  a
        weighty factor against the Appellant. Allied to the first factor is
        that those who do not comply with the Immigration Rules and seek to
        "jump the queue" should not benefit over those who are  seeking  to
        enter the United Kingdom lawfully.


        97. The second is both the Appellant and Mrs Bibi  knew  when  they
        entered into their Islamic marriage that the  Appellant's  position
        in the United Kingdom was precarious. It was therefore always known
        to both parties that the Appellant was a real risk of being removed
        from the United Kingdom. Allied to this  the  Appellant  has  never
        sought, until recently,  to  seek  to  regularise  his  immigration
        status before 2018 despite knowing he had no right to remain. I  am
        careful not to double  count  this  factor  with  the  "precarious"
        factor.


        98. Thirdly the Appellant does not speak English, or if he does was
        not confident enough to  do  so  and  use  the  Tribunal  appointed
        interpreter. This is a factor that I required to take into account.


        99. Fourthly I am satisfied that the Appellant can  integrate  into
        Pakistan, a country he knows well, and whilst I accept that he  may
        not have qualifications, that is not an impediment to him  working,
        though perhaps not in highly paid employment. Having said that,  on
        the appellant's case, if he  was  allowed  to  stay  the  only  job
        prospect he had was as a shop assistant in a convenience store.


        100. The Appellant has not been dependent upon state  benefits  but
        this is not a positive factor, but nor is it a negative  factor.  I
        regard it as a neutral factor in my balancing exercise.


        101. Balanced against the above factors is that the removal of  the
        Appellant  will  lead  to  a  very  significant  impact  upon   the
        Appellant's family life with Mrs Bibi. Whilst there are options  of
        electronic communication that is not the same as a  genuine  loving
        relationship and is no substitute for one.  Mrs  Bibi  has  visited
        Pakistan on a number of occasions  and  whether  her  fear  of  her
        former husband in Pakistan is realistic, I  do  accept  she  has  a
        subjective fear. That said, she was able to visit Pakistan with the
        help of the Pakistani High Commission and there is  nothing  before
        me to say but could not be done in the future,  although  I  accept
        permanent protection would not be available.  I  also  accept  that
        visits are not of the same quality as  enjoying  day-to-day  family
        life.


        102. The Appellant has clearly provided some support for  Mrs  Bibi
        and I would accept that has probably resulted in an improvement  in
        her mental  health.  If  the  Appellant  was  to  be  removed  that
        improvement would probably be adversely impacted, although  I  have
        no medical evidence to suggest that the extent of  that  impact.  I
        can, however, I think, reasonably  infer  that  it  would  have  an
        adverse impact. Balanced against that she would be remaining in the
        United Kingdom close to her children and with a host of friends  in
        the community who would support her as is evidenced by the numerous
        statements placed before me. She also would have the benefit of the
        National Health Service and her concerns as to her son and  is  OCD
        would be assuaged by the fact that she could choose  to  remain  in
        the United Kingdom with him to offer support.


        103. I also have to factor in that the separation of the family.  I
        do not find it would have a significant effect upon her children.


        104. I have considered the effect of my  order  on  the  qualifying
        child, Mr Kazmi, but for the reasons already  given  I  regard  his
        best interests are to remain in the United Kingdom and do not  find
        he will  be  significantly  impacted  on  by  the  removal  of  the
        Appellant.


        105. I also find that on the information before me it  is  unlikely
        that Mrs Bibi will satisfy the Immigration Rules in  the  immediate
        future (although there are in my judgement prospects that she  will
        obtain employment) such that she  would  be  able  to  successfully
        sponsor the Appellant to enter the United Kingdom immediately.


        106. I also consider that as the Appellant has been  an  overstayer
        if he was to apply for a visit Visa it may well be refused.


        107.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand  I  have  important  public  policy
        considerations and on the other if I refuse the appeal it is likely
        the Appellant's family life will be significantly impacted  if  not
        destroyed. I have not discounted the fact  that  his  private  life
        will be affected.


        108. The case is finely balanced but having carefully  weighed  the
        above factors I find the requirements of the Immigration rules  are
        not met and weighing all the evidence in the round the  refusal  by
        the Respondent is not  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
        Appellant's Article 8 rights on the basis of the evidence presented
        to me.


     5. The appellant sought permission to appeal,  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal the operative part of  the
        grant being in the following terms:


        2. The grounds submit, in terms, that the appeal hearing was unfair
        because the judge had to attend a training session in the south  of
        England and had to catch a train later that day, additionally  that
        there was no cross examination of the sponsors 17 year old son,  or
        of the appellant about their relationship consequently the  finding
        that the appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting  parental
        relationship with the sponsors 17 year old son is unfair.


        3. I have read the Record of Proceedings. The appeal was called  on
        at 12.10 and concluded at 13.15. All witnesses were cross-examined,
        and in the case of the son about his biological father and when  he
        had last seen him. There is nothing in the Record of Proceedings to
        support the submission that the proceedings were unfair.


        4. The main thrust of the grounds is that the judge arguably  erred
        in law in failing to conclude that the appellant has a genuine  and
        subsisting parental relationship with the  sponsors  son  (age  17)
        which had not been challenged by the Respondent and  which  enables
        the appellant to succeed under EX.1  because  the  Judge  had  also
        found it was not reasonable to expect the appellant  son  to  leave
        the United Kingdom.


        5. The grounds may be argued.


     6. In her Rule 24 response dated 12 October 2020 the  Secretary  State
        opposes  the  appeal  noting,  inter-alia,  that  Counsel  for  the
        appellant  conceded  that  the  appellant  could   not   meet   the
        Immigration Rules and that the Home Office Presenting  Officer  did
        not accept that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental
        relationship with Mr Kazim, the 17-year-old son of the  appellant's
        partner from a previous relationship who referred to the  appellant
        as his "uncle". It is stated the Judge gives adequate  reasons  for
        finding the  appellant  did  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        parental relationship with Mr Kazmi and that it  was  open  to  the
        Judge to conclude that the appellant's removal  would  not  have  a
        significant impact upon Mr Kazmi.
     7. The respondent asserts the Judge did not err in the  interpretation
        of the report from Professor Bluth and nor did the Judge err in the
        approach to article 8 ECHR.


Error of law


     8. Ms Waqas accepted in her submissions to the Upper Tribunal that the
        concession that the appellant could not satisfy the requirements of
        the Immigration Rules was made at the hearing before the Judge,  at
        which she represented the appellant, but claimed that  such  should
        not have been made and that she was effectively seeking  to  resile
        from the same at this stage.
     9. It is clear that the Judge did not consider on  the  evidence  that
        that  concession  had  been  wrongly  made.  The  claim   made   in
        submissions that the Judge should not have accepted the  concession
        but should have gone on to consider whether the appellant satisfied
        the Immigration Rules is noted, as is the overriding  principle  to
        be considered of fairness in such a case. If a concession  is  made
        which is clearly wrong in fact and in law the appellant  should  be
        able to withdraw the same. It is therefore necessary to consider if
        the concession is wrong.
    10. The Judge finds the appellant is unable  to  satisfy  a  number  of
        requirements  of  Appendix  FM  including  the  minimal   financial
        requirements. Notwithstanding this the Rule provides that leave  to
        enter  or  remain  can  be  granted  if   there   are   exceptional
        circumstances. The meaning of "exceptional  circumstances"  can  be
        found in various paragraphs of the  Rules  and  the  appellant  was
        required to show that the refusal to grant leave to remain would be
        a  breach  of  article  8  ECHR  because   it   would   result   in
        "unjustifiably harsh consequences" for the appellant, his  partner,
        a child or another family member involved.
    11. To succeed under the Rules, the appellant must satisfy  suitability
        and eligibility criteria some  of  which  are  applicable  even  if
        pleading exceptional circumstances.
    12. The eligibility criteria include:

            . the relationship between the appellant and his partner,


            . the appellants status in the UK (in case  of  an  application
              for leave to remain),


            . maintenance and accommodation, and


            . knowledge of the English language.

    13. The Immigration Rules deal with exceptional  circumstances  in  two
        parts of Appendix FM, the first is in paragraphs Gen  3.1-3.3.  Gen
        3.2 was specifically referred to by the Judge at [88] and it is not
        suggested in the grounds that the appellant can succeed under these
        provisions.
    14. The second is in Section EX:1 - Exceptions to certain  eligibility
        requirements for leave to remain as a partner or parent.
    15. Paragraph EX.1(a) deals  with  cases  where  the  appellant  has  a
        "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with a child who  is
        under 18, in the  UK  and  is  British  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
        continuously for at least the 7  years  immediately  preceding  the
        date of application.
    16. In this appeal the relevant child is Mr Kazmi who was  born  on  20
        March 2002 who was 17 years of age at the date of the hearing,  and
        who is now 18 and therefore now an adult.
    17. It is asserted the Judge erred in not finding there was  a  genuine
        and subsisting relationship between Mr Kazmi and the appellant.  It
        was not disputed by the Judge that it was not reasonable to  expect
        the child to leave the UK at the date of the hearing.
    18. Ms Waqas asserts the Judge should have considered AB  &  AO  [2019]
        EWCA Civ 661 and R (on the application of RK v Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department (S.117B(6);  "parental  relationship")  IJR
        [2016 UKUT 31 (IAC) when deciding this issue.
    19.  In  R  (on  the   application   of   RK)   (s.117B(6);   "parental
        relationship")  IJR  [2016]   UKUT   00031  in   the   context   of
        section  117B  it was held that (i) It  is  not  necessary  for  an
        individual to have "parental responsibility" in law  for  there  to
        exist a parental relationship; (ii) Whether a person who is  not  a
        biological  parent  is  in  a  "parental   relationship"   with   a
        child  for  the  purposes  of   s.117B(6)   of   the   Nationality,
        Immigration  and  Asylum   Act   2002  depends  on  the  individual
        circumstances  and  whether  the   role   that   individual   plays
        establishes he or she has "stepped into the  shoes"  of  a  parent;
        (iii)   Applying  that  approach,  apart  from  the  situation   of
        split  families where relationships  between  parents  have  broken
        down and an actual or de facto step-parent    exists,    it    will
        be   unusual,   but   not   impossible,   for   more    than    two
        individuals   to   have   a   "parental    relationship"   with   a
        child.   However,   the   relationships   between   a   child   and
        professional  or  voluntary  carers  or  family  friends  are   not
        "parental  relationships".
    20. In SSHD v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967 it was said,  in  the
        context of the older immigration rules relating to deportation i.e.
         where  there  was  an  exception  where  there   was   no   family
        member other  than  the  foreign   criminal   available   to   care
        for  the  child  in  the  UK,  that  to   have   a   "genuine   and
        subsisting  parental  relationship"  the   parent   must   have   a
        "subsisting"  role  in   personally   providing   at   least   some
        element  of  direct  parental  care  to  the  child.     The  Court
        of  Appeal  also  held  that   each   of   the   words   "genuine",
        "subsisting"  and  "parental"  referred to a separate and essential
        quality of the relationship.
    21. In SSHD v AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ  661  Singh
        LJ  held  that  the  words   "genuine   and   subsisting   parental
        relationship" were words of the English  language  and  no  further
        gloss should be put on them.  King LJ gave some useful pointers  in
        her judgment (although she misquoted  (or  at  least  the  judgment
        does) the words of the statute as "genuine and substantial parental
        relationship").  Where a parent was seeing a  child  on  a  regular
        basis in an unsupervised setting it was hard to see  how  he  could
        not have the necessary  relationship;  but  equally  an  order  for
        direct contact was not conclusive; the parent might  only  take  up
        the contact unreliably or infrequently.  Although it might be  more
        likely that a tribunal conclude that there is  no  relationship  of
        the right quality where there is only indirect contact, that is not
        inevitable.  It might be that there has been a long gap in  contact
        and this is a reintroduction or a parent is showing  commitment  to
        indirect  contact  necessary   before   direct   contact   can   be
        reintroduced.
    22. Specific reference is made by Ms Wasif  to  [20]  of  her  skeleton
        argument where it is written:


       20. The Appellant has described the  delicate  relationship  he  has
           with the child due to the background of  what  has  occurred  in
           relation to his biological father. The Appellant plays an active
           role in the child's life including an  authoritative  role  i.e.
           setting  boundaries.  The  FTT  makes  no   reference   to   the
           Appellant's witness statement. Absolutely no weight is given  to
           the Appellant's account for what role he plays  in  the  child's
           life. The Appellant states at para 9 of his  witness  statement:
           "We do have the odd days where he is mood but that is him  being
           a teenager and we  relax  the  boundaries  with  him  as  he  is
           immature for his age. Sahil has OCD. He  is  constantly  in  the
           bathroom washing himself. He is very particular  in  how  things
           are kept and maintained  in  the  home.  I  would  describe  his
           behaviour as difficult but as  parents  you  have  unconditional
           love for your children so you don't mind handling such issues. I
           along with Doulat spend a long time trying to get him up and out
           of the house. Doulat gets tired so I carry  on  with  the  clock
           countdown to hurry him along for college. I will often make  his
           toast which Doulat gives  to  him  on  the  car  journey."  This
           clearly shows the Appellant has embraced "parenthood",  enjoying
           the family unit and togetherness by eating as a family together.
           In the circumstances, it is unreasonable for the Judge  to  find
           that the Appellant  did  not  enjoy  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           parental relationship. Simply that the child  only  devoted  one
           paragraph to the Appellant is insufficient to find there  is  no
           parental  relationship.  Thereby,  falling  in   to   error   in
           application of the law.


    23. The Judge considered the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and it was accepted by Ms Waqas that the Judge was
        not required to set out all the  evidence  in  the  decision  under
        challenge.
    24. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf  that  at  [19]  of  the
        reasons for refusal letter the respondent conceded the issue  where
        it  is  written,  "it  is  accepted  that  you  have  a  qualifying
        relationship  contained  within  EX.1.  and  therefore   meet   the
        requirements of R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(iii) but that provision of the rules
        clearly relates to applications for limited leave to  remain  as  a
        partner and does not specify in clear terms that this relates to Mr
        Kazmi.
    25. The Judge accepts Mr Kazmi is a qualifying child as he is a British
        citizen but at [45 - 46], writes:


           45.    He does not have a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
                  with the Appellant, his relationship mainly centred on his
                  mother. It is his mother who  makes  all  the  significant
                  decisions for him. It is his  mother  who  encouraged  him
                  with his studies. It  is  his  mother  who  takes  him  to
                  college because he is frequently  late  due  to  excessive
                  washing in the morning. It is his mother managing benefits
                  that support him. It is noticeable in his  statement  that
                  he said he couldn't imagine  life  without  "my  mum".  Mr
                  Kazmi in a paragraph devoted the Appellant simply said  he
                  did not find him annoying and he was given space, which he
                  respected. He didn't speak  much  the  Appellant.  He  was
                  comfortable with his own routine and was  happy  that  his
                  mother was happy.


           46.    I find his best interests  would  be  to  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, staying at the moment with Mrs Bibi  until
                  he  decides  to  leave  home,  and  continue  to   receive
                  treatment for his OCD. I have also taken into account  his
                  own wishes and the fact he is a British-born national with
                  strong links to the United Kingdom. As I've already stated
                  it was not Mrs Fell's case that the Mrs Bibi and Mr  Kazmi
                  should accompany the Appellant, if he was removed.


    26. Notwithstanding the phraseology in the above paragraphs and  others
        within the determination not at times reading as they  should,  the
        Judges meaning and findings can be clearly understood.
    27.  In  her  original  witness  statement,  notwithstanding  that  the
        appellant had lived in the same household as his wife for a  number
        of years, the appellant's wife Mrs Bibby when referring to her son,
        writes:


           15.        My son Mohammed Sahil Kazmi is 17 years  old  and  is
                  currently living with me and  is  studying  a  BTEC  Media
                  course  at  Shipley  College.  I  feel  that  the  ongoing
                  problems within the home when we lived as a 'family  unit'
                  has definitely had an negative impact upon him. He has got
                  extreme OCD. He takes 2  hours  in  the  bathroom  in  the
                  morning where he repeatedly washes his hands,  face,  legs
                  and feet. I have taken him to numerous appointments to try
                  and get him help. He struggles  with  social  interactions
                  and due to his father's behaviour towards me he  gives  me
                  very little  respect.  I  wash  his  underwear  and  socks
                  separately from the  family  washing  it's  only  recently
                  sometimes when he suspects I haven't  he  will  wash  them
                  again. I have tried to place  responsibility  on  him  but
                  feel he is immature. He is not able  to  manage  finances,
                  his self-care, getting  to  College  and  has  great  mood
                  swings.


           16.        In the morning, the Appellant and I,  begin  to  wake
                  him up from 7 AM and I am constantly telling him  to  come
                  out of bathroom and get ready for College.  His  breakfast
                  is often given to him in the car as I drop him to  College
                  as it is at least 30 mins away. The Appellant  comes  with
                  us on occasions and is a great amount of support.  My  son
                  behaves respectfully when the Appellant is around. I  have
                  noticed the positives effect, the  Appellant  has  on  his
                  behaviour. Each day is a struggle with  him  and  I  worry
                  about his whereabouts as he is out of the  house  majority
                  of the time. I am successful in keeping tabs on him  as  I
                  am very scared that  he  will  fall  in  to  bad  company.
                  Bradford is renowned for drugs, guns,  violence  and  poor
                  youth behaviour. If I or the Appellant are am not around I
                  know he will begin to associate with  criminals  and  will
                  end up becoming a criminal. I would estimate that  my  son
                  is mentally functioning at a much lower age, but you  will
                  not accept any form of help as he is in denial that  there
                  is 'anything wrong'. He is na�ve and foolish, but only  it
                  was time, support and care he  learned  to  grasp  how  to
                  behave like an adult. I have spoken  to  the  teachers  at
                  school without my son knowing, but they  states  there  is
                  little they can do if he is not accepting he has an issue.
                  That is why there is no formal diagnosis as he refuses  to
                  meet any professionals to undertake a formal assessment.


    28. The above content confirms the Judge's findings in relation to  the
        main carer of Mr Kazmi as his mother and the predominant  role  she
        takes in  meeting  his  needs.  Whilst  there  is  mention  of  the
        appellant on one occasion, there was  insufficient  evidence  of  a
        parental relationship between him and this young man who, according
        to his mother, would not appear to want one in any event as he will
        not accept help from any source.
    29. It is also the case, as noted in the grant of permission, that  all
        the witnesses were  cross-examined,  including  Mr  Kazmi  and  the
        opportunity therefore given to explore in detail the nature of  the
        appellant's relationship with  this  young  man.  But  despite  the
        appellant providing all  the  written  and  oral  evidence  he  was
        seeking to rely upon it was not made out before the Judge that  the
        reality of the situation is that the appellant does have a  genuine
        and subsisting parental relationship as it was not shown  the  role
        the appellant plays established he has "stepped into the shoes"  of
        a parent.
    30. The Judges findings were arrived  at  having  had  the  benefit  of
        seeing and hearing oral evidence being given  and  considering  the
        weight to be given to that evidence. The conclusion  reached  as  a
        result of that exercise has not been shown to be a finding  outside
        the range of those reasonably available to the Judge. The  question
        of whether such a relationship exists is fact specific.
    31. It was pleaded in the alternative  that  if  the  appellant  cannot
        succeed  on  this  ground  then  he   wishes   to   challenge   the
        proportionality assessment.
    32. The Judge considered the  proportionality  of  the  decision  in  a
        properly  structured  manner  undertaking  the  required  balancing
        exercise. In such a situation it is necessary for the appellant  to
        establish a public law ground of challenge. When asked  about  such
        issues  Ms  Waqas  submitted   the   overall   conclusion   as   to
        proportionality is irrational, namely that no right-thinking  judge
        fully appraised of the facts would have come to the conclusion that
        this judge did.
    33. I find such a submission fails to establish  arguable  legal  error
        material to the decision. Even though the Judge  proceeded  on  the
        basis of the concession that had been made that does not  make  the
        proportionality assessment wrong when an assessment of the evidence
        without the benefit  of  the  concession  shows  that  the  Judge's
        finding the appellant  does  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        parental relationship with Mr Kazmi is a finding  clearly  open  to
        the Judge on the evidence, meaning the requirements of EX.1  cannot
        be met.   This  in  fact  makes  the  concession  arguably  legally
        correct.
    34. The Judge was entitled to give appropriate weight to the  fact  the
        appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
        under either Appendix FM, paragraph GEN 3.1 to 3.3, or in any other
        basis. The Judge was clearly aware of the impact of the appellant's
        removal on the family, which is  incorporated  into  the  balancing
        exercise.
    35. The Judge says this is a finely balanced decision and what  is  not
        made out is that such a conclusion is either irrational,  perverse,
        unlawful, or unfair when the evidence is considered as a whole.  On
        the facts are found it is actually more likely that the majority of
        judges in the first-tier Tribunal  would  have  come  to  the  same
        conclusion. The fact another judge may have  come  to  a  different
        conclusion is not the  relevant  test  as  we  have  been  recently
        reminded by the Court of Appeal.
    36. Whilst the appellant and other family  members  disagree  with  the
        Judge's conclusion and seek to reargue the merits  of  the  appeal,
        the grounds fail to establish arguable legal error material to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.


Decision

    37. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    38. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


           I make no such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
           Procedure (Upper        Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 8 June 2021


