
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17519/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                           |On 28 March 2018              |
|Prepared 27 February 2018                     |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                 gurmeet [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, counsel instructed by Chatham Chambers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of India, date of birth  [  ]  1981,  appealed
    against the refusal of leave to remain made by the Secretary  of  State
    on 27 June 2017.  The appeal against that decision came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ghani (the Judge) who, on 14 August  2017,  allowed
    the appeal of the Claimant and the consequence was that the dependants,
    that is his wife and two children, were successful as dependants.   The
    Claimant's wife is [TK] and the two children are  [JK]  and  [JS]  aged
    about 8 and 4 years of age at the time.

3.   It is clear that at the date of application the eldest child  [JK]  had
    not yet reached 7 years of age but at the date of decision had  reached
    7 years of age and was 8 or thereabouts at the  date  the  matter  came
    before the Judge.

4.   The Secretary of State sought permission to challenge the  decision  of
    the Judge and permission to appeal was given by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington on 1 November 2017.  A Rule 24 response was made on behalf of
    the Claimant on 12 December 2017, essentially  supporting  the  Judge's
    decision.

5.   There are two principal challenges made  by  the  Secretary  of  State:
    first, the Judge erred in law  in  the  assessment  of  the  claims  in
    relation to the Claimant and his dependants and made erroneous findings
    in relation to the application of Article 8 ECHR and Section 117B(6) of
    the NIAA 2002 as amended.  Secondly, permission was given on the  basis
    that the Judge had considered the issue of  statelessness  of  the  two
    children when the evidence was simply  not  there  and  the  Judge  was
    unable to make a proper assessment as would be required  with  evidence
    and identified in the decision in K [2017] EWHC 1365 (Admin).

6.   The arguments have essentially turned on the  sufficiency  or  adequacy
    of the reasoning provided by the Judge.  I should say that  the  format
    of the decision is unhelpful in terms of layout and  presentation  such
    that it ultimately reflects in the sufficiency of the reasoning for his
    decision on the Claimant's case.  Whilst  the  Judge  seeks  to  recite
    relevant law, ultimately he does not properly set  out  sufficient  and
    adequate reasons as to why he found it unreasonable for the child, [JK]
    to be removed, applying the considerations  that  arise  under  Section
    117B and 117D on the basis that [JK] was a qualifying child.  The Judge
    also, in looking at that exercise of reasonableness, simply ignored  as
    far as I can see the assessment which was material of  the  immigration
    status and history of the Claimant and his wife and the implications of
    them being effectively overstayers since February 2012, some more  than
    six years during which time of course they  had  been  responsible  for
    enabling their two children to put roots down in the United Kingdom and
    enter into education and receive those other necessary consequences  of
    being a child in the United Kingdom.   There  is  no  analysis  in  any
    meaningful way of that issue of reasonableness so as to assess  whether
    or not there was need to consider further the public  interest  in  the
    overall proportionality assessment.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge
    failed  to  address  properly  the  considerations  that  arise  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA 6705 and AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180.

7.   It seems to me also that the Judge  probably  failed  to  consider  the
    significance of the Secretary of State's then guidance but that was not
    the issue argued before me and it is unnecessary for the purposes of my
    decision to reach a concluded view on it: Although there  is  obviously
    reference in  the  decision  to  aspects  of  that  guidance.   In  the
    circumstances therefore  I  find  on  that  point  alone  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

8.   The second point raised over the stateless or  potential  statelessness
    and its relevance to the assessment of reasonableness, or possibly even
    proportionality, proceeds on an erroneous basis because, quite  simply,
    there was no evidence to show that  they  were  stateless:  First,  the
    elder child, [JK] is the holder of an Indian passport;  and,  secondly,
    because there is the issue of registration of [JS]'s birth and  whether
    in those circumstances he will in due  course,  if  an  application  is
    made, be registered as an Indian child and national.  Those are matters
    which the Judge did not have evidence upon and ultimately the  comments
    he made insofar as they were material are undoubtedly  speculative.   I
    am satisfied therefore that the issue of statelessness, if it really is
    arguable, was not properly addressed at  that  stage  by  the  Original
    Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

    (1)  The matter will need to be  remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         List Manchester First-tier Tribunal IAC.  Not before FtTJ Ghani.


    (2)  Any further evidence to be served not later than 14  working  days
         before a further hearing and served on the IAC and the Secretary of
         State.


    (3)  If the Secretary of State wishes to raise any further  issues  and
         serve any further documents or skeleton arguments that should  take
         place not later than 7 working days before the further hearing.


    (4)  If need be, there can be a CMR to deal with the case.


    (5)  No interpreter required.


    (6)  Time estimate - two and a half hours.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent it is to be remade  in  the  FtT  (IAC).
No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
