
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17519/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th April 2021                  |On 24th May 2021                    |
|                                    |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                 RAVNEET [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Abbas, Imperium Group Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


      1. The appellant is a national of India. She appealed the respondent's
         decision of 11th October 2019 to refuse her application  for  leave
         to remain in the UK on human rights  grounds.  Her  appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Rowlands for reasons set out in  a  decision  promulgated  on
         27th February 2020.


Background


      2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 15th May 2007,  aged
         13, with entry clearance as a visitor valid until 27th of September
         2007.  As a child she had no control over matters, but  the  family
         remained in the United Kingdom  unlawfully  after  the  appellant's
         entry clearance expired. Her immigration history is referred to  in
         the respondent's decision, but that is at odds with the appellant's
         account of her immigration as set  out  in  paragraph  [2]  of  the
         decision of Judge Rowlands.   At  paragraph  [13],  Judge  Rowlands
         accepted that the immigration history referred to by the  appellant
         is correct.  It is uncontroversial that an application for leave to
         remain made by the appellant was refused by the respondent on  18th
         December 2017.  Her appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke for reasons set out in  a
         decision promulgated on 20th June 2018.  Although the appellant was
         granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  following  a
         hearing on 12th September 2018, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Murray
         dismissed the appeal for reasons set out in a decision  promulgated
         on 9th October 2018.


      3. On 1st March 2019, the appellant made  a  further  application  for
         leave to remain on human rights grounds, and in particular, on  the
         basis of the appellant's family life with her  child  who  I  shall
         refer to in this decision as [JK].  That application was refused by
         the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 11th October
         2019. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands  for  reasons  set  out  in  his
         decision promulgated on 27th February 2020.


      4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  on  18th  May  2020  on  limited
         grounds.  In granting permission, she said:


             "...it is arguable that the Judge fell into error in referring
             repeatedly to "insurmountable  obstacles"  rather  than  "very
             significant obstacles" to  reintegration  in  accordance  with
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  This  is  particularly  arguable  in
             light of the judge's reference to "insurmountable obstacles to
             their removal" at paragraph 19. This ground is arguable. It is
             also arguable that the judge did not consider the  nationality
             of the appellant's child, and in particular, the separation of
             the child from her father."


The appeal before me


      5. At the hearing before me, Mr Abbas accepts the grant of  permission
         to appeal is limited.  He submits there are three  strands  to  the
         grounds upon which permission has been  granted.  I  refer  to  the
         parties  submissions  upon  the  three  criticisms  made   by   the
         appellant, before drawing the threads together.


    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules


      6. First, the appellant relies upon the erroneous reference  by  Judge
         Rowlands  at  paragraph  [16]  of   his   decision   to   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) requiring the appellant to show "..  that  there  are
         insurmountable obstacles  to  her  integration  in  India..".   The
         reference to "insurmountable obstacles" as the test, is repeated at
         paragraphs [17] , [18] and [19] of the decision in which the  judge
         considered whether the requirements of the  immigration  rules  are
         met.   At  paragraph  [19],  Judge  Rowlands  refers  to  the  best
         interests of the child and in the end, concludes  that  he  is  not
         satisfied that there  are  "...  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
         appellant's removal to India.".


      7. Mr Abbas submits the focus of the Judge was upon whether there  are
         insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's  integration  in  India
         and whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant's
         removal to India,  whereas  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  required  the
         appellant  to  establish  that  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to her integration into India.  He submits the  erroneous
         reference to 'insurmountable obstacles' is such that  the  decision
         is infected by a material error of law.  Mr  Abbas  refers  to  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawan and Others (NIAA  2002
         Part 5 -  compelling  circumstances  [2017]  UKUT  13  in  which  a
         Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal considered what  is  meant
         by "very significant obstacles".  It said, at [37]:


             "The other limb of the  test,  'very  significant  obstacles',
             erects a self-evidently elevated  threshold,  such  that  mere
             hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere  upheaval  or
             inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  will  generally   be
             insufficient in this context."


      8. Mr Abbas submits that at paragraph  [18]  of  the  decision,  Judge
         Rowlands refers to the objective  material  that  establishes  that
         single women are marginalised and face social stigma.   He  submits
         that is sufficient to establish that  there  are  very  significant
         obstacles to the appellant's integration into India.


      9. At the outset, Mr Bates candidly and quite properly accepts that in
         referring to "insurmountable obstacles" to  integration  in  India,
         Judge Rowlands failed to refer to the correct wording of  the  test
         as set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), but he submits, any error is
         immaterial.  He submits Judge Rowlands correctly  noted,  at  [13],
         that the previous decision of Judge Richards-Clarke promulgated  on
         1st June 2018 forms the starting point for his consideration of the
         Article 8 claim.  Judge  Richards-Clarke  was  not  satisfied  that
         there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
         integration into India.  That is the  test  set  out  in  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi).  Mr Bates submits the appellant's  first  ground  is
         'form over substance'  and  on  any  view,  whether  considered  as
         "insurmountable obstacles  to  integration"  or  "very  significant
         obstacles to integration", the appellant was unable to establish on
         the evidence that there would be obstacles to her integration  into
         India.


    The nationality of the child


     10. The appellant claims Judge Rowlands proceeds upon the premise  that
         the child [JK] is an Indian citizen.  At paragraph [19], he  refers
         to [JK] as an 'Indian citizen', whereas she was born in the UK  and
         her birth has not been registered with the Indian  authorities  and
         she has not been registered as an Indian national.


     11. Mr Abbas  submits  that  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  best
         interests of the child should have followed a proper  consideration
         of the circumstances that the appellant herself  would  face.   The
         background material establishes that as a single woman she would be
         marginalised and face social stigma.  That will  inevitably  impact
         upon her daughter.


    The child's contact with her father


     12. The appellant claims that in considering the best interests of  the
         child at paragraph [19], Judge  Rowlands  failed  to  consider  the
         impact that removal of the child from the UK  with  the  appellant,
         will have upon the child's relationship with her father.


     13. As to the nationality of [JK] and her contact with her  father,  Mr
         Bates submits the appellant's case before the Tribunal was set  out
         in the appellant's skeleton argument.  The skeleton argument refers
         to a number of authorities and said, at paragraph [18]:


             "It is submitted that it is in the best interests of the child
             the appellant should remain in the UK. The country information
             clearly shows that the appellant will face discrimination, and
             this will inevitably affect the child."


     14. The appellant did not claim before the First-tier Tribunal that the
         child would not be entitled to Indian  citizenship  or  would  face
         difficulty in entering India.  Neither did the appellant claim that
         the child's  removal  to  India  would  have  an  impact  upon  her
         relationship with her father.  The focus was upon the  difficulties
         the appellant would face, and the impact of that upon her daughter.




    Discussion


     15. I am grateful to Mr Abbas  and  Mr  Bates  for  their  helpful  and
         concise submissions directed to the particular criticisms  made  of
         the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands.   Having  heard
         the submissions and having carefully read  the  decision  of  Judge
         Rowlands I conclude that the decision  of  Judge  Rowlands  is  not
         vitiated by a material error of law.


     16. True it is that in considering  whether  the  appellant  meets  the
         requirements for leave to remain on the grounds of private life  as
         set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  immigration  rules,  the
         Judge  refers  to  "insurmountable  obstacles"  rather  than  "very
         significant obstacles", but in my judgement that was  not  material
         to the outcome of this appeal.


     17. In Agyarko -v- SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440,  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered the requirement in the Immigration  Rules,  Appendix  FM
         s.EX.1(b), that there be "insurmountable obstacles"  preventing  an
         applicant from  continuing  their  relationships  outside  the  UK.
         Sales LJ said:


             "21. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles"  as  used  in  this
             paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be
             overcome by an applicant for leave to remain under the  Rules.
             The test is significantly more demanding than a mere  test  of
             whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue
             their family life outside the United Kingdom.


             22.  This  interpretation  is  in  line  with   the   relevant
             Strasbourg   jurisprudence.   The    phrase    "insurmountable
             obstacles" has its origin in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in
             relation to immigration cases in a family context, where it is
             mentioned as one factor among others to be taken into  account
             in determining whether any right under Article  8  exists  for
             family members to be granted leave to remain or leave to enter
             a Contracting State: see e.g. Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer
             v Netherlands (2007) 44 EHRR 34 ,  para.  [39]  ("...  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles in the way  of  the  family
             living together in the country of origin of  one  or  more  of
             them ..."). The phrase as used in the  Rules  is  intended  to
             have the same meaning as in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  It
             is clear that the ECtHR regards it as a formulation imposing a
             stringent test in respect of that factor, as is illustrated by
             Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (see  para.  [117]:  there  were  no
             insurmountable obstacles to the family settling  in  Suriname,
             even though the applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
             hardship if forced to do so).


             23.  For  clarity,  two  points  should  be  made  about   the
             "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion.  First,  although   it
             involves a stringent test, it is obviously  intended  in  both
             the case-law and the Rules to be interpreted in a sensible and
             practical rather than a purely literal way: see, e.g., the way
             in which  the  Grand  Chamber  approached  that  criterion  in
             Jeunesse v Netherlands at para. [117]; also the observation by
             this court in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 544  ,  at  [49]
             (although it should be noted that the passage in the  judgment
             of the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC); [2013] Imm AR 453  there
             referred  to,  at  paras.  [53]-[59],  was  making  a   rather
             different point, namely that explained  in  para.  [24]  below
             regarding the significance of the criterion in the context  of
             an Article 8 assessment).


             24. Secondly, the "insurmountable obstacles" criterion is used
             in the Rules to define one of the  preconditions  set  out  in
             section EX.1(b) which need to be satisfied before an applicant
             can claim to be entitled to be granted leave to  remain  under
             the Rules. In that context, it is not simply a  factor  to  be
             taken into account. However, in the context of making a  wider
             Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a factor  to  be
             taken into account, not an absolute requirement which  has  to
             be satisfied in every single case across the  whole  range  of
             cases covered by Article 8 : see paras. [29]-[30] below."


     18. In Parveen v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  932,  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered the relevant provision,  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  which
         applies where an applicant has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for
         less than 20 years and "there would be very  significant  obstacles
         to their integration in the country of return".  Underhill LJ said:


             "8.  Since the grant of permission this Court has had occasion
             to consider  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  "very  significant
             obstacles  to  integration",  not   in   fact   in   paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi) but as it  appears  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules and in section 117C (4) of  the  Nationality
             Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  which  relate   to   the
             deportation of foreign criminals. In  Kamara  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  813,  [2016]  4
             WLR 152, Sales LJ said, at para. 14 of his judgment:


                  "In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
                  'integration' into the country to  which  it  is  proposed
                  that he be deported ... is a broad one. It is not confined
                  to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
                  living in the other country.  It  is  not  appropriate  to
                  treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss  and
                  it will usually be sufficient  for  a  court  or  tribunal
                  simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament  has
                  chosen to use. The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad
                  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to   whether   the
                  individual will be  enough  of  an  insider  in  terms  of
                  understanding how  life  in  the  society  in  that  other
                  country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it,
                  so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted
                  there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
                  society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety
                  of  human  relationships  to   give   substance   to   the
                  individual's private or family life."


             9.   That passage focuses more on the concept  of  integration
             than on what is meant by  "very  significant  obstacles".  The
             latter point was recently  addressed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
             (McCloskey J and UTJ Francis) in  Treebhawon  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC).  At  para.
             37 of its judgment the UT said:


                  "The other limb of the test, 'very significant obstacles',
                  erects a self-evidently elevated threshold, such that mere
                  hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere  upheaval
                  or inconvenience, even where multiplied, will generally be
                  insufficient in this context."


             10.  I have to say that I do not find that a very useful gloss
             on the words of the rule. It is fair enough  to  observe  that
             the words "very significant" connote an "elevated"  threshold,
             and I have no difficulty with the observation  that  the  test
             will not be met by "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I  am
             not sure that saying that "mere"  hardship  or  difficulty  or
             hurdles, even if multiplied, will not "generally" suffice adds
             anything of substance. The task of the Secretary of State,  or
             the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is  simply  to  assess  the
             obstacles to integration relied on, whether  characterised  as
             hardship or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether
             they regard them as "very significant"."


     19. The phrase 'insurmountable obstacles', involves a  stringent  test,
         to be interpreted in a sensible and practical, rather than a purely
         literal way.  The phrase "very  significant"  equally  connotes  an
         "elevated" threshold, and as Underhill LJ noted in Parveen v  SSHD,
         that test will not be met by "mere inconvenience or upheaval".   In
         the end, the task of the Secretary of State, or  the  Tribunal,  in
         any given case is simply to assess  the  obstacles  to  integration
         relied on, whether  characterised  as  hardship  or  difficulty  or
         anything else, and to decide whether  they  regard  them  as  "very
         significant".


     20. In the decision of Judge Richards-Clarke promulgated on  20th  June
         2018, the Judge had considered, at [25] to [28] whether there would
         be very significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  into
         India.  Judge Rowlands  referred  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke in June 2018, and at paragraph  [16]
         of his decision, he referred to the  passage  of  time  since  that
         decision.  At paragraph [17] he also noted that the appellant is no
         longer in a relationship with her husband, and they  have  a  child
         together, aged 8 months.  He referred to the appellant's claim that
         "... The existence of the child and its best interests amount to an
         insurmountable obstacle and the fact that, if returned,  she  would
         be a lone female with a child ...".  Judge  Rowlands  accepted,  at
         [18], that if the appellant returned to India now, it would be as a
         separated woman.  He referred to  the  background  material  relied
         upon by the appellant and said:


             "... The Appellant's objective evidence shows that  there  are
             approximately 36 million women who fall into the  category  of
             single women in various forms and that they  are  marginalised
             and face social stigma.  She may well face financial  hardship
             as well, but  I  do  not  accept  this  raises  insurmountable
             obstacles for her. She is well educated, speaks  the  language
             and has a lot more going for her than most single women."


     21. At paragraph [19], Judge Rowlands refers to the best  interests  of
         the child.  I accept Judge Rowlands  erroneously  stated  that  the
         appellant's skeleton argument argues  that  the  child  would  face
         discrimination.  The appellant's claim as set out in  the  skeleton
         argument was that "... The country information clearly  shows  that
         the appellant will face discrimination, and  this  will  inevitably
         affect the child ".  He went on to say at paragraph [19]:


             "... At the moment neither of the child's parents  have  leave
             to remain and there is the  possibility  of  them  both  being
             removed.  Her  grandparents  are  also   without   leave   and
             presumably her paternal grandparents live in India. The  child
             is an Indian citizen and I believe her best interests  are  to
             be with her mother in India. For all these reasons  I  am  not
             satisfied that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
             appellant's removal to India. I am  therefore  satisfied  that
             she could not meet the immigration rules."


     22. I also accept that Judge Rowlands refers in paragraph [19]  to  the
         child as an Indian citizen.  He cannot be criticised for doing  so.
         At page 3 (of 8) of the  respondent's  decision,  when  considering
         whether the Eligibility Relationship  Requirements'  for  leave  to
         remain as  a  parent  are  met,  the  respondent  referred  to  the
         nationality of the appellant and the child's father and said:


             "... Both  you  and  the  father  of  your  child  are  Indian
             nationals and you have failed to  provide  any  evidence  that
             your child is not an Indian national..."


     23. At the bottom of page 5 (of 8) of the  respondent's  decision,  the
         respondent stated:


             "Your daughter would be returning  to  India  with  you  as  a
             family unit. You can help  your  daughter  adapt  to  life  in
             India. The country which you grew up in. Your daughter  is  an
             Indian national so they can therefore start to  enjoy  all  of
             the benefits and advantages that citizenship entails"


     24. In  the  undated  grounds  of  appeal  that  were  settled  by  the
         appellant's representatives that were attached to the Form "IAFT-5,
         Appeal against your Home Office decision", the  appellant  did  not
         challenge the respondent's claim that her  daughter  is  an  Indian
         national.  The grounds of appeal simply state, at [3.6]; "It is  in
         the best interests and welfare of the appellant's child that  leave
         to remain is granted".  At the hearing of her appeal, the appellant
         relied upon a witness statement dated 16th December 2019 that is to
         be found on pages 14 to 18 of the appellant's bundle.   She  refers
         to the birth of her daughter, but  again,  did  not  say  that  her
         daughter is not an Indian national.  Neither was such a claim  made
         in the appellant's skeleton argument.


     25.  In  any  event,  Mr  Abbas  quite  properly  acknowledged  in  his
         submissions before me that in MK (India) Statelessness [2017]  EWHC
         1365 (Admin), the Court set out  at  paragraph  [9],  the  relevant
         'Indian Law' regarding nationality, taken from  the  material  that
         was relied upon.  Broadly put, where  the  birth  of  a  child  was
         outside India on or after 3 December  2004,  the  child  is  not  a
         citizen unless the birth is registered at an Indian  consulate'  in
         such form and  in  such  manner  as  may  be  prescribed'.  If  the
         registration is after the child's  first  birthday  it  needs  'the
         permission of  the  Central  Government'.    The  court  considered
         evidence adduced by the respondent which was  to  the  effect  that
         enquiries  of  an  Indian  minister  and  two  consular   officials
         indicates  that  in  practice  there  is  no   difference   between
         registration before the child's  first  birthday  and  registration
         after that date. The  Indian  officials  said  that  there  is  'no
         restriction' on later registration.  Thus  the  relevant  statutory
         provision requiring the permission of the Central  Government  does
         not in practice imply the exercise of a discretion, and  permission
         is given routinely. There are also possibilities for  applying  for
         registration as a citizen where a person born outside  India  comes
         to live in India while still a minor, and there are provisions  for
         the backdating (if necessary) of the Central government permission.
          Mr Abbas quite properly acknowledges that it is possible  for  the
         child therefore to acquire Indian citizenship.


     26. I reject  the  appellant's  claim  that  in  considering  the  best
         interests of the child,  Judge  Rowlands  failed  to  consider  the
         impact that removal of the child from the  UK  with  the  appellant
         will have upon the child's relationship with her father.  There was
         a statement made by Mr  Gurjinder  Singh,  the  appellant's  former
         partner, dated 17th December  2019  at  pages  19  and  20  of  the
         appellant's bundle.  The statement is in the vaguest of  terms  and
         says nothing about his relationship with his daughter.  He confirms
         that he does not have any immigration status in the UK but has made
         an application to regularise his stay.  At paragraph [4] he states:


             "I would like to apply for custody  for  my  daughter,  but  I
             cannot afford it. I want [JK] to live with my  family  and  me
             because we are better  suited  to  take  care  of  her.  Also,
             because of Ravneet's mental health issues I think it is better
             [JK] is with me. Ravneet's mood is always going up  and  down,
             this is not good for [JK]."


     27. The appellant's skeleton argument filed in advance of  the  hearing
         before the Tribunal did not advance a claim that the removal of the
         appellant  and  her  daughter  to  India  would  impact  upon   the
         relationship between the child and her father.  The  only  evidence
         before the Tribunal is what is recorded at  paragraph  [7]  of  the
         decision of Judge Rowlands.  The  appellant  confirmed  her  former
         partner does help and has contact with his daughter.  The  evidence
         was that [JK] goes to him at his sister's home at weekends.  Again,
         that is the vaguest of evidence and tells the Judge  nothing  about
         the impact that the removal of the appellant and  her  daughter  to
         India would have on the relationship between [JK] and  her  father.
         Separation of a child and parent where there is some  contact  will
         inevitably have some impact but that must be considered,  as  Judge
         Rowlands did here, against the reality that the appellant's  former
         partner has no lawful basis to be in the UK. The assessment must be
         conducted in the 'real world' context based upon the  evidence  and
         circumstance as they are.  On  the  paucity  of  evidence,  it  was
         plainly open to the Judge to conclude as he did at paragraph [19]:


             "... At the moment neither of the child's parents  have  leave
             to remain and there is the  possibility  of  them  both  being
             removed.  Her  grandparents  are  also   without   leave   and
             presumably her paternal grandparents live in India. The  child
             is an Indian citizen and I believe her best interests  are  to
             be with her mother in  India.  For  those  reasons  I  am  not
             satisfied that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
             appellant's removal to India ..."


     28. The reference  to  "insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
         removal to India", in paragraph [19] is in my judgement immaterial.
          The matters referred to by Judge Rowlands in paragraph [19] relate
         to the obstacles to integration rather than any  obstacles  to  the
         removal of the appellant and her daughter to India.


     29. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was  that  the
         respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act
         1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017]
         UKSC 11 confirms that the ultimate issue is whether a fair balance
         has been struck between the individual and public interest,  giving
         due weight to the provisions of the rules.  That  was  plainly  the
         approach adopted by Judge Rowlands at paragraphs [13]  to  [23]  of
         his decision.


     30.  In  my  judgement,  read  as  a  whole,  Judge  Rowlands   reached
         conclusions that were properly open to him on the  evidence  before
         the Tribunal.  The Judge referred to the obstacles  to  integration
         that were relied upon by the appellant.   Quite  simply,  there  is
         nothing in the evidence before the Tribunal that  establishes  that
         the stringent test set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) could be met.
           I  am  quite  satisfied  that   the   error   in   referring   to
         "insurmountable  obstacles  to  integration"  rather   than   "very
         significant obstacles" is immaterial, as is the reference  to  [JK]
         being an Indian national.


     31. The findings made by the judge were  findings  that  were  properly
         open to the judge  on  the  evidence  and  cannot  be  said  to  be
         perverse, irrational or findings that were  not  supported  by  the
         evidence.  The assessment of such a claim is always a  highly  fact
         sensitive task.   The  FtT  judge  was  required  to  consider  the
         evidence as a whole.  Although I accept  the  decision  could  have
         been better expressed, it is not a counsel of perfection.


     32. In reaching his decision, Judge  Rowland  carried  out  an  overall
         proportionality assessment and whether  a  fair  balance  has  been
         struck between the  individual  and  public  interest,  noting  the
         express statutory provision set out in s117B of the 2002  Act.   He
         referred to factors that weigh in favour of the appellant  such  as
         the circumstances of the various applications made on behalf of the
         appellant previously and that any delay, appears to  have  been  no
         fault of hers.  It was in my judgement open to  judge  Rowlands  to
         conclude  that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  is  in  all   the
         circumstances proportionate.


     33. It follows that I dismiss this appeal.





Notice of Decision


     34. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Rowlands stands.


       V. Mandalia                       Date     7th May 2021


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







