
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/17876/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th May 2019                     |On 17th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            Kizhan Omer Hama Amin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs O Obayelu of Goshen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Powell (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 29th October 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a female Iraqi citizen born 26th September 1990.   She
    originates from the Iraqi Kurdistan Region (the IKR).   She  claims  to
    have entered the UK on 17th December 2015 as a family member of an  EEA
    national.

 3. On 8th September 2017 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in  the
    UK on the basis of her private and family life.  She wished  to  remain
    in the UK so that she could continue to live with her husband Aziz Omer
    Mohamed (to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor)  who  is  a  naturalised
    British citizen who has lived in the UK since 16th February 2002.

 4. The Sponsor originates from Iraq.  He  was  naturalised  as  a  British
    citizen in 2010.  The Appellant and Sponsor  married  on  15th  January
    2008.

 5. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on 16th August 2018.
     The judge heard the appeal on 25th October 2018.

 6. The judge found that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant and Sponsor continuing their family life in Iraq.  The  judge
    found that the Appellant had  not  proved  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration in Iraq, and therefore she did
    not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  rules.   The
    judge took into account that the Appellant was pregnant, but found that
    no exceptional circumstances existed, and the Appellant's removal  from
    the UK would not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. The grounds were prepared by the Appellant's solicitors.  It was argued
    that the judge erred in law for the following reasons.

 8.  The  judge  was  wrong  to  treat  section  EX.1(b)  as  a  rule   and
    determinative of whether the requirement of E-LTRP of  Appendix  FM  is
    met and failed to have regard to the principle  in  Sabir  [2014]  UKUT
    00063 (IAC).  The Appellant contended that EX.1 was not a  freestanding
    element. I found this ground somewhat difficult to follow.

 9. It  was  contended  that  the  judge  applied  a  literal  approach  to
    insurmountable obstacles  and  was  in  error  in  so  doing.   It  was
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  interpret  insurmountable
    obstacles in a sensible and practical way.

10. The judge had erred by failing to consider the Respondent's policy at a
    general level.  It  was  submitted  that  there  was  no  proportionate
    consideration of the family and private life in the UK.  Reference  was
    made to R (on the application of Chen) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189  (IAC)  on
    the basis that there may be cases where  there  are  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  UK,  but  where
    temporary separation to enable an individual to make an application for
    entry clearance may be disproportionate.

The Grant of Permission

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
    in the following terms;

         ".   It is arguable that the FtTJ has failed to  set  out  adequate
             reasons for his finding that the Appellant  (either  alone  or
             accompanied by her husband) would be able  to  access  support
             from family members on return to  Iraq.   In  support  of  his
             credibility finding the judge refers to AAH (CG) as  authority
             but I find that this is the wrong approach  to  the  evidence.
             AAH concerns returning failed asylum seekers.   The  Appellant
             is not in that category and her evidence is that she would not
             be welcome in either her  family  home  or  the  home  of  her
             husband's brothers.

           . Bearing in mind that the Appellant is pregnant with twins, and
             has  a  history  of  miscarriage,  I   cannot   discount   the
             possibility that a proper evaluation of the evidence above may
             be sufficient  to  tip  the  balance  of  the  proportionality
             assessment in her favour."

12. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  Respondent  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  In summary it was contended that the  judge  had  directed
    himself appropriately and made findings open to make on  the  evidence.
    It was contended that the judge had given cogent reasons for concluding
    that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate that family support  would
    not be available in Iraq.

13. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

14. At the oral hearing Mrs Obayelu relied and expanded  upon  the  grounds
    upon which permission to appeal had been granted.  Documentary evidence
    had been produced to indicate that the Appellant had now  given  birth.
    It was accepted that this was not relevant to the error of law issue as
    I had to consider the circumstances that were before the judge, and  at
    that time the Appellant was pregnant and had not given birth.

15. Mr Howells relied upon the rule 24 response, arguing that the judge had
    applied the correct test of  insurmountable  obstacles,  and  had  also
    correctly considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and was again correct  in
    then considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

16. Having carefully considered all that  has  been  placed  before  me,  I
    conclude that the judge  has  not  materially  erred  in  law  for  the
    following reasons.

17. The judge took into account all material factors.   The  judge  adopted
    the correct approach when considering this  appeal.   It  was  accepted
    that Article 8 was engaged  in  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  had
    established family life, and the Appellant had also established private
    life.

18. The judge was aware that both the Appellant and Sponsor originate  from
    Iraq.  Both are of Kurdish ethnicity.  The  Sponsor  is  a  naturalised
    British citizen and has his own business in the UK.

19. The judge took into account the Appellant's pregnancy.

20. The starting point of the judge was to consider EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.
     I do not accept that the judge was incorrect in taking this  approach.
    The starting point in this case had to be  whether  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor could demonstrate that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK.  The judge applied  the  correct
    definition of insurmountable obstacles.

21. The judge noted that the couple had lived  together  in  the  Kurdistan
    area of Iraq between 2013-2015 without significant difficulties.

22. The judge was well aware that the couple do not want to return to  Iraq
    but that is not the test.  The judge found that medical facilities  and
    services exist in Kurdistan which although are not of the same  quality
    as similar services in the UK, would be  available  to  the  Appellant.
    The judge found that there was insufficient evidence to find  that  the
    couple would be without familial support if returned to  Iraq  and  was
    entitled to reach that conclusion.

23. The judge took into account that the Sponsor could sell his business in
    the UK, and his property, and establish a business in Iraq.  The  judge
    was entitled to make those findings and reach those conclusions.

24. The judge is criticised for making reference to  the  country  guidance
    decision of AAH, but makes the point in paragraph 39  that  while  that
    decision is directly relevant to protection  cases,  it  also  provides
    useful information as to risk in Iraq and Kurdistan.  The judge is well
    aware that this is not a protection case.

25. The judge finds at paragraph  49  that  the  obstacle  to  family  life
    between  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  continuing  outside  the  UK  is
    primarily his reluctance to give up the life he has established in  the
    UK.  He has established a good business and does not wish to uproot and
    relocate to Iraq.  The judge found that this would involve a degree  of
    hardship and inconvenience and would be disruptive and worrying.

26. Those are findings which the judge was entitled to make, and the  judge
    was fully  entitled  to  go  on  and  find  that  the  couple  had  not
    demonstrated that they would  face  very  significant  difficulties  in
    continuing their family life abroad.  The judge was entitled to find at
    paragraph 51, that a significant factor in his assessment was the  fact
    that the Appellant and Sponsor lived together in Kurdistan between 2013
    and 2015 and "did so without misadventure and with family support."

27. The judge dealt properly and adequately with EX.1(b) of Appendix FM and
    then went on to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).   The  judge  adopted
    the correct legal approach at paragraph 61 and was entitled to conclude
    that there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration into Iraq.  The judge noted at paragraph 62  that  she  had
    lived in Kurdistan from birth until September 2015.  There would be  no
    language difficulties.  There are family  members  in  Kurdistan.   The
    Appellant is married and the Sponsor was able to accompany her to  Iraq
    if he chose to do so.

28.  Having  found  that  the  Appellant  could   not   satisfy   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) the judge correctly went on to consider Article 8 outside
    the Immigration rules  and  adopted  a  balance  sheet  approach.   The
    factors that weigh on the Respondent's side are set  out  at  paragraph
    72, and the factors on the Appellant's side at paragraph 73.

29. The judge took  fully  into  account  the  Appellant's  pregnancy.   He
    considered the section 117B considerations.  In my view the  judge  has
    adopted the correct legal approach, and was entitled to find that there
    were no exceptional circumstances which would cause unjustifiably harsh
    consequences if the Appellant was not granted leave to  remain  in  the
    UK.  The judge was entitled to conclude, and gave adequate reasons  for
    his conclusion, that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control should be accorded more weight, than the weight  to
    be accorded to the  wishes  of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  that  the
    Appellant be allowed to reside in the UK.

30. The grounds upon which permission to appeal have been  granted,  amount
    to a disagreement with the conclusion reached by the judge, but they do
    not disclose a material error of law.

31. There has now been a change of circumstances in that the Appellant  has
    given birth to a child.  It is a matter for the Appellant  and  Sponsor
    as to whether they wish to make a fresh application to  the  Respondent
    based upon the birth of their child.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.

There has been no application for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 7th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 7th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

















