
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17697/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 March 2018                        |On 26 April 2018                   |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Omar Laifa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lam of Counsel, instructed by David Tang & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet promulgated on 28 November 2017, in which he allowed  the  'human
    rights' appeal of Mr Omar Laifa.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant  and  Mr  Laifa  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to Mr Laifa as the Appellant and the Secretary of State
    as the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is an Algerian national born on 1 November  1974.  It  is
    his case that he entered the United Kingdom in the  summer  of  1994  -
    when he would have been approaching his 20th birthday.  He claims  that
    he has remained here ever since, having assumed  the  identity  of  one
    Jamel Hammeri, a French national born on 1 August 1967.  The  Appellant
    claims that he has been in  various  employments  making  use  of  that
    identity throughout the time that he has been in the UK.

4.   The Respondent necessarily has no record of the  Appellant's  entry  to
    the United Kingdom.  The Appellant does not deny that  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom in an identity other than his true  identity,  and  says
    that he came here from France, having spent some time in  France  after
    departing from Algeria.

5.   There is, however, some record  of  the  Appellant's  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom in his current identity - Omar Laifa -  by  way  of  two
    criminal convictions.  The first of these is dated 11 April  2007  when
    the Appellant  was  convicted  of  possessing  a  false  or  improperly
    obtained identification document at Woolwich Crown Court and  sentenced
    to six months' imprisonment.  On 26 January 2011 he was again convicted
    of possessing a false  or  improperly  obtained  identity  document  at
    Camberwell Green Magistrates' Court.  In relation to that latter  event
    it is also apparent that on 25 January  2011  he  was  served  with  an
    IS.151A document as an illegal entrant.

6.   Notwithstanding these convictions and the issuing of  documentation  as
    an illegal entrant, it is the Appellant's case that he  not  only  then
    remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  he  also  again  continued  to
    masquerade under a false identity and worked accordingly.

7.   It is against this background that the Appellant  made  an  application
    on 1 March 2016 for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was made by way of form FLR(LR) and supported by a covering
    letter from his representatives and a number of  supporting  documents.
    Those documents included statements from a number  of  individuals  who
    declared their knowledge of the Appellant, that  he  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for significant periods of time and that they  knew  him
    to be making use of the Hammeri identity.   For  example,  the  witness
    statement of Mr  Nouri  Boudjenah  dated  6  February  2016  states  at
    paragraph 3: "I confirm that I know Mr Laifa as Mr Omar Laifa, Mr Jamel
    Hammeri and Mr Djamel Hammeri."  It is also stated in this statement at
    paragraph 5: "In my opinion, Mr Laifa is a trustworthy person  and  has
    fully integrated into our society."

8.   The other supporting witness  statements  are  in  essentially  similar
    terms, each referring to knowledge of  the  Appellant  in  the  current
    identity (Omar Laifa) and two versions of  the  Hammeri  identity,  and
    each declaring the Appellant to be a trustworthy person in the  opinion
    of  the  deponent.   The  documents  include  two  supporting   witness
    statements from each of the  Appellant's  brothers.   One  brother,  Mr
    Mourad Laifa, refers to the Appellant as  being  "honest"  as  well  as
    being a reliable and polite character.  Similarly, the statement of the
    other  brother,  Mr  Farouk  Laifa,  makes  the  observation  that  the
    Appellant "had always been of honest, reliable and polite character".

9.   Before going any further it seems to me that on its  face  it  is  very
    difficult to reconcile the contents of each  of  these  statements.   I
    struggle to see in circumstances where  each  deponent  was  apparently
    aware of the Appellant's assumption of different identities  that  each
    could opine to the effect that he was an honest and trustworthy person.
     More particularly, it is not readily  understandable  without  further
    exploration on  what  basis  the  Appellant's  brothers  were  able  to
    describe him as 'honest':  it  seems  to  me  that  before  reaching  a
    conclusion that such opinions were genuinely held it would be necessary
    to establish whether it could realistically be suggested that they  had
    no idea or understanding as  to  why  a  different  identity  had  been
    assumed - i.e. it  would  have  been  incumbent  on  the  Appellant  to
    establish that they had no idea that he was using a different  identity
    in order to obtain employment in circumstances where he had no basis to
    be in the United Kingdom. Necessarily evaluation of such matters impact
    upon the weight to be accorded to these various supporting statements.

10.  Be that as it may - and I will return  to  these  observations  in  due
    course - the Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons
    set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 8 July 2016.

11.  The Respondent noted the fact of the Appellant's  previous  convictions
    and also noted that they had not  been  mentioned  on  the  application
    form.  It was a matter of considerable  debate  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to whether or not those convictions were in  fact  'spent'.
    Ms Everett, on behalf of the Respondent,  now  acknowledges  that  they
    were indeed spent.

12.  In this regard I pause to note that the grounds of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal at  paragraph  5  pleaded  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    disclose the convictions because he thought the  convictions  had  been
    spent.  However, in his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal he said
    something quite different.  At paragraph 12  of  the  Decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal it is recorded that the Appellant gave evidence  to
    the following effect.  "He was concerned that his solicitors would  not
    take the case for him if they knew of his convictions and that  is  why
    he denied having any convictions at section E of the application form."
     It may be seen that there is a discrepancy between:  electing  not  to
    provide information in  the  application  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    considered not required because the  convictions  were  thought  to  be
    spent; and not informing representatives, and  in  turn  not  providing
    information on the application form, because of a  concern  as  to  the
    consequences of revealing the convictions.

13.  In any event, the Respondent considered to the Appellant's  application
    pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules  with  particular  reference   to
    paragraph  276ADE(1).  The  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that   the
    Appellant met the suitability requirements under the  Rules.   In  this
    regard both paragraphs S-LTR.1.6 and  S-LTR.2.2(b)  were  invoked.   In
    respect of S-LTR.1.6 the decision letter records: "Your presence in the
    UK is not conducive to the public good because you have  used  multiple
    aliases during your time in the  UK."   With  regard  to  paragraph  S-
    LTR.2.2(b) this was raised on the basis of the failure to disclose  the
    convictions.  As I have said, it is now acknowledged by the  Respondent
    that those convictions were indeed spent -  accordingly  the  focus  on
    that particular basis of refusal is no longer critical or crucial.

14.  The Respondent was otherwise  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    established twenty years' continuous residence in the  United  Kingdom,
    and accordingly concluded that he did not satisfy the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  In this regard the Secretary of  State  said
    this:

         "None of the evidence you have provided as  evidence  of  20  years
         continuous residency is in the name shown in your passport and  you
         have not provided an official identity document issued  to  you  to
         show that you were ever legally known by the name of Jamel Hammeri.
          Therefore it  is  not  accepted  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
         submitted that you have lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
         20 years.  Consequently  you  fail  to  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules."

     Implicit in this is the Respondent's marginalisation  or  rejection  of
    the reliability of the supporting statements from family and friends.

15.  The Respondent went on to consider paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  but  found
    that the Appellant did not satisfy this  requirement  either.   It  was
    noted that the Appellant had spent a considerable  period  of  time  in
    Algeria before leaving, including in particular  his  formative  years,
    and it was considered that  he  would  still  have  strong  social  and
    cultural ties to assist  in  his  integration  into  life  there.   The
    Respondent otherwise found that there were no exceptional circumstances
    in the case to warrant leave notwithstanding the failure to satisfy the
    requirements of the Rules.

16.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

17.  On appeal the Appellant submitted a bundle of documents of  207  pages,
    which for the main part comprised evidence of  employment  of  somebody
    with the identity of Jamel Hammeri.   The  Appellant  also  provided  a
    smaller bundle, which included  a  witness  statement,  a  few  further
    documents, and a selection of case law.  The Appellant was supported in
    his appeal by the oral testimony of one of his brothers and one of  his
    friends.

18.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal for  reasons  set  out
    in the 'Decision and Reasons' of the First-tier Tribunal.

19.  The Respondent sought permission to appeal, which was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 8 January 2018.  Judge Chohan  considered
    that it was arguable that Judge Sweet's  reasoning  was  inadequate  in
    respect of his favourable finding with regard to  residence  of  twenty
    years in the UK, and in respect of there being significant obstacles to
    the Appellant's reintegration into Algeria.

20.  A Rule 24 response has been filed on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  under
    cover of letter dated 6 March 2018.  Mr Lam has also provided a written
    argument in opposition to the Respondent's challenge.

21.  For clarity: I note that one aspect of Mr Lam's written argument  seeks
    to characterise the grounds pleaded by the Respondent in support of the
    application for permission to appeal as submitting that the  Judge  had
    given no reasons for his conclusion in respect of the  length  of  time
    the Appellant had been in the UK, rather than no adequate  reasons.   I
    reject that distinction.  It seems  to  me  perfectly  clear  that  the
    grounds of appeal were raising an issue as to adequacy of  reasons,  in
    particular it being stated at paragraph 3 of the grounds that the Judge
    "needed to provide clear reasons".  Moreover, the basis of the grant of
    permission by Judge Chohan was "In  short,  the  judge  has  not  given
    adequate reasons for the findings made".

22.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge rehearses the background  to  the  appeal
    in his opening paragraphs, and then goes on to deal with the nature  of
    the hearing and  the  submissions  at  paragraphs  9-15.   The  Judge's
    findings are to be found at paragraphs 16-19.

23.  The key findings that are the subject of challenge are twofold:

    (i)  "I am satisfied, based upon the strength  of  the  evidence,  both
    documentary and witness evidence, that he has indeed been in the UK for
    over twenty years ..."  (paragraph  16).  (This  is  taken  forward  to
    paragraph 18 where the Judge states  that  in  such  circumstances  the
    Appellant has met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii).)


    (ii) "In the alternative, he should succeed under paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    because  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  being
    reintegrated into Algeria on his return to  that  country."  (paragraph
    18).

24.  Further to the above I also note that at paragraph 19 the  Judge  gives
    consideration to Article 8  of  the  ECHR  "In  the  alternative",  and
    stating that he would have allowed the appeal under Article 8  "because
    in my view it would be wholly disproportionate  for  the  Appellant  to
    return to Algeria, taking into account the strength of his  connections
    and private life in the UK and the length of his stay in the UK".

25.  It is convenient to note at this point that the  'alternative  finding'
    in respect of Article 8 should not have been an alternative finding  at
    all - and it is concerning that the Judge so  characterised  it.   This
    was a human rights appeal.  It was only in respect of  Article  8  that
    the Appellant could have  advanced  his  'private  life'  based  claim.
    Whilst an analysis of the case against the Rules might properly  inform
    an outcome under Article 8, the ECHR ground was in no way  supposed  to
    be an alternative or subsidiary basis of challenge to the  Respondent's
    decision. The very brief contents of paragraph 19,  which  indeed  only
    amount to a single sentence, are the only part of  the  decision  where
    the Judge expressly addresses Article 8, and thereby the only part that
    expressly evaluates the available basis of challenge.

26.  Be that as it may, in respect of the evaluation of the  factual  matrix
    I have no real hesitation - despite the able submissions of Mr Lam - in
    concluding that the Judge's  reasoning  fell  well  short  of  what  is
    adequate on the key issue in the appeal with regard to  the  length  of
    time the Appellant has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Moreover,  in
    respect of paragraph 276ADE(vi) no reasoning is offered by the Judge at
    all beyond the bare statement that the requirements of  the  Rule  were
    met.  Indeed, there is nothing discernible in the Decision  by  way  of
    exploration as to what might  or  might  not  inhibit  the  Appellant's
    integration into the country of his nationality.

27.   Yet  further,  as  alluded  to  above,  the  Article  8  'alternative'
    consideration at paragraph 19 is wholly inadequate. In particular there
    is no reference to section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 at all.  It was suggested by Mr Lam  that  such  public
    interest  considerations  might  have   in   effect   been   undertaken
    notwithstanding the failure to identify  the  statutory  provisions  by
    name, but I find that I am unable to identify from the Decision on what
    basis the public interest in maintaining effective immigration  control
    was given due regard, and I am unable to identify  on  what  basis  the
    Judge evaluated the provisions that says that private life  established
    at a time when a person's status is precarious or  unlawful  is  to  be
    accorded little weight (section 117B(4)(a) and (5)).

28.  As regards the Judge's findings in respect of the Appellant's  presence
    in the United Kingdom for 20 years, and  the  satisfaction  thereby  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iii), it seems to me that the reasons -  which  go  no
    further than the sentence quoted above from  paragraph  16  -  are  not
    adequate.

29.   This  was  a  complex  case  which  required  a  careful  and  nuanced
    consideration of evidence,  and  thereafter  a  clear  and  transparent
    explanation of the  basis  upon  which  it  was  considered  that  such
    evidence should be accepted. Given the history that I  have  rehearsed,
    which as  I  have  indicated  includes  two  previous  convictions  for
    dishonesty by using false identities, it seems to me  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge needed to be particularly circumspect in evaluating
    the Appellant's evidence. In order for the  dissatisfied  party  -  the
    Respondent - to understand the basis of the outcome, it  was  incumbent
    upon the Judge to explain with adequate clarity why an  individual  who
    had at least twice been convicted of using false identities, and on his
    own case had lived a life of utter deception in that his entire claimed
    working life in the UK was achieved by assuming a  different  identity,
    should be considered to be a witness of  truth.   In  this  regard  the
    Judge does not seem to have identified the difficulties inherent in the
    supporting witness statements to which I have referred above  -  which,
    on  the  one  hand,  acknowledge  that  the  Appellant  used  different
    identities and yet advance  the  Appellant  as  a  trustworthy  person.
    Something far  more  by  way  of  reasoning  was  required  by  way  of
    explanation  of  what  weight  could  be  attached  to  the  supporting
    testimonies and why.

30.  More particularly, the Judge does not articulate the  key  question  in
    this appeal or  express  any  reasons  for  any  findings  on  the  key
    question.

31.  The key question is inevitably this: did the Appellant, and if  so,  at
    what point, assume the Hammeri identity for the purposes of work?  That
    required something by way of considering what it was  in  the  evidence
    that linked the Appellant to the use of the Hammeri identity.

32.  In this regard it seemed to me surprising that  neither  the  Appellant
    nor the Respondent had produced any materials in respect of the earlier
    convictions.  On the Appellant's part, if those convictions had been in
    relation to the use of the Hammeri identity that would have  tended  to
    confirm his claim that he had been using the identity for a long period
    of time. On the Respondent's part, if those  convictions  had  been  in
    respect of one or more different identities, that is to say, identities
    different from the Hammeri identity, then that  would  have  undermined
    the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  using  the  Hammeri   identity
    throughout.

33.  It is not beyond the realms of possibility that the  Appellant  assumed
    the Hammeri identity at some point considerably after his claimed entry
    to the United Kingdom in 1994.  For example, it may have  been  assumed
    after his  conviction  in  2011.   It  is  not  beyond  the  realms  of
    possibility equally that the Appellant simply bought  a  collection  of
    documents accumulated by an individual called  Hammeri  at  some  point
    approaching his application and simply then presented himself as having
    worked under that identity.

34.  So, as I say, it is  crucial  to  see  what  might  have  been  in  the
    evidence  that  supported  or  linked  the  Appellant  to  the  Hammeri
    identity. Beyond the Appellant's own assertions, and the testimonies of
    his friends and brothers, Mr Lam directed my attention in  this  regard
    to only two documents.

35.  The first is a document that appears in the smaller of the two  bundles
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  a  letter  from  T.T.
    Accountancy Services of 632 Old Kent Road purportedly signed by  Thomas
    Tai Faturoti.  The letter is dated 22 October 2017 and in its  entirety
    is in these terms: "I can confirm that Mr Jamel Hammeri  is  my  client
    and I signed the back of the  picture  as  the  true  picture  of  him.
    Thanks.  Thomas Faturoti".  There is then a photograph appended to  the
    document and a photocopy has been provided  showing  the  back  of  the
    photograph signed by Mr Faturoti on 23 October 2017, saying "this is to
    certify that this is the  true  picture  of  Mr  Jamel  Hammeri".   The
    picture does indeed appear to be that of  the  Appellant.  However,  Mr
    Lam, not surprisingly, was at a struggle to identify anything  in  that
    letter that suggested that the Appellant had used the Hammeri  identity
    at any point prior to the writing of that letter.

36.  It was only after  some  very  considerable  further  perusing  of  the
    larger of the two bundles that Mr Lam was eventually able to identify a
    second document which potentially linked the Appellant to  the  Hammeri
    identity via the testimony of Mr Faturoti of T.T. Accountancy Services.
     At pages 201-202 was a letter from T.T. Accountancy dated  27  October
    2015 addressed to the Appellant. It is in general terms about a  review
    of fees for the accounting year 2015 to 2016.  There is nothing in that
    letter to suggest any sort of professional  relationship  between  T.T.
    Accountancy and the Appellant that predates the letter  of  27  October
    2015.

37.  Accordingly,  the  best  that  could  be  shown  from  the  documentary
    evidence was a link between the Appellant and the identity  that  might
    be taken back to 2015 - that is to say a point very shortly before  the
    current application was made.  Necessarily, that does  not  demonstrate
    that the Appellant had been a person making use of the Hammeri identity
    at any point hitherto.

38.  None of these matters explored in the preceding paragraphs - which,  it
    seems to me, were at the core of the Appellant's case - are  identified
    or articulated in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning.

39.  In the circumstances in my judgement it is  just  plain  unsatisfactory
    for the Judge to state in very general  terms  that  the  evidence  was
    strong enough to persuade him as to the facts - that he was "satisfied,
    based upon the strength of the evidence" -  without  demonstrating  the
    basis upon which he reached the evaluation as to the  strength  of  the
    evidence.

40.  The Judge clearly falls into further  error  in  the  consideration  of
    paragraph  276ADE  in  that  he  fails  completely  to   consider   the
    suitability requirements of S-LTR.1.6.  Whilst the Judge  focuses  upon
    the criminal convictions and the failure to disclose and the  issue  as
    to whether  or  not  those  convictions  were  spent,  making  findings
    essentially in favour of the  Appellant  -  which  are  now  no  longer
    challenged - he does  not  seemingly  give  any  consideration  to  the
    alternative suitability argument advanced in the RFRL:  "Your  presence
    in the UK is not conducive to the public good  because  you  have  used
    multiple aliases during your time in the UK". The issue of  whether  or
    not the convictions were spent does not  impact  upon  that  particular
    reasoning.

41.   In  the  context  of  an  Article  8  assessment,  and  in  particular
    proportionality and bearing in mind the public interest in  maintaining
    effective immigration control to guard public interests, the  issue  of
    'suitability' is potentially significantly pertinent. This  is  perhaps
    the more so in the circumstances here. Even if it were to be  concluded
    that the Appellant has been in the UK for a protracted period of  time,
    on his own  case  he  has  remained  notwithstanding  his  convictions,
    continuing to assume - and obtain work pursuant to - a false  identity.
    It seems to me particularly relevant - and should  have  properly  been
    taken into consideration and articulated - that the Appellant not  only
    did not learn his lesson after his first conviction but did  not  learn
    his lesson after his second conviction.  Irrespective  of  whether  his
    offences  might  be  said  to  have  been  spent,  in  the  context  of
    suitability (to be  included  in  a  'proportionality'  balance),  some
    evaluation should properly have been made as to  whether  he  could  be
    considered to  be  a  person  who  had  rehabilitated  himself,  or  in
    circumstances where it is his claim that he has continued to masquerade
    under a false identity in order to secure work to which  he  would  not
    otherwise  have  been  entitled  and  therefore  to  secure   pecuniary
    advantage by deception, he is habitually disrespectful of the law.

42.  Again, such matters should all have been the subject of due and  proper
    consideration and findings on  the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  They were not, and this is yet further fatal to the decision of
    the Judge.

43.  In all the circumstances the inadequacy of reasoning is such  that  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.   It  is  common
    ground between the parties that the decision in the appeal requires  to
    be remade after a further hearing with all issues at large. Accordingly
    the appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

44.  The observations that I have made as to the nature and quality  of  the
    evidence should not in any way be considered to be binding on the  next
    Tribunal.  They are observations that seem to me to be  appropriate  to
    make on the basis of the materials that I have before me, in  light  of
    the fact that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  explore  such
    matters or if he did has not explained what he made of them because  of
    the inadequacy of his reasons, and by way of demonstrating  the  nature
    and materiality of the deficiencies in reasoning.  My  observations  do
    not constitute findings of fact.  It will be for the Judge that remakes
    the decision ultimately to decide whether or not the matters to which I
    have alluded require further exploration and what, if any, weight might
    be accorded any consequent findings. Nonetheless, no doubt now that the
    Appellant is aware of such matters he will be in a position to seek  to
    address them and to invite the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  the  next
    occasion to make what he or she will of these matters in light  of  his
    evidence and any further supporting materials that he might provide.

45.  I also note again the potential value to one or other  of  the  parties
    in having some more information as to  the  identity  utilised  in  the
    circumstances that led to the convictions in  April  2007  and  January
    2011. Any such evidence may be filed and served in accordance with  the
    standard directions that will no doubt be issued  by  the  Tribunal  in
    light of my decision herein.

Notice of Decision

46.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

47.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet with all  issue
    at large.

48.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.

Signed:                                 Date: 24 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
