
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/17782/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 October 2020                  |On 14 October 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                       MOHAMED MINHAJ MOHAMED MAHROOF

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr. B Malik of counsel

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V).  A face to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a  remote  hearing.   At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  I
reserved my decisions and reasons, which I now  give.   The  order  made  is
described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Sri Lankan national with date of birth given as
    8.4.88, has appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 1.5.20, dismissing  his
    human rights appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    dated 15.10.19, to refuse his application for Leave to  Remain  on  the
    basis of 10 years' long residence, pursuant to paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
    on 17.6.20, considering it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    erred in law in failing to  apply  the  correct  interpretation  of  an
    "exempt person" under paragraph 276A(b)(iii) of the Immigration  Rules,
    and that in conducting the article  8  ECHR  proportionality  balancing
    exercise the judge failed to give appropriate weight to  the  'historic
    injustice' suffered by the appellant as a result  of  the  respondent's
    failure to provide him with the '60 day letter' in accordance with  her
    policy.

 3. Shortly prior to the error of law hearing,  the  Tribunal  received  by
    email Mr Malik's extensive skeleton argument  dated  2.10.20,  together
    with a large volume of case authorities relied on.  I  confirm  I  have
    taken this material into account along with the oral  submissions  made
    at the error of law hearing.

 4. The lengthy history is set out in the skeleton argument and need not be
    repeated here. In summary, the appellant entered the UK in October 2009
    with leave to remain as a Tier 4 student  subsequently  extended  until
    25.8.14. Since that date he has had no valid leave to remain in the UK.
    On several occasions, particularly in 2013 and  2014,  and  thereafter,
    the respondent purported to curtail his student leave. The  appellant's
    case is that the notice of curtailment with the 60-day period of  grace
    was not received by the appellant until 13.3.19, with curtailment  date
    of 12.5.19. On that date, the appellant made a human rights application
    for  Leave  to  Remain,  subsequently  varied  to  a   long   residence
    application under paragraph 276B. It is the refusal of this application
    which is the subject of this appeal. The application was refused on the
    basis that the appellant did not have lawful leave between 25.8.14  and
    13.3.19.

 5. The argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  as  to  whether  the
    appellant was lawfully resident between 25.8.14  and  13.3.19  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 276B, and the extent to  which  the  respondent's
    alleged failure to serve the curtailment notice should have been  taken
    into account in the article  8  proportionality  exercise.  However,  a
    number of other arguments were taken, as explained before.

 6. It is important to note that at [10]  of  the  impugned  decision,  the
    judge made the following findings of fact. The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant did not receive the first or second curtailment notices,  and
    that the third notice was sent to the wrong  address.  The  judge  also
    found that a further curtailment letter sent on 11.2.14 was sent to the
    correct address but signed for by the appellant's neighbour who did not
    give it to the appellant until 12.4.14, on  which  date  the  appellant
    asked the respondent for a further 60-day letter,  as  the  curtailment
    period had expired. The judge found that a further  curtailment  letter
    was sent on 11.8.14 but with the same February  date,  so  that  60-day
    period was of no  practical  use  to  the  appellant.  On  18.8.14  the
    appellant sought another 60-day letter, a request repeated on  25.8.14,
    8.7.15, and 19.5.16. In the meantime,  the  appellant's  student  leave
    expired on 25.8.14. After having made his human rights  application  on
    6.3.18, on 13.3.19, the respondent provided the appellant with the  60-
    day letter, expiring 12.5.19.

 7. The primary argument made by Mr Malik at the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    before me in the error  of  law  hearing  is  that  once  an  applicant
    receives a 60-day letter he becomes  exempt  from  immigration  control
    within the meaning of paragraph 276A(b)(iii).

 8. It is  necessary  to  Mr  Malik's  argument  for  the  "exemption  from
    immigration control" to apply not only to those who have  received  the
    60-day letter but those who are waiting for it. It  is  also  necessary
    for the argument to succeed that the 60-day  letter  dated  13.3.19  be
    construed as a grant of leave to remain.

 9. For the reasons set out below, I do not  accept  any  part  Mr  Malik's
    submissions on the issue of exemption from immigration control and have
    concluded  that  they  are  based  on  a  fanciful  and   unsustainable
    interpretation of the Rules and Statute.

10. Paragraph 276A(b) provides  that  "lawful  residence"  means  residence
    which is continuous residence pursuant to: (i) existing leave to  enter
    or remain; or (ii) temporary admission (not applicable in  this  case);
    or (iii) "an exemption from immigration  control,  including  where  an
    exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a  grant  of
    leave to enter or remain."

11. First, I note that there is nothing within paragraphs 276A or 276B that
    provides for a person in the circumstances  of  this  appellant  to  be
    exempt from immigration control, whether or not he has received the 60-
    day letter. I do not accept the argument that the grant of a period  of
    grace within which an application for further leave will be  considered
    takes a student migrant applicant outside of immigration control. It is
    a discretionary waiver of the effect of expiry of valid leave so as  to
    cure the injustice of a person whose application would fail without the
    opportunity to vary the named educational sponsor. I  note  that  other
    parts of paragraph 276A and indeed other related Rules including  those
    at 276R onwards relating to member of HM Forces and their families, and
    make clear that exemption from immigration  control  relates  to  those
    provisions under the Immigration Act 1971. I note that the 1971 Act was
    amended by the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, amending s8 and  adding
    s8A. These amendments provide for categories of persons who are  exempt
    from immigration control, including heads of state, heads of diplomatic
    missions, etc. The appellant does not fall within any of  the  specific
    categories of persons entitled to exemption from immigration control.

12. In the premises, I  am  satisfied  that  the   phrase  "Exemption  from
    Immigration Control" referred to in paragraph  276A(b)(iii)  refers  to
    those defined under the 1971 Act as  persons  exempt  from  immigration
    control and has no application whatsoever to those  in  receipt  or  or
    awaiting a 60-day letter. Even if I am wrong  as  to  the  relationship
    between the exemption from immigration control referred to in paragraph
    276A(b)(iii) and the 1971 Act, I am satisfied, as Mr McVeety submitted,
    it is not possible to read into 276A(b)(iii)  something  which  is  not
    there, namely applicability to those waiting for the 60-day letter.

13. It follows that Mr Malik's argument on this head cannot succeed on  any
    basis.  It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  address  the   lengthy
    submissions  and  Mr  Malik's  extensive  references  to  case  law  of
    tangential relevance to  this  issue  and  on  general  principles  any
    further. I am satisfied that the judge  was  correct  at  [14]  of  the
    decision to conclude that the appellant was very much still the subject
    of immigration control with or without  the  60-day  letter,  that  his
    valid leave expired on 25.8.14,  so  that  thereafter  his  immigration
    status was unlawful. As is clear from the free-standing requirement  at
    paragraph 276B(v), the appellant must  not  be  breach  of  immigration
    laws, except where paragraph  39E  applies  to  disregard  any  current
    period of overstaying. It follows  that  once  his  leave  had  expired
    without in-time renewal in 2014, he could never qualify  for  the  long
    residence provisions. The long  residence  application  was  doomed  to
    failure from the outset.

14. Mr Malik made a number of unsustainable submissions during  the  course
    of his oral arguments. For example, he asserted in oral  argument,  and
    at [26] to [29] of his skeleton, that the decision was perverse in that
    the judge found as a fact both that the appellant could "do  no  more",
    and that he was partly to blame for the delay in obtaining  the  60-day
    letter. However, it is obvious from a reading of paragraph [19] of  the
    decision that it was Mr Malik's submission to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the appellant could do no more, a submission with which the  judge
    only partly agreed, explaining that there were lengthy periods in which
    the appellant sat back and did nothing to pursue the provision  of  the
    60-day letter, including almost two years between May  2016  and  March
    2018. The judge did not find that the appellant could "do no more," but
    to the contrary, found that he could indeed have done more.

15.  Mr Malik also submitted that the respondent was at fault in failing to
    serve the 60-day letter on the appellant in  February  2014,  asserting
    that it was sent to the incorrect address. However, when challenged  on
    this assertion, it  transpired  that  the  letter  had  been  correctly
    addressed to  the  appellant,  as  can  be  seen  at  page  27  of  the
    appellant's bundle but signed for by a neighbour who failed to hand  it
    to the appellant until April 2014. In his own letters at pages  20  and
    27 of the bundle, the appellant accepted that if there was fault it was
    that of Royal Mail. In the premises, it was incorrect for Mr  Malik  to
    assert that the letter had been misdirected by the respondent  or  that
    the respondent was in any way at fault in respect  of  sending  of  the
    February 2014 letter.

16. These issues are,  of  course,  relevant  to  whether  there  has  been
    injustice or other prejudice to the appellant by the alleged failure of
    the respondent to provide the appellant  with  the  60-day  letter.  Mr
    Malik relied on Patel (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness)  India
    [2011] UKUT 00211 and his submissions at [6] to [11]  of  his  skeleton
    argument, to submit that the appellant had been  unfairly  deprived  of
    the "opportunity to vary" his student application. Mr Malik pointed out
    that as a result of Patel, the respondent instituted a policy to  grant
    60-day grace period  in  cases  where  the  sponsor  licence  has  been
    withdrawn post-application. Patel held that in such  circumstances  the
    applicant should have the opportunity to vary the  application  and  be
    afforded a reasonable time within which to find a  substitute  college.
    However, this appellant's leave was curtailed following the  revocation
    of the college licence and  even  before  Patel  the  practice  of  the
    respondent was to grant a 60-day period of grace within which  to  find
    an alternative sponsor.

17. Effectively, until he received the curtailment notice, the  appellant's
    leave continued and  on  that  basis  did  not  expire  until  25.8.14.
    However, it is clear that by April 2014, when his neighbour handed over
    the February 2014 curtailment letter, the appellant was aware that  the
    respondent intended to curtail his  leave.  According  to  his  witness
    statement, the appellant claims to have  continued  his  studies  until
    February 2014, at which time he learnt that his college's  licence  had
    been revoked. It was in fact revoked in May 2013. Whether he  had  been
    studying until February 2014 is not entirely clear  as  his  letter  of
    17.4.19 stated that he had been out of  education  for  more  than  six
    years.

18. Given that the appellant's leave was extant through to 25.8.14,  it  is
    not entirely clear why he needed a 60-day period of grace within  which
    to find a new educational sponsor and make a fresh student  application
    before the expiry of his leave in August 2014, although this is what he
    has asserted at [3] of his witness statement. At  [5]  of  his  witness
    statement he  claimed  that  he  was  only  handed  the  February  2014
    curtailment letter on or around 1.7.14. However, as set out  above,  at
    [10(d)] of the decision the judge  found  that  he  had  received  this
    letter on 12.4.14. The appellant  has  not  sought  to  challenge  this
    finding of fact.

19. In any event, by early 2014 the appellant was aware of the intention to
    curtail his leave, on the basis that the  sponsor's  licence  had  been
    revoked, and, on Mr Malik's argument that the  curtailment  notice  was
    not effective until received, he still had extant leave when he  became
    aware of these facts. It may be, however, that  he  believed  that  his
    leave had been curtailed and that he needed a 60-day  grace  period  to
    find a new sponsor and make a fresh student application.

20. Relying on the findings of fact summarised above, Mr Malik argued  that
    there had been 'historic injustice' to the  appellant  by  the  alleged
    failure of the respondent to serve him with the 60-day letter necessary
    for him to obtain an educational sponsor and make  an  application  for
    further student leave.

21. The injustice complained of by the appellant  was  deprivation  of  the
    opportunity to make an application for further student  leave,  not  an
    opportunity to vary his application, or to be granted leave to  remain.
    Neither can he vary leave once it expired on 25.8.14. However,  as  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found, there were periods  during  which  the
    appellant did not pursue any student application or grant of  a  60-day
    letter. As Mr McVeety asked rhetorically,  if  the  appellant  was  not
    studying in the UK what else caused him to be so busy as  to  not  have
    time to pursue the 60-day letter between his letter of request  in  May
    2016 and his human rights application in March 2018?  Why  did  he  sit
    back for the best part of two years? Further, if there was delay, it is
    clear that not all of that delay was the fault of the  respondent,  who
    made several attempts to serve him. For example, the respondent was not
    to know that the February 2014 letter had  not  been  received  by  the
    appellant when it was sent to the correct address and not returned.

22. On the facts, I am satisfied that this  is  not  a  case  of  'historic
    injustice' as alleged; at its highest it  is  one  of  some  relatively
    short period of delay.  Neither am I satisfied that there has been  any
    material prejudice to the appellant, given his own significant inaction
    during  the  periods  identified  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    following the expiry of his leave in August 2014, and particularly when
    he accepts that on 13.3.19 the respondent granted him leave outside the
    Rules  (LOTR),  to  expire  on  12.5.19.  The  letter  of  13.3.19   is
    instructive; it makes clear that although the appellant did not qualify
    for limited leave to remain or for discretionary leave, it  was  agreed
    that should he make an application for further Tier 4 leave within  the
    currency of the LOTR, he would "exceptionally be allowed to switch back
    into Tier 4 provided all the other Tier 4 requirements have been  met."
    He was warned that should he fail to submit a Tier 4 application within
    the short period of leave, he would not be granted a  further  60  days
    grace. In the circumstances, it is difficult to see what prejudice  the
    appellant has suffered. He was able to remain  in  the  UK  beyond  the
    expiry of his leave in 2014 without being removed and granted a further
    period of leave in March 2019 to make a student application.

23. The remaining aspect of the grounds as drafted  primarily  address  the
    weight to be given to the alleged  'historic  injustice'  or  delay  in
    failing to serve the appellant  with  the  60-day  letter  until  2019.
    However,  Mr  Malik  accepted  in  oral  argument  that  the  case  law
    establishes that there is a high threshold, periods in terms of  years,
    before such delay could entitle the appellant to a grant of leave.

24. In this regard I note that in Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  412,  the
    Court of Appeal  said  that  it  is  necessary  to  guard  against  the
    temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in truth  no  more
    than disagreements about the weight to be given to  different  factors,
    particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the  advantage  of
    hearing oral evidence. It is well-established law that the weight to be
    given to any particular factor in an appeal is a matter for  the  judge
    and will rarely give rise to an error of law, see Green (Article 8 -new
    rules) [2013] UKUT 254.

25. Having carefully considered the impugned  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the light of the submissions made to  me,  I  am  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did accord appropriate weight to the
    alleged injustice, having considerable  sympathy  for  the  appellant's
    plight.

26. The appellant's complaint is that  that  the  alleged  failure  of  the
    respondent to serve him with a 60-day letter on  curtailment  prevented
    him from applying successfully to extend his Tier 4 student  leave.  It
    is said that without the 60-day letter  he  was  unable  to  secure  an
    educational sponsor. At  [19]  of  the  decision  the  judge  expressed
    sympathy and accepted that the appellant, "wrote to the respondent on 5
    separate occasions to inform them that the letter was  outstanding.  Mr
    Malik submitted that I could do no more." As stated  above,  the  judge
    agreed with Mr Malik's submission only to a  limited  extent,  pointing
    out that there were lengthy periods when the appellant, on whom was the
    onus to regularise his immigration status, made no  communication  with
    the respondent in the period between 2104 and 2018, including a  period
    of almost two  years  between  May  2016  and  March  2018.  The  judge
    concluded  that  the  appellant  "must  also  shoulder  some   of   the
    responsibility as a result of his inactivity."

27. It is clear from the decision that the judge gave  considerable  weight
    to the appellant's alleged predicament, referring  at  [20(b)]  of  the
    decision to factoring into the  proportionality  assessment  the  "lost
    opportunity".  There  the  judge  also  pointed  out  that   the   lost
    opportunity was to secure a new sponsor, not to acquire entitlement  to
    Indefinite Leave to Remain, so that any further leave would  depend  on
    the outcome of future applications. The 60-days grace was to enable him
    to apply, not a guarantee  that  leave  would  be  granted,  let  alone
    indefinite leave to remain.

28. The judge also gave weight to the appellant's private life, despite the
    strictures of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002. Ultimately, the judge found  that  even  accounting  for  the
    errors of the respondent, the proportionality  balance  tipped  in  the
    respondent's favour; that is to say in favour  of  immigration  control
    and against the appellant's long-residence claim. I am  satisfied  that
    decision was entirely open to the judge on the evidence and  for  which
    cogent reasoning has been provided.

29. At [20] of the recently submitted skeleton argument Mr  Malik  attempts
    to pursue a ground of appeal neither raised at the First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal hearing or in the grounds of appeal  and  in  respect  of  which
    permission has not been given. He asserts as a 'Robinson-obvious' point
    that if there has been a  historic  injustice  against  an  immigration
    applicant,  the  respondent  should  exercise   any   relevant   future
    discretion outside the Rules on the basis that  the  appellant  had  in
    fact leave to remain notwithstanding that formally that leave  remained
    invalidated. Reliance is made on Ahsan and others v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 2009. However, the reference in that case related to a  part  of  a
    theoretical approach to the judicial review of the Secretary of State's
    refusal of leave where a tribunal has found that an appellant  did  not
    cheat in order to obtain an English  language  test  certificate.  This
    issue is a matter outside the scope  of  a  statutory  appeal  and  the
    sentence from the decision quoted at [20] of the skeleton  argument  is
    neither the ratio of the case nor precedent for the point being made by
    Mr Malik. As stated, this was not a ground  of  appeal  raised  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal, nor in respect of which application  was  made  to
    amend the grounds,  and  it  need  be  addressed  no  further  in  this
    decision.

30. In summary, for the reasons set out above, I am  satisfied  that  there
    was nothing perverse or irrational about the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal. The judge gave  cogent  reasons  open  on  the  evidence  for
    finding against the  appellant  on  all  arguments  raised.  I  am  not
    satisfied there was 'historic injustice' to the appellant or unfairness
    or prejudice that was not fully taken account of in the proportionality
    assessment.

31. In the premises, I find no material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

    The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the  human  rights
    appeal remains dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date: 6 October 2020



