
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17553/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 September 2018                           |25 January 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Gunamal, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 4 July 2016 to refuse his human rights application.  His appeal
    against that decision was heard on 14 August 2017 and,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 October 2017, was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holder.  That decision was set aside by the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    the reasons given at a hearing on 19 July 2018 ( a  copy  of  which  is
    annexed), the respondent accepting that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    made an error of law in that the judge failed  to  make  findings  with
    respect to the best interests of the appellant's British citizen  child
    and his wife's daughter by a previous relationship.

 2. This is a decision to which both members of the panel have  contributed
    and takes into account the additional written submissions we  requested
    from both parties after the hearing in consequence of the handing  down
    of KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who entered the United Kingdom
    as a visitor  on  3  September  2009  and  has  overstayed  since.   An
    application made for leave to remain on the basis of private life  made
    on 5 April 2010 was refused.

 4. Despite that refusal the appellant  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    later meeting his now wife,  [HN],  whom  he  married  in  a  religious
    ceremony on 24 May 2015.  [HN] has a daughter, [SN], born in 2000.  The
    appellant and his wife also have a son born on 5 February 2016 and they
    all live together as part of the same family unit.

 5. [HN]'s first marriage  was  not  a  happy  one  and  this  led  to  her
    depression.  She was divorced in 2012.

 6. The respondent's case is that the requirements of Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules are not met for two reasons: on the basis that as  at
    the date of application the  appellant  and  his  wife  had  not  lived
    together long enough to constitute "partners" as defined; and,  as  the
    parent route does not apply where, as here, the parents of a child  are
    still in a relationship together.  The Secretary  of  State  considered
    also that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were not met, the appellant not having shown that there would  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into the country in which
    he has spent the greater part of his life.

 7. The respondent considered also that the appellant was  not  playing  an
    active role in the life of his British citizen child and thus that  the
    impact of his departure on the child would be  negligible,  hence  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances such that a  refusal  to  grant
    leave  outside  the  Rules  would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences for him and his family.

 8. As noted above, when the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the
    judge found that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and his wife but considered  that  they  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules nor did he find,  having
    had  regard  to   the   best   interests,   that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.

The Hearing on 3 September 2018

 9. We heard evidence from the appellant, his wife and the elder  daughter.
    We also heard submissions from both representatives.  All three adopted
    their witness statements,  the  first  two  giving  evidence  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.

The Law

10. Where a Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under
    the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect  for  private
    and family life under Article 8, by  virtue  of  section  117A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, it must  have  regard  in
    all cases to the considerations in section 117B as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom."

11. In addition to the above statutory provisions we consider it  important
    to consider also Appendix FM GEN 1.2:

         "GEN 1.2

         For the purposes of this Appendix "partner" means -

         ...

             (iv) a person who has been living together with the  applicant
                  in a relationship akin to a marriage or civil  partnership
                  for  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of   the
                  application, unless a different meaning of partner applies
                  elsewhere in this Appendix.

         ..."




         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if

         (a)

             (i)  the applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who-

                  (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                      18 years when the applicant was first  granted  leave
                      on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                  (bb) is in the UK;

                  (cc)  is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least  the  7  years  immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

             (ii) taking into account their best  interests  as  a  primary
                  consideration, it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
                  child to leave the UK; or

         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

12. Also of note is Section  E-LTRPT:  Eligibility  for  limited  leave  to
    remain as a parent.  E-LTRPT 2.3, and GEN.3.2(2) which states that when
    the requirements of Appendix FM are not met: "The  decision-maker  must
    consider, on the basis of the information provided  by  the  applicant,
    whether there are exceptional circumstances which would render  refusal
    of entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a breach of Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human  Rights,  because  such  a  refusal
    would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  applicant,
    their partner, a relevant child or another family member whose  Article
    8 rights it is evident from that information would  be  affected  by  a
    decision to refuse the application.".

13. We bear in mind that in a complex situation  involving  a  family  unit
    where not all the members of the unit are  related  in  the  same  way,
    there must be an overall evaluation of the different interests of those
    involved.  All three witnesses were consistent in their testimony  that
    the appellant's wife's first marriage had been unhappy and we  note  in
    particular the clear and compelling evidence  of  the  daughter,  first
    that her mother had not been happy in the marriage, that there had been
    constant fighting which affected her significantly when she was growing
    up, and that she had not had a proper father.  We note  also  that  her
    evidence confirms the evidence of [HN] that she  had  had  to  rely  on
    friends and had suffered depression as a result.  We consider,  on  the
    evidence before us, that  there  was  little  or  no  affection  either
    between the former husband and his now ex-wife or  with  his  daughter.
    It is also apparent that there is little contact between [SN]  and  her
    biological father.

14. We are satisfied on the evidence  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife is genuine  and  subsisting.   We  accept  also,
    again in light of the evidence of the daughter, that this  has  changed
    her mother's life and that she is now happier which has in  turn  meant
    that she is able to act properly as a mother to her.

15. [SN] is, as is noted above, now over the age of 18.  She  does  however
    continue to live as part of a family unit and we accept  her  evidence,
    which we again found to be articulately delivered and compelling,  that
    she has a very good and strong emotional bond with the  appellant.   We
    accept that she has little or no contact  with  her  father,  whom  she
    described as sending her a text  from  time  to  time  "if  he  can  be
    bothered", and that having the appellant to live as part of a household
    made her realise first what a genuine marriage can be, the support that
    a husband can give to a wife and how a man should be with his children.
     We note also her evidence that led her to realise she had  not  had  a
    proper  paternal  relationship,  and  as   a   result   had   undergone
    counselling.   Equally,  we  accept  the  evidence  that  it  would  be
    extremely difficult for her to be separated from the appellant  because
    of the emotional bond she has with him and  their  day-to-day  contact.
    We accept also her evidence that there would be a significant effect on
    her mother which in light of  the  previous  relationship  is  entirely
    understandable.  We note also the concerns that the negative effect  on
    the wife may make it difficult for her to care properly for the younger
    child and the understandable concern both of the  daughter  and  mother
    that the younger child should not have the absence of a  proper  father
    from which [SN] also suffered when she was growing up.

16. We note, however, that there is little beyond this evidence to  confirm
    the strength of the bonds between the family members, but equally there
    could be no better evidence of this,  than  the  credible  evidence  of
    those involved. A report from  a  social  worker  would  be  of  little
    assistance.

17. We do, however, have some doubts about the evidence from the  appellant
    as to how he was able to survive  without  (which  he  denies)  working
    illegally.  Whilst there is consistent evidence from the appellant  and
    his wife, supported by documentary evidence from his friend that he has
    been in receipt of �30 a week in expenses at least since  2016,  as  Mr
    Jarvis  submitted  this  is  not  evidence  that  the  money  had  been
    forthcoming for the quite significant period that the  appellant  spent
    prior to that in the  United  Kingdom  and  without  obvious  means  of
    support.

18. Equally, we do  not  place  reliance  on  the  appellant's  unsupported
    evidence that he faced political problems in Bangladesh  prior  to  his
    departure (the details of which are lacking) and there is  insufficient
    evidence to show that this would now, even if true, create a real  risk
    of persecution on return.  Further, there was insufficient evidence  to
    show that these would cause him any significant details in  being  able
    to reintegrate into Bangladesh.

19. Although [SN] is not a child as at the date of hearing she was  clearly
    under 18 at the date of decision and at the hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  We are satisfied that she has a family life  with  both
    her mother and with the appellant.  We accept also that in the light of
    the circumstances as set out in the evidence above that  this  bond  is
    considerably stronger than one might  expect  there  to  be  between  a
    father and stepdaughter.  That is because, as [SN] said, her biological
    father has not really been a father to her.  Of further significance to
    this bond is the fact that it was  only  when  she  realised  what  the
    relationship should be that she realised that she had not had it in the
    past which resulted in  significant  difficulty  for  her  and  in  her
    seeking  counselling.   We  accept  in  the  circumstances  that  being
    separated from the appellant who is to all  intents  and  purposes  her
    father, would be a significant issue.  We accept also that there exists
    a strong family life  between  [SN]  and  her  stepfather  considerably
    greater than one might expect.  She is of course now an adult but  that
    is only a recent development and she still forms part of what is now an
    integral nuclear family.  We bear in mind also that  the  family  unit,
    which formerly comprised the appellant's wife, his daughter and the ex-
    husband, was not a strong one and we accept that this led to  suffering
    on the  part  of  [SN]  and  [HN].   That  situation  has  now  changed
    considerably for the better.

20. [SN] is now 18 and is attending college.  We  accept  that  it  is  her
    intention to go on to university.  We accept also that  she  has  spent
    the entirety of her life in the United Kingdom, she has been brought up
    in the United Kingdom and is fully integrated into the culture of  this
    country.  The entirety of her  education  and  social  ties  have  been
    formed here and whilst  we  accept  that  she  has  previously  visited
    Bangladesh with her mother, any ties with that country are considerably
    smaller than the numerous ties she  has  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    country of her birth.  Were she still a child at the date  of  hearing,
    then we would undoubtedly have found that her best  interests  were  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with her mother and stepfather.  To  leave
    the United Kingdom, she would have effectively  had  to  cope  with  an
    entirely new form of life with all the attendant disruption that  would
    be to her education and to all the ties she has developed.

21. With regard to the younger child, although he is a British citizen,  he
    is under 3 years of age.  It is inevitable that his best interests  are
    currently to be with his parents upon whom he is dependent.  We  accept
    the evidence of the appellant and wife and the daughter that there is a
    very good relationship between the appellant and his son and  that  the
    son dotes on his father.  His  best  interests  are,  we  consider,  to
    remain with both parents and those interests can be met either  in  the
    United Kingdom or in Bangladesh.  However, on balance, it is marginally
    in the child's best interests to remain in the country of his birth  to
    fully benefit from his British citizenship.  Those interests  are  not,
    of course, as strong as those that would exist in the case of the older
    daughter and the contrast between what he  experiences  in  the  United
    Kingdom and what he would have in Bangladesh are inevitably less.

22. In assessing whether  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules,  we  found  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
    definition of partner as he and his wife had not been living  together,
    on their own evidence, for two years at the date of application, as  is
    required by the Immigration Rules.  We accept that they have  now  been
    living together for two years and that is a matter  of  which  we  take
    note.  Nonetheless he cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM as he
    is neither a partner nor does he meet the eligibility requirements as a
    parent, given that, as Mr Jarvis submitted, that route is  designed  to
    facilitate the entry or residence in the United Kingdom of  the  parent
    of a child where the relationship between the parents of the child have
    broken down.  That is not the case here.

23. We do not accept that the appellant meets the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE.  The only relevant subparagraph is (vi) and there is simply  no
    basis in the evidence put  before  us  to  show  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration into Bangladesh.  The  appellant
    is after all a citizen of that country, has  spent  most  of  his  life
    there, is fully cognizant of the language and there does not appear  to
    be any basis on which he could not re-establish himself there.  That is
    despite the fact that he may not have family  there.   That  is  not  a
    sufficient basis, nor indeed is the absence  of  accommodation  or  job
    sufficient, either singularly or cumulatively, to amount in  the  facts
    of this case to very significant obstacles.

24. In considering whether removal would be proportionate, we consider that
    the family unit must be treated as a whole.  We consider  that  removal
    in these circumstances would clearly engage Article 8 there being clear
    evidence of disruption. We consider that removal in this case would  be
    in accordance with the law given that it  is  in  accordance  with  the
    established principles which brings us to the issue of proportionality.



25. The starting point in this case is that there is a significant interest
    in removal.  Great weight must be attached to the  public  interest  in
    removing those who do not have the right to remain here and who do  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  We  consider  that  in
    this case the public interest is to be accorded greater weight  as  the
    appellant has remained here without leave for many years, entered  into
    a marriage with somebody, again when  he  knew  what  the  consequences
    would be and, we accept, has at some time  worked  irregularly  in  the
    past.  There is insufficient evidence to show that he was working  once
    that had become a criminal offence. Overstaying is, however, a criminal
    offence albeit that there has been no prosecution in this case.  All of
    these factors militate against the appellant.

26. The appellant does speak some English but he did require an interpreter
    in court.  How advanced his English is we do not know and we  have  not
    been given any evidence of his qualifications.  In  the  circumstances,
    the fact that he does not speak English to any particular degree  is  a
    matter which weighs against him as is the  fact  that  in  reality  the
    family are not financially independent given the reliance  for  housing
    and the greater part of the income of the family being benefits.

27. Little weight  could  be  attached  to  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife given this  was  entered  into  long  after  his
    status in the United Kingdom became unlawful and  where  there  was  in
    reality no realistic prospect of  him  being  able  to  regularise  his
    status.  Similarly, little weight can be attached  to  the  appellant's
    private life as it was developed when had no  right  whatsoever  to  be
    here.

28. We do not accept the respondent's analysis  of  Section  117B(6)(b)  as
    applying only when the child would in fact be  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  That scenario could arise in the  case  of  a  British
    citizen only when there was no relative left in the United  Kingdom  to
    look after the child.  We consider that a better interpretation  of  it
    is that it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom in order to  maintain  the  parental  relationship  that
    exists.   That  answers  the  question  posed  by  Lord  Boyd   in   SA
    (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  SLT
    1245 quoted by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 as to why  would  the  child  be
    expected to leave the United Kingdom?  In the present case,  the  child
    may be expected to leave the United Kingdom  to  maintain  the  current
    parental relationship with his father who has no right to remain  here.
    Any other reading  of  section  117B(6)  would  be  to  add  a  further
    requirement  over  and   above   reasonableness   (which   involves   a
    consideration of a number of factors) to a situation where it would not
    be in a child's best interests for them to leave  the  United  Kingdom.



29. In this case, were [SN] still a qualifying  child,  we  would  have  no
    hesitation in concluding that it would be  necessary  to  undertake  an
    analysis of her position, balancing her very strong  private  life  and
    ties to the United Kingdom, and the  significant  weight  of  her  best
    interests to whether that would be outweighed such  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.

30.  The  younger  child  is  a  qualifying  child  such  that  117B(6)  is
    potentially  engaged  which  brings  us  onto  consideration   of   the
    reasonableness of expecting him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    matters to take into account in that assessment have been confirmed  by
    the Supreme Court in KO in which judgment was  handed  down  after  the
    oral hearing in the present appeal but upon which  written  submissions
    were received from both  parties.   The  key  findings  in  KO  are  as
    follows:

          "16.    It is natural to begin with  a  first  in  time,  that  is
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed solely to  the
         position of the child.  Unlike its predecessor DB 5/96 it  contains
         no requirement to consider  the  criminality  or  misconduct  of  a
         parent of the balancing factor.  It is impossible my view  to  read
         it is importing such a requirement by implication.

         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in  the  context
         of the right of the parent to remain.  I refer that it was intended
         have the same effect.  The question again is what  is  "reasonable"
         for the child.  As Eliza LJ said in MA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  one  WLR
         5093, Paris 36, there is nothing in this  subsection  to  import  a
         reference to the conduct of the parent.  Section 117B  sets  out  a
         number of factors relating to  those  seeking  leave  to  enter  or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them.  Subsection 117B(6)  is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification  being  that  the
         person relying on it is not liable to  deportation.   The  list  of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above)  seems
         to be wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the  context  of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  whether
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
          To that extent the record of the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to there ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain.   The  point  was
         well expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:

             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?'  In a case such as this
             second only be one answer: 'because the parents have no  right
             to remain in the UK'.  To approach the question any other  way
             strips  away  the  context  in   which   the   assessment   of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 854, para 58:

             "58. In my judgement, therefore, the assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on  the  basis  of  the
             facts as they are in the real world.  If  one  parent  has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow parent with no right to remain to the  country
             of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para  40,  I  would  respectfully  disagree.   There  is
         nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness"  is  to  be
         considered otherwise than in the real world in which  the  children
         find themselves."

31. The ultimate question in this case  is  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the younger child to follow the appellant, the  parent  with  no
    right to remain,  to  the  country  of  origin?   As  above,  his  best
    interests are primarily to remain with  both  parents,  and  given  his
    young age, that he has not yet started education, that he  is  in  good
    health and it is only on balance that his best interests are to  remain
    in the United Kingdom; we find that in  all  the  circumstances  it  is
    reasonable to expect the younger child to leave the United Kingdom  and
    as such the appellant does not benefit from section 117B(6).

32. Were we to be considering this at the date of decision, then  in  light
    of the very significant effect there would be on the interests  of  the
    older daughter being affected and the strength of her best interests in
    remaining in the United Kingdom, we  would  have  been  persuaded  that
    notwithstanding the poor immigration history the effective severing  of
    family life between her and the rest of the family or requiring her  to
    go to live in Bangladesh in order to maintain  family  unity  would  be
    unreasonable  taking  into  account  all  the  relevant  factors.   The
    circumstances would, on the particular facts of this  case,  and  given
    the only recent ability of the elder daughter to have a proper parental
    relationship with her  step-father,  that  the  consequences  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh as set out in GEN 3.2(2).

33. But we are not of course in that exact  situation.   It  is  of  course
    established law that the nature and strength of  relationships  between
    children and parents varies as they develop their own private lives and
    that there are no bright lines to be drawn between somebody becoming  a
    child to a child becoming an adult.  The emphasis on  "best  interests"
    of a child is to give them autonomy as a person so far as  is  possible
    at their stage in life.  As they grow older they have agency  of  their
    own and are less dependent on family.  Here, on the particular  factual
    matrix of this case, we consider that there continues to  be  a  strong
    family life between [SN], her mother and stepfather,  and  whilst  that
    has diminished and there  is  no  longer  the  statutory  provision  of
    117B(6), we bear in mind also that Section 117B is not a complete  list
    of those factors which must be taken  into  account.   Just  as  it  is
    difficult as the law establishes to suddenly consider that  the  minute
    that somebody turns 18 they cease to have  a  family  life  with  their
    parents, it is equally difficult to see how the balancing  exercise  as
    set out above could dramatically shift in favour of removal because  of
    what is simply chronological change in the daughter's age.

34. Bearing in mind the strength of the position of the daughter the damage
    that separation from her parents is likely to engender, given  even  at
    this age the strong bonds of love and affection she has arising in part
    from their absence as she was growing up, as such that  notwithstanding
    a diminution in the strength of the case, we are still  satisfied  that
    on the particular facts of  this  case  that  the  public  interest  in
    removal is nonetheless outweighed because of the effect on  the  family
    as a whole of removing the appellant.  There is little prospect of  him
    being able to return to the United  Kingdom  in  the  future  with  the
    result and disruption  if  not  severing  of  the  family  relationship
    between the stepdaughter  and  him  and  either  the  severing  of  the
    relationships she has with her mother and brother or  the  severing  of
    her mother's relationship with the father.  Looking at these effects on
    the family  as  a  whole,  we  are  satisfied  that  removal  would  be
    disproportionate and accordingly we allow the appeal on that basis.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

 2. We remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 24 January 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

Annex - Error of law decision
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/17553/20016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2018                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Gunamal, Orchid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. At the hearing it was accepted by the respondent that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of  law  as  is
    averred in the grounds of appeal. I am satisfied that  it  was  correct
    for the respondent to make such a concession, and I  find,  accordingly
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error of law; and, for that reason, it is set aside to be remade in the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. In the circumstances, it is unnecessary at this stage to  provide  full
    reasons for these  findings,  but  it  is  necessary  to  give  further
    directions as to how the matter will now proceed.



DIRECTIONS

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.

      2. The appeal is listed to be heard on 3 September 2018 at Field House
         as was agreed by the appellant's solicitor.

      3. The remaking will involve considering whether paragraph EX.  1  (a)
         of Appendix FM is applicable, it being clear that  the  appellant's
         child is a British Citizen from birth by operation of section 1 (1)
         (a) of the British Nationality Act 1981.

      4. The Upper Tribunal will proceed to make findings as to  the  nature
         of the relationship between the appellant and his  partner's  older
         daughter, and it will also make findings as to the  best  interests
         of children, albeit that it is noted that the older daughter is now
         over 18.

      5. Any party wishing to adduce  evidence  not  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal must serve it accompanied by a statement pursuant to  rule
         15 (2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on or
         before 20 August 2018

      6. It is for the appellant to decide whom to call as witnesses, but in
         any event a witness  statement  must  be  prepared  and  served  in
         respect of any witness who is to give  evidence  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal. Any witness statement must be  served  on  or  before  20
         August 2018


Signed                                  Date:  19 July 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
