
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/17373/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgation|
|On 19 October 2018                        |On 26 October 2018             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M T O
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The SSHD's decision dated 8 December 2017 refusing the  appellant's
         claims to be entitled to leave to remain, and declining  to  revoke
         the deportation order made against him.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge SPJ  Buchanan,  promulgated  on  6  April
         2018, allowing the appeal.

     iv) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT, stated in  the  application
         for permission to appeal filed on 18 April 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Keane, dated 11 May 2018.

     vi) The rule 24 response on behalf of M T O, dated 20 August 2018.

 3. Mr Govan had nothing to add to ground 1, which is that the FtT did  not
    take a prior decision as a starting point.  Mr Ndubuisi referred to  AA
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 at paragraphs 20 and  29  and  to
    the FtT's decision at paragraph 7.12.  I indicated that ground 1  would
    not be upheld.

 4. Ground 2 contends that the FtT allowed the appeal on the  unduly  harsh
    effects of deportation on the appellant's children, without identifying
    anything  exceptional  to  outweigh  the  compelling  public  interest.
    Ground 3 says that while the FtT noted the criminal history, it did not
    weigh his serious criminality and immigration history when deciding  in
    his favour.  Both representatives said that these  grounds  overlapped,
    and dealt with them together.

 5. Relevant passages from AR (Pakistan) v SSHD [2010]  EWCA  Civ  816,  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 and MM (Uganda) v SSHD EWCA  Civ
    450 are set out in the grounds.

 6. Mr Govan further founded upon these passages in AJ:

         "45.     Nowhere in  the  tribunal's  decision  is  there  a  clear
         recognition of the very powerful weight to be given to  the  public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals or the need for  compelling
         factors to outweigh it. Acknowledging  that  "considerable  weight"
         should be given to certain aspects of the public interest does  not
         suffice: see Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v  MA
         (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 48 para.25 per Richards LJ.


         46.      Nor do I think that this case should be  remitted  to  the
         UT. In line with the authorities I have already discussed, had  the
         FTT properly  understood  the  force  of  the  public  interest  in
         deportation, it could not have concluded that separation  from  his
         children, without more, could  amount  to  compelling  reasons.  No
         doubt there will be some emotional damage to the children, but that
         is not unusual whenever a parent  is  deported  and  the  child  is
         unable to live with that parent outside the UK. There  was  nothing
         special or unusual in the circumstances here which would justify  a
         conclusion  that  the  interference  with  article  8  rights   was
         disproportionate.


         ...


         48.      In my judgment if the proper legal test had been  applied,
         the  only  proper  answer  is  that  there   were   no   compelling
         circumstances in this case which  could  displace  the  very  heavy
         weight to be given to  the  public  interest  in  removing  foreign
         criminals. Accordingly, there is no purpose in remitting the  case.
         I would uphold the appeal and restore the deportation order."


 7. Mr Govan said that the judge founded on the effect of  the  appellant's
    departure on relations between two of his children,  half-siblings  who
    live in separate households (in Aberdeen and London),  and  made  brief
    reference to psychological and medical evidence, but did not  show  any
    unusual impact and did not give any reasons  which  justified  allowing
    the appeal.  He submitted that this was  a  case  like  AJ,  where  the
    outcome fell to be reversed.

 8. The main points which I noted from the submissions of Mr Ndubuisi  were
    these:

      i) The FtT correctly identified the issues at  7.4.   The  appellant's
         relationships were not in doubt.  The eldest child, M, could not go
         to Nigeria.  The case was effectively governed by  whether  it  was
         unduly harsh for the children, M, L, and A, to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the appellant.   It  was  not  in  the  category  of  "very
         compelling circumstances over and above" such  considerations.   It
         was only on whether any exception applied.

     ii) At 7.15 the judge took account of the offending being  serious  and
         repeated.   At 7.16 he rejected parts of  the  appellant's  claims.
         At 7.17 he was clear that the findings about the  consequences  for
         the children depended on the evidence of others, not the appellant.

    iii) The crucial conclusion  at  7.17.1  was  open  to  the  judge,  was
         reasoned on the basis of the evidence, and went  beyond  the  usual
         incidents of family life impact on a family.   This was  backed  up
         by the citations from reports at 7.13.4 - 5.  M had already lost  a
         sibling, and on the appellant's departure she faced effective  loss
         of contact with two more siblings.

     iv) The case was comparable to Nguyen v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 258,  SSHD
         v ZP (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 1197, and Quarey v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
         Civ 47, all referred to in the FtT.

      v) This might have been a borderline case,  and  another  panel  might
         have decided differently, but there was no error of law.

     vi) It was agreed that this was not a case with any scope for remittal,
         but which fell either to be upheld, or to be reversed.

 9. In respect of grounds 1 and 2, I reserved my decision.

10. Parties were correct in agreeing that the case fell either to be upheld
    or to be reversed in the UT.  There was no  significant  dispute  about
    the primary facts, no suggestion of  any  significant  change,  and  no
    application to introduce further evidence.

11. The respondent founded upon the case law making it clear how  high  the
    tests are in deportation, but did not show that the judge was not aware
    of that.

12. The respondent has shown no error to be derived from the judge's  self-
    directions on the law.

13. Mr Ndubuisi was right to point that this case is  in  the  category  of
    undue harshness, not of "very compelling circumstances over and above",
    and gleaned some support from Nguyen at 44, Quarey at 37 - 38,  and  ZP
    at 47 - 48.  However, each case turns ultimately in its own facts.

14. At 17.13.4 - 5 and 7.14 the judge deals with reports on the  effect  on
    the child L and finds it would be unduly harsh,  which  is  possibly  a
    marginal judgement on whether separation  would  bring  more  than  the
    expected incidents.  The crux of the judgment then comes at 7.17.1:

         "I conclude that the eldest child, M, cannot live  in  Nigeria  (as
         conceded by the respondent) and that the consequences of removal of
         the appellant to Nigeria would mean that her half-brother  L  would
         either have to leave with his father (and thereby sever the ongoing
         relationship between eldest and  middle/youngest  children);  or  L
         would need to live in the UK without his father. In my judgement it
         would be unduly harsh for L to do  either  for  the  reasons  given
         above.  In my judgement, it would be unduly harsh for M to live  in
         the UK without her father because to do so would impact on L in  an
         unduly  harsh  manner  and  would  probably   sever   the   ongoing
         relationship  between  eldest  and  middle/youngest  children.  The
         association between children is probably only likely to develop  if
         the appellant remains in the UK to cause the children  to  interact
         at contact sessions between appellant and eldest child. It  is  the
         latter consideration which forms the  most  significant  factor  in
         reaching my conclusion that removal of the appellant to Nigeria  is
         unduly harsh for M. I also include conclude that M, having  had  to
         cope with the death of her full-blood sibling would  be  likely  to
         suffer adversely from cessation of ongoing contact with her  father
         which is described by her mother as  "good-quality  contact".  That
         too would render  the  appellant's  removal  unduly  harsh  on  the
         child."

15. Matters are further summed up at the end of 7.18:

         "It is the unduly harsh consequence  of  ending  the  relationships
         between children; and the unduly harsh consequence of cessation  of
         direct ongoing contact between eldest child and the appellant which
         weighs heavily in favour of the appellant in this appeal."

16. This case was on the borderline, but it had individual  features  going
    to the impact upon both M and L.   The  judge  did  identify  what  was
    distinctive, and he did not minimise the weight  to  be  given  to  the
    public interest.  The foregoing passages from the decision explain  why
    he came down on the side he did.  The respondent has not shown that  to
    have involved the making of an error on a point of law.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. The FtT made an anonymity direction, and the matter was  not  addressed
    in the UT, so anonymity is maintained herein.

            [pic]
            22 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
