
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17866/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 26 February 2021              |On 09 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                KRISHan KUMAR
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Zeb, of City Law Practice acting on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence (hereinafter referred to as  the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  10  January  2020,  in   which   the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
         application dated 30 September 2019 was dismissed.


      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 26 February 2021, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not object1d  to  by  the
         parties. A face- to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant and his spouse who were able to see  and
         hear  the  proceedings  being  conducted.  There  were  no   issues
         regarding sound, and no technical problems were encountered  during
         the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates  were  able  to  make
         their respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Mr  Zeb  and  Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.


Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of India.  He entered the United
         Kingdom on 1 January 2012 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 student
         valid until 30 May 2013.


      6. On 24 May 2013 he applied for further Tier 4 leave which was
         refused on 24 June 2013. The appellant was given a right of appeal
         against this decision, but his appeal was dismissed by the FtT on
         21 May 2014. Permission to appeal the decision was refused both by
         the FtT and by the Upper Tribunal. The appellant was appeal rights
         exhausted on 3 October 2014.

      7. On 29 October 2014, the appellant made an application for leave
         outside of the rules, but this was refused with no right of appeal
         on 17 January 2015. A reconsideration was requested and a refusal
         with an in country right of appeal was given on 9 October 2015.

      8. On 20 October 2015, the appellant lodged an appeal against this
         decision, but it was dismissed by the FtT on 25 July 2015. There is
         no copy decision in the papers.

      9. The appellant and his partner first made contact on social media in
         2015. They kept in touch with each other and formed a friendship.
         In or about September 2015 they first met and began their
         relationship travelling between their respective homes.  In 2017
         the appellant proposed to the sponsor and on 22 April 2017 they
         married in a civil ceremony and a Hindu religious ceremony took
         place on 30th of June 2017.

     10. On 15 December 2017 he was served with a RED.0001 and an IS 96.

     11. In January 2018 permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was
         refused and in May 2018 permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
         was refused. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted for a
         second time.

     12. On 24 May 2018 he made an application for leave to remain on the
         basis of his family and private life (which related to his family
         life with his British partner) which was refused in a decision
         dated 8 August 2018. It was refused under paragraph 353 of the
         Immigration Rules and as it was not a fresh claim no right of
         appeal was granted.

     13. The appellant began judicial review proceedings lodged on 15
         October 2018 but permission to proceed was refused on 2 April 2019.

     14. On the 30 September 2019 he made a further human rights application
         in an application for leave to remain  in the UK on the basis of
         his family life with his partner and on the basis of his private
         life.

     15. The basis of the application is set out in a letter from the
         appellant's representatives. It was stated that the appellant and
         his partner were undergoing infertility treatment and that the
         appellant was required to attend the appointments alongside his
         partner. It was stated that if relocated to India, the appellant's
         partner would not be able to receive the same or similar treatment
         as in the United Kingdom. It was further stated at page 4 that the
         appellant's family in India would be unable to support his
         reintegration there because they came from a poor background. They
         had resources to support themselves and "have moved on with their
         lives and are accustomed to not having our client there." It was
         also stated the job market was very hard and it would be "nearly
         impossible for our client to find adequate employment." Reference
         was made to their relationship as genuine and subsisting and that
         they were heavily dependent on each other. The submissions stated
         that the relocation of the appellant from the United Kingdom would
         be disproportionate and that the circumstances were compelling and
         compassionate as he could not leave his partner alone in the United
         Kingdom. Thus there would be "insurmountable obstacles" for the
         appellant and the sponsor to start a new life in India.


The decision letter:


     16. The application was refused in a decision made on the 17 October
         2019. The decision letter states that the appellant had made a
         human rights claim in an application for leave to remain in the UK
         under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules on the basis of his
         family life with his partner.

     17. It was accepted that the eligibility relationship requirement was
         met (on the basis that that the appellant was in a genuine
         subsisting relationship).

     18. The reasons given for refusing the application can be summarised as
         follows. The respondent considered his application under paragraphs
         R-LTRP of Appendix FM but considered that he could not meet the
         eligibility immigration requirement (paragraphs E-LTRP 2.1 -2.2)
         because he was in the UK in  breach of immigration laws  as an
         overstayer and paragraph EX1 did not apply.

     19. The respondent considered whether the appellant would be exempt
         from meeting certain eligibility requirements of Appendix FM
         because paragraph EX1 applied. It was accepted that the appellant
         had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner who was
         a British Citizen. However the respondent did not accept that there
         were any insurmountable obstacles in accordance with paragraph EX2
         of Appendix FM which means a very significant difficulties which
         will be faced by the appellant or his partner in continuing their
         family life together outside of the UK, and which could not be
         overcome or entail very serious hardship for him and his partner.

     20.  The respondent took into account the points raised in the
         application, including that their parents did not approve of the
         relationship and that they were currently undergoing fertility
         treatment in the UK. However, it was not accepted that they were
         "insurmountable obstacles" in accordance with paragraph EX2. The
         respondent considered that it was open to them to continue their
         relationship in India and that they had not raised any compelling
         circumstances preventing them from doing so.

     21. Therefore paragraph EX1 did not apply.


     22. His application was considered under the private life rules under
         Paragraph 276 ADE, where it was noted that the appellant was a
         national of India who had entered the UK in January 2012. He had
         lived in the UK for 7 years and it was not accepted that he lived
         in the UK continuously for 20 years;  he was not between the ages
         of 18 and under 25 having lived in the UK for more than half his
         life and was over the age of 18 and therefore could not meet the
         requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1 (iii)(iv) and (v). As to
         paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the respondent did not accept that there
         would be very significant obstacles to his integration into India
         if required to leave the UK because  he resided in India for the
         majority of his life. It was considered that he would have retained
         social, cultural, and linguistic connections to India during his
         time in the UK. Consequently, he failed to meet the requirements of
         the Immigration Rules.


     23. The respondent did not consider that there were any "exceptional
         circumstances" to warrant a grant of leave to remain and considered
         the issues that had been raised as to why it would be unjustifiably
         harsh for him to return to India with his partner. The respondent
         took into account the basis of the application and that his partner
         could not be expected to return to India due to their parents not
         agreeing with the relationship, but that this was not considered to
         be exceptional as it was open for them to continue their family
         life outside of the UK. Reference was made to this issue being
         addressed in a previous refusal notice (although neither party
         provided the previous refusal notice to the FtTJ in the present
         appeal). The respondent took into account the claim that they had
         started fertility treatment in the UK but concluded that fertility
         treatment was available in India and it would be open for the
         couple to continue that treatment there.


     24. It was noted that the appellant commenced a relationship in the
         knowledge that his immigration status in the UK was as an over
         stayer and that he had no legitimate expectation to remain in the
         United Kingdom indefinitely and therefore from the outset, both
         parties should have been aware of the possibility the family life
         might not be able to continue in the UK. Reference was made to
         other aspects of his claim being considered in the decision of *
         August 2018 and appeal determination of  21 May 2014.

     25. Therefore the respondent did not find that there was any evidence
         to demonstrate that there were any" exceptional circumstances"
         established in his case.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     26. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  N.  Lawrence)  on
         the 24 December 2019.

     27. In a determination promulgated on the 10  January  2020,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rules in question and on Article 8 grounds.  The  judge
         heard evidence from the appellant and also heard evidence from  his
         partner.

     28. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  could
         not meet the requirements for a grant  of  leave  to  remain  under
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules;  specifically  he  could  not
         meet the eligibility immigration requirements of the  rules  as  he
         had been an  overstayer  and  failed  to  meet  E-LTRP  2.2  (  see
         paragraphs [5-6]).

     29. By reference to  his  relationship  with  his  partner,  the  judge
         accepted that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         his partner.

     30.  At  paragraphs  [6-15]   the   FtTJ   addressed   the   issue   of
         "insurmountable obstacles". The FtTJ noted that the dispute centred
         on the sponsor's need for fertility treatment and that it  was  the
         appellant's case that he needed to remain in the UK throughout  the
         process. It had been argued on behalf of the appellant that  if  he
         returned to India it would be likely to interrupt the continuity of
         treatment and that would be detrimental to the process.

     31. At [8] the FtTJ set out that the appellant, the sponsor, and  their
         legal representative accepted that treatment would be available  in
         India but that  they  questioned  the  quality  of  that  treatment
         available. In support of that submission, reliance was placed on  a
         report from a GP set out in the bundle at pages 24 to 27. The  FtTJ
         considered the contents of that report and the assertion made  that
         "IVF treatment being carried out in India is not a feasible  option
         for this couple for a number of reasons".  The  judge  went  on  to
         consider the reasons given in that report; the first being that the
         appellant's claim was that his family in India are  estranged  from
         him and that he shunned by his mother for his  choice  in  marrying
         the sponsor and it was against her will. Secondly,  it  was  stated
         that the couple did not have family support, anywhere to  live  and
         thirdly, the  appellant  is  a  victim  of  verbal,  financial  and
         emotional abuse at the hands of his family and he  had  self-harmed
         as a consequence of the abuse. The FtTJ concluded that none of  the
         report challenged the availability of treatment or its quality  and
         whereas the appellant  and  his  wife  questioned  the  quality  of
         treatment in India, in fact the expert report did not. In any event
         the judge reached the conclusion  at  [8]  that  he  had  not  been
         provided with any evidence that the GP was an expert on the  Indian
         healthcare system.

     32. At [9] the FtTJ went on to consider whether the appellant's partner
         had in fact begun IVF treatment. The judge observed that the GP had
         stated that the appellant's partner was to start IVF  treatment  in
         the spring of 2020 and that it was in the "very initial stages  and
         what the treatment will entail depends upon her  first  appointment
         with the IVF specialist. The treatment does involve that  the  male
         partner is to undergo sperm analysis in the initial stages  at  the
         very least. Thus,  the  appellant's  presence  is  pivotal  to  the
         sponsors IVF treatment progressing." The judge found  that  the  GP
         did not develop what he or she meant by "the  appellant's  presence
         is pivotal."

     33. Based on that evidence, the judge found at [10]  that  the  sponsor
         had not yet commenced IVF treatment and that it would not be  until
         the spring of 2020 and  therefore  there  would  be  time  for  the
         appellant and his partner to relocate India and commence  treatment
         there. He therefore concluded that that was  not  evidence  of  any
         "insurmountable obstacle" in adopting that course of action.

     34. As to whether there were other insurmountable obstacles, the  judge
         accepted that the  appellant's  partner  was  a  British  national.
         Whilst it was submitted  that  she  was  entitled  to  receive  IVF
         treatment on  the  NHS,  the  judge  found  that  the  respondent's
         decision did not impinge on the sponsors entitlement as it would be
         open  to  the  appellant  to  return  to  India  and  to  make  the
         appropriate entry clearance application to return to  the  UK.  IVF
         treatment could then commence.

     35. The judge also found that if the couple did not wish to  wait  they
         could travel to India and receive treatment there.

     36. The FtTJ considered the evidence where it was said the  appellant's
         family in India were estranged as a result of them getting married.
         The judge noted that India was a large country with over a  billion
         people and that  Punjabi  and  Bengali  (the  respective  languages
         spoken by both parties) was spoken in all parts of India  and  more
         commonly in north India. In addition, both spoke English which is a
         language of India and spoken in every major city.  Thus  the  judge
         concluded that they could relocate any part of India  and  continue
         to enjoy "family life".

     37. As to whether the appellant's partner  had  family  in  India,  the
         judge set out the evidence at [13]. He recorded that initially  the
         sponsor said "maybe" but then said that she did not have any family
         in India. The judge concluded that  her  evidence  started  off  by
         being vague saying that she may have family in India but when asked
         to be clear she denied having any relatives  in  India.  The  judge
         found that that affected her credibility.

     38. The FtTJ concluded that the evidence was insufficient to  meet  the
         high test for insurmountable obstacles in paragraph EX1(b)  of  the
         rules because there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life
         continuing outside of the United Kingdom. The judge found that  the
         appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

     39. As to paragraph 276ADE, the judge took into account his  length  of
         residence since 2010 (this should be 2012) but he  could  not  meet
         the requirements as to length of residence.  As  to  paragraph  276
         ADE(1) (vi) and whether there were very significant obstacles,  the
         judge  considered  this  issue  in  the  context   of   the   legal
         authorities. The "very significant obstacle" advanced on behalf  of
         the appellant related to his mental health (see paragraph  21).  It
         was submitted on behalf of the appellant that he had self harmed in
         the past and that he had mental health issues which was  likely  to
         impinge on his ability to integrate in India. The judge noted  that
         he had not been provided with any expert report on the  appellant's
         mental health and that the GP had stated  that  the  appellant  had
         shown him/her "scars on his  left  wrist"  and  that  it  had  been
         reported as a result of verbal abuse. However the  doctor  had  not
         provided any evidence of alternative causes of the scarring and  in
         any event, if the appellant had been suffering from  mental  health
         problems,  there   would   be   psychiatric,   psychological,   and
         counselling services available in India (see paragraph 21 and  24).
         The judge also considered this in the alternative under  Article  3
         but concluded that treatment would be available to the appellant in
         India.

     40. Additionally at [28] the FtTJ took into account that the  appellant
         retained his language ties (speaking  Punjabi)  and  there  was  no
         evidence that he had lost contact  with  his  culture  language  or
         religion and that he would be "enough of an  insider  in  terms  of
         understanding how life in society is carried on" so that  he  could
         participate in it.

     41. The FtTJ went on to consider the proportionality of the appellant's
         removal under Article 8 of the ECHR but concluded that it would not
         be a disproportionate interference with his right  to  respect  for
         private and family life.

     42. The FtTJ took into account that the appellant and her partner could
         not show compliance with the Immigration Rules (Paragraph  EX1  (b)
         as regards insurmountable  obstacles  and  paragraph  276ADE).  The
         appellant had been in the UK unlawfully and that he could not  meet
         the eligibility requirement. At the date of the  hearing  he  could
         not meet the financial requirements (at [25]).

     43. When considering the Section 117  public  interest  considerations,
         the FtTJ that took into account that the  appellant  spoke  English
         (at [15]) and that  at  the  date  of  the  application  there  was
         evidence that the appellant had been financially supported  by  his
         partner.

     44. He concluded that the  appellant  and  her  partner  established  a
         private life  together  when  both  parties  were  aware  that  the
         appellant's  immigration  status  was  precarious  (at  [25]).   He
         therefore attached little weight to those factors.

     45. The judge at [25] addressed the submission made by the  appellant's
         legal representative that there was no public interest in the  case
         to require the appellant to leave the UK to make an entry clearance
         application. Whilst the decision in Chikwamba was referred to,  the
         judge found that that was a decision  which  predated  the  changes
         brought to the Article 8 considerations  and  the  public  interest
         considerations set out in section  117B.  He  considered  that  the
         decision in Chikwamba had  to  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the
         authorities he had referred to  in  paragraph  13  and  the  public
         interest considerations. He did not find that the decision assisted
         the appellant in establishing that there was no public interest  in
         his removal given that he could not demonstrate compliance with the
         Rules.

     46. The judge finally concluded  at  [29]  that  when  considering  the
         relevant  factors  the  public  interest  of  the  maintenance   of
         immigration  control  applied  and  the  judge   found   that   the
         respondent's decision was not a disproportionate interference  with
         the appellant's family and private life. He concluded at [29]  that
         whilst it was not necessary to find "exceptional circumstances" and
         that "exceptional does not mean unusual or unique", when taking the
         appeal outside the rules  they  would  have  to  be  strong  enough
         circumstances to outweigh the public interest in maintaining proper
         immigration control (applying Agyarko paragraph 57).  He  concluded
         that  he  had  not  been  provided  with  evidence  of   any   such
         circumstances. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.



     47. Permission to appeal was issued on the 21 January 2020 and on 1
         April 2020, permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Davies
         stating:-

         "The grounds suggest the judge made an error of law in that he did
         not properly consider the issue of proportionality. It is arguable
         that by not asking himself the questions raised by Lord Bingham in
         the case of Razgar he has not properly considered the issue of
         proportionality.
         The judge's reference to the burden and standard of proof does not
         appear to address the issues highlighted by Lord Bingham in the
         case of Razgar. The grounds and the decision disclose an arguable
         error of law."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     48. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the  13 July 2020, inter alia, indicating that it was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face- to- face hearing. Following the  parties
         submitting their written submissions on 9 October  2020  directions
         were given for a remote hearing to take place and that  this  could
         take place via Skype. Both parties have indicated  that  they  were
         content for the hearing to proceed by this method.  Therefore,  the
         Tribunal listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be  given
         by each of the parties with the assistance of their advocates.

     49. Mr Zeb on behalf of the appellant relied upon the  written  grounds
         of appeal and the written submissions dated 27 July 2020.

     50. There was a written response filed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated 12 August 2020.

     51. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

The grounds and submissions:

     52. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the FtTJ failed  to
         carry out a proportionality assessment as set out in  the  decision
         of Razgar. The removal of the appellant would not be  proportionate
         as the appellant was not a bad character and not a  burden  on  the
         state. Applying the structured approach  in  TZ  (Pakistan  and  PG
         India) v SSHD [2018]  EWC  Civ  1109,  it  is  submitted  that  the
         requirements under the Immigration Rules are met and  there  is  no
         public interest in his  removal.  In  the  alternative,  there  are
         exceptional/compelling circumstances and considerations relevant to
         a wider Article 8 proportionality  assessment.  The  weight  is  in
         favour of the appellant which makes his  removal  disproportionate,
         as it envisages a family split particularly when  the  parties  are
         undergoing IVF treatment which requires  both  of  them  to  attend
         medical appointments, disruption to  which  has  the  potential  to
         jeopardise a treatment underway.

     53. It is further submitted that  the  judge  adopted  a  "very  strict
         hostile approach" when applying the insurmountable obstacles  test.
         By reference to paragraph 11, the judge stated that  the  appellant
         could leave the UK alone and make an  entry  clearance  application
         and IVF treatment can  commence  then.  The  judge  made  an  error
         because the documentary evidence indicated that the process of  IVF
         had already begun, and that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  had
         attended the appointments for treatment. The appellant cannot leave
         the treatment halfway and go to India. Due to the sponsor's  health
         issues she is currently earning less than  the  required  financial
         requirements of �18,600. If the appellant leaves  the  UK  goes  to
         India he cannot make an application for entry clearance. The  judge
         failed to give consideration to the impact  of  disruption  to  the
         ongoing IVF treatment.

     54. It is  further  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  give  proper
         consideration to the report of the GP who stated that IVF treatment
         in India is not feasible.

     55. It is further contended that the appellant  has  demonstrated  that
         there are very significant obstacles to his  integration  to  India
         for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) owing  to  issues  of
         lack of employment, finances and return his mental health state and
         possible risks in the appellant's family.

     56. In his oral submissions, Mr Zeb submitted that the  judge  had  not
         address the difficulties for  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  to
         return to India in the light of the receiving  treatment  for  IVF.
         The parties could not be expected to stop treatment which they  had
         started in the United Kingdom and start again in India which  would
         be a breach of family life. As they are in a genuine and subsisting
         relationship, the FtTJ's error was material and on  the  submission
         alone the decision should be set aside.

     57. Mr Zeb submitted that the judge failed to  address   the  issue  of
         proportionality and that the judge had  failed  to  strike  a  fair
         balance  and  had  given  inadequate  reasons  on  the   issue   of
         insurmountable obstacles which again would lead to the  hearing  to
         be remitted to a different FtTJ.  Mr Zeb referred to  the  decision
         in Lal and that the judge had not taken into  account  the  sponsor
         who was a British citizen and was entitled to  free  IVF  treatment
         and that she would be deprived of this if she were required to live
         in India with the appellant and this was an insurmountable obstacle
         to the appellant and the sponsor establishing family  life  outside
         of the UK.

     58. Mr Zeb further submitted that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
         financial requirements and thus the risk would be  if  he  were  to
         live in India they would be separated for an indefinite period.  He
         invited the Tribunal to set aside the decision and remit the appeal
         to another FtTJ.

     59. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the written submissions dated 12 August 2020
         where the respondent had cited the decision of  Agyarko  and  Ikuga
         [2017] UKSC 11 and that the Supreme Court had established that  the
         "insurmountable obstacles" test in section EX of Appendix FM of the
         Immigration Rules is a stringent one with a high threshold  (citing
         paragraphs 43 and 44 of that decision). It is submitted that whilst
         the judge did not refer to it, he properly  applied  the  demanding
         test at paragraphs 6 - 13 and found that the appellant and his wife
         could pursue "many options" one of which is a continuation of their
         family life in India. Other options considered by  the  judge  were
         that the appellant could apply to the UK authorities in  India  for
         entry clearance to return to the UK, either after his wife received
         fertility treatment in India before she receives a treatment in the
         UK (paragraphs 11 and 25).

     60. The respondent submitted that the main  obstacle  advanced  by  the
         appellant to the continuation of family  life  in  India  with  his
         wife's wish  to  undertake  fertility  treatment  in  the  UK  (see
         paragraph  7).  The  judge  considered  this  issue  adequately  at
         paragraph 7 - 11 and the medical evidence before the judge was that
         whilst the process had begun, the treatment itself was not  due  to
         begin until the spring of 2020. It was therefore open to the  judge
         to find the proposed fertility  treatment  did  not  constitute  an
         insurmountable obstacle to the continuation of family life  between
         the appellant and his wife in India. In any event, at paragraph  73
         of Agyarko, the court agreed with the Court of Appeal that Ms Ikuga
         could not possibly meet the "insurmountable obstacles" test on  the
         basis that she was undergoing fertility treatment in the UK.

     61. It is submitted that the judge  also  considered  another  obstacle
         advanced by the appellant to the continuation India of  his  family
         life namely the appellant  was  a  stranger  and  his  family  (see
         paragraph 12). The judge gave adequate reasons  finding  that  that
         did not constitute an insurmountable obstacle.

     62. As to paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the  respondent  submits  that  the
         FtTJ  considered  this  issue  citing  the  relevant  case  law  at
         paragraph 16 - 20. As required by  the  decision  in  Parveen,  the
         judge assessed the obstacles integration  in  which  the  appellant
         relied, namely his mental health at paragraph 21 - 24..  The  judge
         properly applied the Kamara test to the factual circumstances.

     63. As regards  article  8,  the  respondent  submits  that  the  judge
         properly considered Article 8  outside  of  Immigration  Rules  and
         properly directed himself to the test approved by the Supreme Court
         in Agyarko. In summary, it was  submitted  that  having  noted  the
         appellant was an oversteer in the UK and  they  did  not  meet  the
         immigration rules, the judge properly took into account the  public
         interest considerations. The  judge  also  attached  importance  to
         effective immigration control. In the circumstances it was open  to
         the FtTJ to find there were no compelling circumstances to outweigh
         the public interest in the proportionality balancing exercise.

     64. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.



Discussion:


     65. The first ground advanced on behalf of the appellant  is  that  the
         FtTJ adopted "a very strict hostile  approach"  when  applying  the
         insurmountable obstacles test (I refer to page 1 of the grounds  of
         permission and page 3 of the written submissions).




     66.  Mr Zeb  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  submitted  that  this  was
         demonstrated at paragraph [11] of the decision and  that  the  FtTJ
         failed to take into account material evidence relating to the issue
         of the fertility treatment. He submitted that  the  judge  did  not
         address the difficulties of the sponsor and in particular that  she
         could not be expected to stop infertility treatment and  the  judge
         had failed to consider the impact of  the  disruption  in  the  IVF
         treatment. In addition she had not been to India for 15  years.  He
         further submitted  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to  take  into  account
         material evidence in the form of the GP report which  was  relevant
         to the issue of IVF treatment and the difficulties that the parties
         would face.


     67. Having considered the submissions made on behalf of the  appellant,
         I am satisfied that the judge did not fall into error  in  the  way
         that has been asserted.




     68. The FtTJ identified in his  decision  that  the  issue  in  dispute
         centred around the  sponsor's  need  for  fertility  treatment  (at
         paragraph [7]). The FtTJ set out the case advanced on behalf of the
         appellant that the appellant and the sponsor had provided  evidence
         that the sponsor had begun the process of IVF treatment  in  United
         Kingdom and that it was funded by the NHS and  that  the  appellant
         would need to remain in the UK  throughout  that  process.  It  was
         argued on behalf of the appellant that if he returned to India,  on
         his own or with his partner, that there would be an interruption to
         the continuity of  that  treatment  which  was  am  "insurmountable
         obstacle."




     69. Thus the issue in dispute in  this  appeal  centred  upon  EX1  and
         whether there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  outside
         of the UK.




     70. Paragraph EX.1. reads as follows (so far as relevant):

         " EX.1. This paragraph applies if.

         (a) ...; or

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

     71. The  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko  considered  the  meaning  of  the
         "insurmountable obstacles" requirement  at  [43]  to  [45]  of  the
         judgment as follows:

         "43.  It  appears  that  the  European  court  intends  the   words
         "insurmountable obstacles" to be  understood  in  a  practical  and
         realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to obstacles which
         make it literally impossible for the family to live together in the
         country of origin of the non-national concerned. In some cases, the
         court has used other  expressions  which  make  that  clearer:  for
         example, referring to "un obstacle majeur" ( Sen v The  Netherlands
         (2003) 36 EHRR 7 , para 40), or to "major impediments"  (  Tuquabo-
         Tekle v The Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798 , para  48),  or  to  "the
         test of 'insurmountable obstacles' or 'major impediments'" ( IAA  v
         United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19, paras 40 and  44),  or  asking
         itself whether the family could "realistically" be expected to move
         (  Sezen  v  The  Netherlands  (2006)  43  EHRR  30  ,  para   47).
         "Insurmountable obstacles" is, however, the expression employed  by
         the Grand Chamber; and the court's application of it indicates that
         it is a stringent test. In Jeunesse, for example, there  were  said
         to be no insurmountable obstacles to the relocation of  the  family
         to Suriname, although the children,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  at
         secondary school, were Dutch nationals  who  had  lived  there  all
         their lives, had never visited Suriname,  and  would  experience  a
         degree of hardship if forced to move, and the  applicant's  partner
         was in full-time employment in the Netherlands: see paras  117  and
         119.

         44. Domestically, the expression "insurmountable obstacles" appears
         in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the Rules. As  explained  in
         para 15 above, that paragraph applies in cases where  an  applicant
         for leave to remain under the partner route is in the UK in  breach
         of  immigration  laws   and   requires   that   there   should   be
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing  outside  the   UK.   The   expression   "insurmountable
         obstacles" is now  defined  by  paragraph  EX.2  as  meaning  "very
         significant difficulties which would be faced by the  applicant  or
         their partner in continuing their family life together outside  the
         UK and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship for the  applicant  or  their  partner."  That  definition
         appears to me to be  consistent  with  the  meaning  which  can  be
         derived from the Strasbourg case  law.  As  explained  in  para  16
         above, paragraph EX.2 was not introduced until after the  dates  of
         the decisions in the present cases. Prior to the insertion of  that
         definition,  it  would  nevertheless  be   reasonable   to   infer,
         consistently with the Secretary of State's statutory  duty  to  act
         compatibly with Convention rights, that the expression was intended
         to bear the same meaning in the Rules as in the Strasbourg case law
         from which it was  derived.  I  would  therefore  interpret  it  as
         bearing the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX.2.

         45. By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles"  are
         treated as a requirement for the grant of leave under the Rules  in
         cases to which that paragraph  applies.  Accordingly,  interpreting
         the expression in the same sense as in  the  Strasbourg  case  law,
         leave to remain would not normally be granted  in  cases  where  an
         applicant for leave to remain under the partner route was in the UK
         in breach of  immigration  laws,  unless  the  applicant  or  their
         partner would face very serious difficulties  in  continuing  their
         family life together outside the UK, which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship.  Even  in  a  case  where  such
         difficulties  do  not  exist,  however,   leave   to   remain   can
         nevertheless  be  granted  outside  the   Rules   in   "exceptional
         circumstances", in accordance with the  Instructions:  that  is  to
         say,  in  "circumstances  in  which   refusal   would   result   in
         unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  individual  such  that
         refusal of the application would not be proportionate."

     72. The Supreme  Court  held  that  the  requirements  were  Article  8
         compliant,  recognising  that  the   requirements   reflected   the
         Minister's view of where the public interest lay.

     73. As the Supreme Court also made clear, even where those requirements
         are not met, an  applicant  may  still  be  granted  leave  if  the
         consequences of removal result are "unjustifiably harsh".  However,
         as the Supreme Court went on to say when looking at  the  grant  of
         leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules,  this  will  only  arise  in
         exceptional circumstances.  The  rationale  for  that  approach  is
         explained at [54] and [55] of the judgment as follows:

         "54. As explained in para 49 above, the  European  court  has  said
         that, in  cases  concerned  with  precarious  family  life,  it  is
         "likely" only to be in exceptional circumstances that  the  removal
         of the non-national family member will constitute  a  violation  of
         article 8. That reflects the weight  attached  to  the  contracting
         states' right to control their borders, as an  attribute  of  their
         sovereignty, and the limited weight which is generally attached  to
         family life established in the full knowledge that its continuation
         in the contracting state is unlawful or precarious. The  court  has
         repeatedly acknowledged that "a state is entitled, as a  matter  of
         well-established international  law,  and  subject  to  its  treaty
         obligations,  to  control  the  entry  of  non-nationals  into  its
         territory and their residence there" ( Jeunesse, para 100). As the
         court has made clear, the Convention is not intended  to  undermine
         that right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control
         by establishing a family life  while  present  in  the  host  state
         unlawfully or temporarily, and  then  presenting  it  with  a  fait
         accompli. On the contrary, "where confronted with a  fait  accompli
         the removal of the non-national family member  by  the  authorities
         would  be  incompatible  with  article  8   only   in   exceptional
         circumstances" (Jeunesse, para 114).

         55. That statement reflects the strength of the  claim  which  will
         normally  be  required  if  the  contracting  state's  interest  in
         immigration control is to be outweighed. In the Jeunesse case,  for
         example,  the  Dutch  authorities'  tolerance  of  the  applicant's
         unlawful presence in that country  for  a  very  prolonged  period,
         during which she developed strong family and social ties there, led
         the court to conclude that the circumstances were  exceptional  and
         that a fair balance had not been struck  (paras  121-122).  As  the
         court put it, in view of the particular circumstances of the  case,
         it was  questionable  whether  general  immigration  considerations
         could be regarded as  sufficient  justification  for  refusing  the
         applicant residence in the host state (para 121)."


     74. In his oral submissions Mr Zeb made  a  general  reference  to  the
         decision in Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925.  At  paragraph  35  of
         that decision the Court of Appeal gave its view as to  the  correct
         interpretation of insurmountable obstacles.  The  Court  of  Appeal
         indicated in paragraphs 36 and 37:

         "36. In applying this test, a logical approach is first of  all  to
         decide whether the  alleged  obstacle  to  continuing  family  life
         outside the UK amounts to a  very  significant  difficulty.  If  it
         meets this threshold requirement, the next question is whether  the
         difficulty is one which would make it impossible for the  applicant
         and their partner to continue family life together outside the  UK.
         If not, the  decision-maker  needs  finally  to  consider  whether,
         taking account of any steps which  could  reasonably  be  taken  to
         avoid or mitigate the difficulty, it would nevertheless entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner (or both).

         37. To apply the test in what Lord Reed in the Agyarko case at para
         43 called 'a practical and realistic sense',  it  is  relevant  and
         necessary in addressing these  questions  to  have  regard  to  the
         particular characteristics and circumstances of  the  individual(s)
         concerned. Thus, in the present case where it  was  established  by
         evidence to the satisfaction of the tribunal that  the  applicant's
         partner is particularly sensitive to heat, it was relevant for  the
         tribunal to take this fact into account in assessing the  level  of
         difficulty which  Mr  Wilmshurst  would  face  and  the  degree  of
         hardship that would be entailed if he  were  required  to  move  to
         India to continue his relationship. We do not accept, however, that
         an obstacle to the applicant's partner moving to India is shown  to
         be insurmountable - in either of the ways contemplated by paragraph
         EX.2. - just by establishing that the  individual  concerned  would
         perceive the difficulty as insurmountable  and  would  in  fact  be
         deterred by it from relocating to India. The test  cannot,  in  our
         view, reasonably be understood as  subjective  in  that  sense.  To
         treat it as such would substantially dilute the intended stringency
         of the test and  give  an  unfair  and  perverse  advantage  to  an
         applicant whose partner is less  resolute  or  committed  to  their
         relationship over one whose partner  is  ready  to  endure  greater
         hardship to enable them to stay together".

     75.  The FtTJ  addressed  the  issue  at  paragraphs  [6]-[12]  of  his
         decision and  I  am  satisfied  that  he  properly  considered  the
         evidence in accordance with the law set out above and in accordance
         with the evidence that was advanced on behalf of the appellant.

     76. Whilst Mr Zeb submits that the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to
         material evidence in the form of the GPs report,  in  my  judgement
         this is not a justified criticism of the FtTJ's decision.

     77. At [8] the judge observed that  the  appellant,  his  partner,  and
         their legal representative all  accepted  that  IVF  treatment  was
         available in  India,  but  they  questioned  the  quality  of  that
         treatment. To support of this assertion, the appellant relied  upon
         the report of a GP, Dr W. Contrary to  the  submissions  made,  the
         FtTJ expressly considered the GPs report and its contents  and  did
         so in the light of the assertions made that IVF treatment  was  not
         feasible for the couple in India. The FtTJ  set  out  verbatim  the
         reasons given by the GP; that the appellant had  claimed  that  his
         family in India were estranged from him, that he was shunned by his
         mother of his choice in marrying the sponsor, that the couple would
         not have family support and nowhere to live and  thirdly  that  the
         appellant was the victim of verbal, financial and  emotional  abuse
         at the hands of his family in  India  and  had  self  harmed  as  a
         consequence; his family had belittled his wife.

     78. As the FtTJ observed, none of those reasons given by the GP  either
         challenged the availability of  IVF  treatment  in  India  nor  the
         quality of such treatment. In my judgement the FtTJ was correct  in
         his assessment that he had not been provided with any evidence that
         the GP was an  expert  in  the  Indian  healthcare  system  and  in
         particular the quality or otherwise of the IVF treatment that could
         be undertaken there. Nor did the GP explain why the reasons he gave
         would meant that IVF treatment could not be accessed.

     79. More importantly, the FtTJ addressed the issue  as  to  whether  in
         fact the sponsor had commenced IVF treatment (see  paragraphs  [9]-
         [10] of the decision). The judge set out the evidence  in  the  GPs
         report at [9] stating  that  the  sponsor  was  to  start  her  IVF
         treatment in the spring of 2020 and that " her treatment process is
         in the very initial stages  and  what  the  treatment  will  entail
         depends on her first appointment with the IVF specialist."  The  GP
         went on to state "the treatment does involve that the male  partner
         is to undergo a sperm analysis in the initial stages  at  the  very
         least. Thus, (appellant's) presence is pivotal to  (sponsor's)  IVF
         treatment progressing."

     80. In my judgement, the judge was also correct in  the  assessment  of
         that evidence and that the GP had not explained why the appellant's
         presence was "pivotal" to the IVF process when the evidence had not
         demonstrated the appellant's partner  had  properly  commenced  IVF
         treatment and would not  do  so  until  the  spring  of  2020.  The
         evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  relevant  to  the  partner's
         medical history demonstrates that whilst she had been  referred  to
         the fertility clinic in July 2019, no treatment had  in  fact  been
         carried out beyond an initial consultation which had taken place on
         10 October 2019, two months before the  hearing  in  December  2019
         (see pages 32 and page 36). Contrary to the parties' evidence,  the
         written documents did not set out that the appellant's partner  had
         been given funding for IVF or that the treatment had progressed  to
         the extent that it had properly commenced. In fact, the  letter  at
         page 32 made it plain that there were particular  funding  criteria
         of a BMI of less than 30 for assisted fertility treatment. The  BMI
         given for the appellant's partner did not meet the criteria. As the
         FtTJ set out, the GPs  report  also  stated  that  the  appellant's
         partner was "waiting to undergo fertility treatment" on  the  basis
         that she was due to be seen in the spring  of  2020  and  that  the
         treatment process was in the "very initial stages". In the light of
         that evidence, it has not been demonstrated that the judge  was  in
         error in his assessment of the GPs report or in his  conclusion  at
         [10] that she had yet to commence IVF treatment and it would not be
         until spring of 2020 and thus there was  sufficient  time  for  the
         couple to relocate to India and to commence  treatment  there.  His
         conclusion that the appellant had  not  provided  evidence  of  any
         "insurmountable obstacle" in adopting this course of action  was  a
         finding properly open to the FtTJ to make.

     81. Mr Zeb sought to rely on fresh evidence that  was  not  before  the
         FtTJ which had been sent by email the day before this  hearing.  It
         consisted of an article dated 15 March 2013 and  a  medical  report
         dated 11/1/21.

     82. No application had made under Rule 15  (2A)  either  prior  to  the
         hearing or at the hearing itself. Mr Zeb submitted that  they  were
         important documents because they  supported  the  appellant's  case
         that fertility treatment had begun.

     83.  I  make  the  following  observations  about  that  evidence.  The
         admission of the further material under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 is as follows.
         Evidence and submissions
         15. ...
         ... (2A) In an asylum case or an immigration case-
         (a) if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that
         was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that party must send or
         deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any other party-
         (i) indicating the nature of the evidence; and
         (ii) explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal; and
         (b) when considering whether to admit evidence that was not before
         the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must have regard to
         whether there has been unreasonable delay in producing that
         evidence.
     84. UT rule 15(2A) imposes important procedural requirements where the
         Upper Tribunal is asked to consider evidence that was not before
         the First-tier Tribunal. UT rule 15(2A) must be complied with in
         every case where permission to appeal is granted and a party wishes
         the Upper Tribunal to consider such evidence. Notice under rule
         15(2A) (a), indicating the nature of the evidence and explaining
         why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal, must be filed
         with the Upper Tribunal, and served on the other party within the
         time stated in any specific directions given by the Upper Tribunal;
         or, if no such direction has been given, as soon as practicable
         after permission to appeal has been granted. A failure to comply
         with Rule 15(2A) will be regarded as a serious matter and may
         result in fresh or further evidence not being considered by the
         Tribunal ((see appendix to decision of Lama (video recorded
         evidence -weight - Art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 16 (IAC)). In the
         context of this appeal, there has been no Rule 15(2A) application
         made or any compliance with the substance of the Rule.

     85. Secondly, none of that evidence had been put before the FtTJ and it
         is difficult to see how it could demonstrate that the judge was  an
         error when the medical report related to events taking  place  over
         one year after the hearing itself.

     86. Even if I were to admit the evidence, as Mr Diwnycz submitted, none
         of the evidence  materially  supports  the  appellant's  case.  The
         article relied upon is substantially out of date (dated May  2013).
         It is an article that refers to childless couples' resident in  the
         UK travelling to  India  for  fertility  treatment  and  refers  to
         childless British Asian couples travelling  to  India  due  to  egg
         shortages in the United Kingdom. The article does  not  demonstrate
         that treatment is not available in India in  fact  it  demonstrates
         the opposite. Furthermore, it does not demonstrate that the quality
         is inferior in all clinics in India and simply refers to  practices
         in some fertility clinics that implant multiple embryos.

     87. Dealing with the medical  report,  it  is  dated  11  January  2021
         following a telephone consultation that took place on  16  December
         2020 and therefore is  one  year  after  the  FtTJ's  hearing.  The
         contents of the letter refer to the  appellant  taking  medication,
         but the content of the letter again refers to the funding  criteria
         relevant for IVF which the appellant  has  not  met.  Consequently,
         that evidence does not demonstrate that the judge was in error  one
         year  earlier  on  the  evidence  that  was  before  him.  In   the
         intervening period the position of the appellant's partner has  not
         changed and that again the very initial stages referred to  in  the
         correspondence at pages 32 and 36, and  the  GPs  report,  has  not
         progressed any further. Importantly, it has not been  demonstrated,
         that the IVF treatment is at a stage where  it  could  properly  be
         said that there would be any disruption in the continuity  of  that
         treatment which would  amount  to  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
         family life established outside of the UK. There  was  no  evidence
         that they would not be able  to  transfer  their  medical  reports/
         history to India if necessary to undergo treatment.

     88. In the light of the evidence  that  was  before  the  FtTJ,  in  my
         judgement  he  was  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
         treatment had not commenced beyond its initial stages and  that  it
         was not an insurmountable obstacle to family life being established
         in India. Whilst losing an opportunity at some point in the  future
         to undertake  IVF  however  upsetting  to  the  appellant  and  his
         partner, is not an obstacle to  the  relationship  continuing.  The
         inability to access IVF treatment, although of great importance  to
         both parties, does not create an  obstacle  to  their  relationship
         continuing when taking into account the evidence  that  was  before
         the FtTJ.

     89. It was also open to the judge to conclude on the evidence that  IVF
         treatment was available in India (which  the  parties  accepted  at
         paragraph 8) and that if they did not wish to wait  for  treatment,
         that could take place in India (see paragraph 11).

     90. Whilst Mr Zeb submits that the appellant is a British  citizen  and
         had not been to India for a period of time, those factors are taken
         into account, but the judge was entitled to  reach  the  view  that
         they were not  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family  life  being
         established outside of the United Kingdom.

     91. At [12] the judge took into account the claim that the  appellant's
         family were estranged as a result of their marriage but found  that
         the appellant spoke Punjabi and that  the  sponsor  spoke  Bengali,
         both languages were spoken in all parts of India alongside  English
         and that they could live in any part of India so  that  they  could
         continue their family life. The judge also made a finding  in  [13]
         this that the appellant's partner had  not  been  credible  in  her
         evidence concerning the lack of family relatives that  she  had  in
         India.

     92. When looking at the decision as a whole, in my judgement  the  FtTJ
         gave adequate and sustainable reasons that were in accordance  with
         the  relevant  case  law  for  reaching  the  decision   that   the
         circumstances relied upon by the appellant and the sponsor did  not
         amount  to  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to   family   life   being
         established outside the United Kingdom.

     93. The decision in Lal makes clear that it is the  cumulative  effects
         of the various factors which  must  be  considered  when  assessing
         whether  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles   to   family   life
         continuing in the Appellant's home country.  The  Court  of  Appeal
         also indicated that one has to look at the factors relied on in  an
         objective sense rather than on the  basis  of  what  the  appellant
         and/or the appellant's spouse perceive to be the  difficulties  and
         that when determining the question of whether return  would  entail
         "very serious hardship" based on the evidence which was before  the
         FtTJ (see paragraph [43] of the judgment).

     94. When looking at the decision as a whole, in my judgement  the  FtTJ
         gave adequate and sustainable reasons that were in accordance  with
         the relevant case law and evidence for reaching the  decision  that
         the circumstances relied upon by the appellant and the sponsor  did
         not amount to "insurmountable obstacles" when  viewed  cumulatively
         to family life being established outside the United Kingdom.

     95. The grounds also submit that the appellant  had  demonstrated  that
         there were "very significant obstacles" to his integration to India
         (paragraph 276ADE  (1)  (vi)),  due  to  the  lack  of  employment,
         finances on return and his mental health and possible risk from the
         appellant's family. Beyond stating that submission, the grounds  do
         not address the issue in the light of the factual findings made  by
         the FtTJ nor do the grounds give any reasons why the judge is  said
         to have erred in law when considering that issue.

     96. It is plain from reading  the  decision  that  the  FtTJ  addressed
         whether the appellant  could  meet  Paragraph  276  AD(1)  (vi)  in
         accordance with the relevant case law  and  in  the  light  of  the
         evidence was before the Tribunal set out at paragraphs [16] -  [24]
         of his decision.

     97. The FtTJ assessed the  obstacles  to  integration  upon  which  the
         appellant  relied  and  in  particular  his  mental   health   (see
         paragraphs [21] - [24] where the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's
         legal  representatives'  submission  that  the  appellant's  mental
         health would impinge on his integration  in  India.  There  was  no
         expert report concerning the appellant's  mental  health  beyond  a
         reference in the GPs report (see paragraph 21). The FtTJ  therefore
         properly observed that there was  no  expert  evidence  as  to  the
         appellant's mental health and whilst the GP referred  to  scars  on
         his left wrist, it was open to the judge to take into account  that
         when considering the issue of causation the GP had not provided any
         evidence of alternative causes of the scarring. In any  event,  the
         judge was entitled to find on the evidence that the appellant would
         be able to access treatment in India for any mental health problems
         that he may have (at paragraph [24]).

     98. There was no dispute that  the  appellant  lived  in  India  for  a
         significant part of his life having entered the United  Kingdom  in
         2012 and the FtTJ was thus entitled to make the finding set out  at
         [12] and [28] that neither the appellant or  the  sponsor  provided
         evidence that they had lost their continuing cultural, language and
         religious ties and therefore the judge was entitled to conclude  as
         he did at [28] that the appellant (and to some extent his  partner)
         would be enough of an "insider" with an understanding of  how  life
         in Indian society was carried on  and  would  have  a  capacity  to
         participate in it.

     99. Consequently, it has not been demonstrated that the  judge  was  an
         error  in  reaching  the  conclusion  that  there  were   no   very
         significant obstacles to the appellant's integration to India.

    100. The final ground advanced by Mr Zeb is that the FtTJ erred  in  law
         by failing to carry out a proportionality  assessment.  He  submits
         that the judge did not apply the five- stage  test  in  Razgar  and
         that this was a material error of law.

    101. The written submissions set out that it is contended on  behalf  of
         the appellant that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  had
         been met  and  therefore  there  was  no  public  interest  in  the
         appellant's removal. It has  not  been  identified  either  in  the
         written submissions, the grounds or in the oral submissions how  it
         is said that the appellant met the Immigration Rules in  the  light
         of the factual findings made by the FtTJ.

    102. In the alternative, it is submitted that there are exceptional  and
         compelling circumstances which fall  in  favour  of  the  appellant
         which make his removal disproportionate.  Those  circumstances  are
         said to be that it would  entail  a  family  separation  where  the
         parties are undergoing IVF treatment which requires both to  remain
         in the United Kingdom and that any disruption would jeopardise that
         treatment.

    103. In his oral submissions, Mr Zeb submitted that the judge failed  to
         address  the  difficulties  of  the  sponsor  in  relation  to  IVF
         treatment and being expected to stop treatment. He  submitted  that
         the judge failed to address the issue of proportionality with  that
         in mind.

    104. I have carefully considered the submissions made on behalf  of  the
         appellant but having done so, I am not  satisfied  that  the  judge
         fell into error in his assessment of Article 8 of the ECHR.

    105. Whilst I accept that the decision is not as well structured  as  it
         could have been, it is plain that the judge considered  the  appeal
         on the correct legal basis. Whilst Mr Zeb submitted that the  judge
         did not make any  reference  to  the  decision  in  Razgar,  in  my
         judgement that is an argument as to form and not substance. On  any
         careful reading of the decision, it is plain  that  the  FtTJ  took
         into account the principles set out in Razgar. The judge  proceeded
         on the basis that there was family life between the  appellant  and
         his partner and also that the appellant had established  a  private
         life during the time that  he  had  been  resident  in  the  United
         Kingdom and that the real issue was that of proportionality. In his
         decision he addressed that issue and did so by applying the section
         117 public interest considerations.

    106. As provided by section 117A (1), Part 5A applies where a Court or
         Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under the
         Immigration Acts breaches Article 8 and as a result would be
         unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Section 117A
         (2) requires the Court or Tribunal, in considering whether an
         interference with a person's right to respect for private and
         family life is justified under article 8(2), to have regard in all
         cases to the considerations listed in section 117B.

         Section 117B states as follows: -

         " Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
    public interest.

         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-"

         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-"

         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-"

         (a) a private life, or

         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-"

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom."


    107. As regards those public interest considerations the FtTJ found that
         the public interest in effective immigration control was engaged
         (at S117B (1)). At [15] the judge took into account that the
         appellant spoke English and at [14] he could not meet the financial
         requirements. At [25] the judge considered the submission made on
         behalf of the appellant in relation to the public interest
         considerations  but even if there had been financial independence
         in the United Kingdom alongside an ability to speak English they
         would be neutral factors in the analysis under Section 117 of the
         2002 Act (as amended).


    108. The FtTJ was entitled to place little weight upon the appellant's
         length of residence and his private life which was established when
         his stay United Kingdom had been precarious (under section 117B (5)
         and was entitled to place weight on his earlier assessment and
         findings that family life could continue in India.


    109. In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8, the heart
         of the assessment is whether the decision strikes a fair balance
         between the due weight to be given to the public interest in
         maintaining an effective system of immigration control and the
         impact of the decision on the individual's private or family life.
         In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a court or
         Tribunal should give appropriate weight to Parliament's and the
         Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of the general
         public interest as expressed in the relevant rules and statutes:
         see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and see   R (MM and others)
         (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC
         10, the Supreme Court at [43].


    110. In my judgement the FTTJ correctly identified that when considering
         the public interest the appellant could not meet the Immigration
         Rules either under paragraph 276 ADE based on his length of
         residence and in light of the factual findings that there were no
         very significant obstacles to his integration to India or Appendix
         FM, where the judge found that there were no insurmountable
         obstacles of family life being established outside the UK. A court
         must accord "considerable weight" to the policy of the Secretary of
         State at a "general level": Agyarko paragraph [47] and paragraphs
         [56] - [57]; and see also Ali paragraphs [44] - [46], [50] and
         [53].


    111. However, at [29] the FtTJ directed himself in accordance with the
         law and the decision in Agyarko, that even when the requirements
         are not met, an applicant may still be granted leave if the
         consequences of removal are "unjustifiably harsh" (at [54 - 55] of
         that decision).

    112. Given that the FtTJ had addressed the claimed compelling
         circumstances or those that would lead to "unjustifiably harsh
         consequences" which had been advanced in behalf of the appellant
         which consisted of the prospects of fertility treatment, the
         estranged family in India and his mental health, it was therefore
         open to the judge to reach the conclusion as he did at [29] that
         there were no unjustifiably harsh consequences identified that
         outweighed the public interest in effective immigration control.
         When reaching his decision the factual findings of the FtTJ were
         consistent with the decision in Lal and that it had not been
         established that no reasonable alternative was available for IVF
         treatment  in India or nor were there circumstances  which could
         amount to "very serious hardship" given that treatment would be
         available and whilst the sponsor was a British Citizen, she spoke
         the languages of India and there were no very significant obstacles
         to the appellant's integration to India and where both parties
         retained cultural and language ties.

    113. I am satisfied that the FtTJ properly apply the proportionality
         test for an assessment outside of the rules and applied it on the
         circumstances of the individual case that was before him carrying
         out a "fact sensitive assessment".

    114. As the FtTJ observed at [29] whilst it is not necessary to identify
         any "unique" or any "exceptional" factor (see Agyarko at [47],
         [60]), in my judgement it was open to the FtTJ to find that the
         circumstances that relate to the appellant and his partner were not
         compelling on the evidence presented for the reasons already
         outlined. In my judgement those circumstances as advanced before
         the FtTJ were not of such weight to demonstrate that when the
         interference with the appellant's family and private life when
         balanced against the public interest, that the consequences of
         removal were "unjustifiably harsh."

    115. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the decision of
         the FtTJ did not make an error on a point of law and the decision
         stands.

Notice of Decision.

    116. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision stands.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds            Dated 4/3/ 2021








NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.




