
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17008/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2019                           |On 18 February 2019           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                            MS KRYSTEL KYLA HODGE
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of St  Kitts  born  on  1  June  1999.  She
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Brewer
      sitting at Taylor House on 4 October 2018 in which the Judge dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  1
      October 2018. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's  application
      for leave to remain on the basis of her private  life.  The  Appellant
      entered the United Kingdom in 2009 aged 10.  She  has  had  no  lawful
      immigration status in the United Kingdom.

The Appellant's Case

   2. The Appellant's case was that she had no ties to St Kitts because only
      her mother lived there, and she did not have a meaningful relationship
      with her mother. She had a strong  private  life  in  United  Kingdom,
      specifically  that  she  had  friends  here  and  had  completed   her
      education. She obtained a BTEC award in art and design but  could  not
      commence work because of her immigration status. She  told  the  Judge
      she was keen to start work. She had a  strong  relationship  with  her
      father who brought her up  and  upon  whom  she  was  financially  and
      emotionally dependent. He in turn was emotionally dependent upon  her.
      She had other relatives in United Kingdom.

The Decision at First Instance

 3. The Judge heard evidence from both the Appellant  and  her  father.  He
    noted at  [28]  of  the  determination  that  the  question  under  the
    Immigration Rules was whether there would be very significant obstacles
    to the Appellant's reintegration into St Kitts. The Appellant was  well
    educated and wanted to have a career  in  the  healthcare  sector.  The
    Appellant could commence such a career in St Kitts.

 4.  Although the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom for 8 years  the
    Judge took account of the fact that that time had been spent unlawfully
    (albeit that much of it was spent as a minor and  the  Appellant  would
    have been unaware of her unlawful status). Upon return to St Kitts  the
    Appellant was likely to have somewhere to live and she  could  commence
    looking for work as she would do if she stayed in the  United  Kingdom.
    It was only the Appellant's preference to remain in the United Kingdom.
    Nothing came close to the very significant obstacles  threshold  to  be
    applied under paragraph 276 ADE.

 5. Although there had been some delay in the Respondent's  decision-making
    process, (the Respondent had taken approximately one year to refuse the
    Appellant's application), the Appellant's father had  done  nothing  to
    regularise  the  Appellant's  immigration  status,  (see   [43]).   The
    Appellant's father had dual nationality  and  he  could  if  he  wished
    return with the Appellant to St  Kitts.  The  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application was pursuant to a legitimate  aim  and  in  the
    light of the  limited  private  life  and  the  precariousness  of  the
    Appellant's  immigration   status   the   Respondent's   decision   was
    proportionate. The Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

 6. The Appellant appealed against this decision arguing  that  she  had  a
    family life with her father and it  had  been  rejected  by  the  Judge
    applying too narrow a  test.  The  Judge  had  required  dependency  in
    particular financial dependency over and above normal  emotional  ties.
    The Appellant was fully dependent in a financial  and  practical  sense
    and there were more than mere emotional ties between the two  of  them.
    There was real and committed support which had been two-way  with  both
    the Appellant and her  father  testifying  to  the  importance  of  the
    Appellant's presence when supporting the father following the death  of
    his wife and especially during his illness when he was  diagnosed  with
    cancer.

 7. The Judge had failed to undertake a fact sensitive assessment as to the
    strength of the father's ties to the United Kingdom and the  disruption
    caused to him were the Appellant to be forced to return  to  St  Kitts.
    There was no finding as to whether that would be reasonable for him.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the papers by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hollingworth  on  5  December  2018.  He  wrote:  "It  is
    arguable that the  Judge  had  set  out  an  insufficient  analysis  in
    relation to the matrix of factors bearing upon  the  question  of  real
    support in terms of whether family life  existed  and  further  whether
    that real support had the characteristic of mutuality. It  is  arguable
    that  greater  weight  should  have  been  attributed  to  the  factors
    identified in the permission application in determining the question as
    to whether family life existed."

The Hearing Before Me

 9. In consequence of the grant of permission to  appeal  the  matter  came
    before me to determine in the first place whether there was a  material
    error of law such that the decision fell to be set aside and the appeal
    remitted to the First-tier to be reheard.  If  there  was  not  such  a
    material error the decision at first instance would stand.

10. For the Appellant reliance was placed on the case of Lama  [2017]  UKUT
    00016  which  primarily  concerned  video   recording   evidence   from
    witnesses. However, the point in the case relied upon was at (iii)  and
    (iv) of the headnote which stated that there  were  no  hard  and  fast
    rules as to what constituted family life within the compass of  Article
    8.  A  person's  value  to  the  community  was  a  factor  which   may
    legitimately be considered in the Article 8  proportionality  balancing
    exercise.

11. In his determination, it was submitted to me, the Judge  had  correctly
    cited various authorities at  [40]  to  [43]  but  had  not  adequately
    considered whether there was something more than normal emotional ties.
    There was evidence of a close relationship between  the  Appellant  and
    her father. He had lost his second wife not long  after  the  Appellant
    came to the United Kingdom since when a very close bond  had  developed
    between father and daughter which went  beyond  normal  affection.  The
    Appellant had provided support to her father during  his  very  serious
    illness. The only person that the father had told about his cancer  was
    the Appellant. She had referred in her evidence to  how  important  her
    father was to her. In her witness statement the Appellant had said  her
    father had helped her with everything  since  she  was  10  years  old,
    helping her with money and advice.
12.  It was argued that the Judge  had  not  disclosed  the  basis  of  his
    findings. In his determination at [44] the  Judge  had  said  "for  the
    reasons set out above there is nothing in this case from which I  could
    conclude that there is family life which is protected  by  Article  8".
    The problem was that what was written above was just the case law. When
    the Judge said that the Appellant would work if she could, there was  a
    double error, firstly to focus on financial dependency and secondly  to
    talk about what would or could happen if  the  Appellant's  status  was
    changed. The Judge had to  assess  family  life  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing. Family life had developed in circumstances where the Appellant
    was a minor who had been fully dependent on her father. The Appellant's
    private life had developed when the Appellant's status was  precarious,
    but one would have to look at the  exceptional  circumstances  in  this
    case. It was not correct to say that if the Judge had considered family
    life it would still have resulted in the dismissal of the appeal.

13. For the Respondent it was argued that there was no  material  error  in
    the determination. One could always criticise a determination for being
    too short but that did not mean the Judge had failed  to  consider  the
    circumstances applicable in the case. The Judge set  out  the  relevant
    case law and had this background in his mind but having considered  the
    evidence he came to the view there was no more  than  normal  emotional
    ties. That was a conclusion which was open to him. If the Judge thought
    there was nothing more than that it was difficult to see what  else  he
    could have added. The Judge had a good grasp of the law and the grounds
    of onward appeal were just an attack on the lack of detail.

14. In response counsel for the Appellant pointed to paragraph  32  of  the
    decision in Lama which in turn quoted from the Court of Appeal decision
    of PT [2016] EWCA Civ 612. Finding a family  life  did  not  entail  an
    absolute requirement  of  dependency  in  the  economic  sense  but  if
    dependency was read down as meaning "support" in the personal sense and
    if one added "real" or "committed" or "effective" to the  word  support
    then that was the irreducible minimum of what family life implied.

Findings

15. The main  issue  in  the  onward  appeal  before  me  was  whether  the
    interference in the Appellant's family life with her father  caused  by
    the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain   would   be
    disproportionate. The Appellant  argued  that  she  had  a  very  close
    relationship with her father and this was acknowledged by the Judge  at
    [40]. The Judge also noted at [33] that  "a  significant  part  of  the
    evidence centred around the Appellant's relationship with her  father".
    The Judge was aware of what was being argued in the case.

16.  He  correctly  directed  himself  on  the  test  of  very  significant
    obstacles; the Razgar steps and himself cited PT  to  the  effect  that
    there was no requirement of exceptionality to find family life, it  all
    depended on the facts. The love and affection  between  adult  and  the
    parents would not of itself justify a finding of family life. There had
    to be something more.
17. The  Appellant  argues  that  there  is  something  more,  a  financial
    dependency because the Appellant has always lived with her father since
    arriving here and has been unable to work and  support  herself  and  a
    mutuality of emotional support for the reasons given  in  the  grounds.
    The Judge's conclusion was that the Appellant was financially dependent
    on her father because she was unable to work as a  consequence  of  her
    living in this country unlawfully. What the Appellant had to  show  was
    that the financial dependency in those circumstances was more than  the
    normal emotional ties  that  would  be  expected  of  the  relationship
    between father and daughter.

18. The Judge did not consider that the Appellant could show that. At  [37]
    the Judge found that there was  nothing  more  in  the  case  than  the
    Appellant's preference to remain in the United Kingdom. There  were  no
    obstacles to reintegration, the Judge referring to the  possibility  of
    assistance from the Appellant's mother.  It  is  significant  that  the
    appeal in this case has not been put with any force on the  basis  that
    the Appellant would be unable to relocate to St Kitt's but rather  that
    it would disrupt her private and family life that she  has  established
    in the United Kingdom. Given that the Judge did not consider that there
    was more than a financial dependence and the normal love and  affection
    between a father and daughter, it is difficult to see how the Appellant
    could argue that she had  a  family  life  with  her  father  that  was
    deserving of protection.

19. The Judge cited a Court of Appeal decision JB [2009] EWCA Civ 234  that
    financial dependence to some extent on a parent did not demonstrate the
    existence of strong family ties between adult children and the  parent.
    The Judge clearly had that case in mind in  rejecting  the  claim  that
    financial dependency in this case gave rise to more than normal  family
    ties. It is well established that the Judge is not obliged to  set  out
    each and every piece of evidence in the case. What the Judge considered
    important was that if the Appellant were required to return to St Kitts
    the Appellant's father would be able to accompany her as he  held  dual
    nationality. The Judge's focus was on whether  there  were  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's relocation to the country of her origin.

20. If as was being argued the Appellant's relocation to  St  Kitt's  would
    have an adverse effect on her father this  could  be  remedied  by  the
    father moving with the  Appellant  so  that  their  relationship  could
    continue if they so wished. The possibility of the father's  relocation
    was a finding open to the Judge on the evidence before him.  The  Judge
    noted at [45] that the father given no evidence as to why he could  not
    return with the Appellant to St Kitts. In effect the Judge  found  that
    family life could be continued elsewhere, and the Appellant  could  not
    therefore succeed either under the rules because  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to her relocation to St Kitts  but  also  outside
    the rules under Article 8. The interference with her relationship  with
    her father would be minimised by the fact that it could be continued in
    St Kitts a country of which they were both citizens.

21. The Judge had acknowledged a close relationship between  the  Appellant
    and her father but considered that it could be continued  elsewhere.  I
    disagree with the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  which  appears  to
    suggest that the Judge had not  determined  adequately  whether  family
    life existed in this case or whether the support  which  the  Appellant
    and her father gave to each other was  mutual.  The  financial  support
    which the father gave to the Appellant could not of  itself  amount  to
    more than normal emotional  ties,  the  Judge  evidently  adopting  the
    reasoning in JB hence that was why he had cited it in the first  place.
    The mutuality of their emotional support for each other could similarly
    be continued elsewhere as the Judge considered at [45]. The grounds  of
    appeal are a mere disagreement with the conclusions of the Judge.

22. The determination was  criticised  because  the  Judge  said  that  the
    Appellant's financial dependency on her father would cease if she  were
    able to find work. As a statement of the position in the United Kingdom
    it may be that that was incorrect and the  Judge  himself  acknowledged
    that if he was wrong on that point there  were  other  reasons  why  he
    rejected the claim.

23. However, a finding of what the position in the future might be  if  the
    Appellant were to return to St Kitts, is not necessarily wrong in  law.
    It is an important factor when assessing the significance of  obstacles
    to relocation, whether the person to be removed would be able  to  find
    work in their country of origin. The Judge dealt  with  this  issue  at
    some length and gave very cogent reasons  why  he  felt  the  Appellant
    would be able to find work in St Kitts.

24. The Appellant had also made a claim to have a  protected  private  life
    outside the immigration rules (which the Judge had found the  Appellant
    could not meet). The Judge noted how limited the evidence was  of  that
    private life at [47]. The Appellant knew  she  was  not  British,  knew
    where she was born and where she had lived for the first  10  years  of
    her life. The Judge rejected the argument that that was  sufficient  to
    amount to a private life and her relationships with her  friends  could
    continue albeit in a different way should she return to St Kitt's.  For
    these reasons I do not consider that the Judge made any material  error
    of law. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal. I make no anonymity order  as
    there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

Signed this 12 February 2019

Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 12 February 2019

Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

