
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/17076/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 March 2021                     |On 31 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                    SMAS

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr D Balroop,  instructed  by  Whitefield  Solicitors
Ltd

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of birth given  as
    5.6.82, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 27.8.20 (Judge Dainty),
    dismissing on immigration and human rights grounds his  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 19.6.18,  to  refuse  his
    application made on 14.12.18 for Leave to  Remain  in  the  UK  as  the
    partner of Mrs NN, who has  been  granted  refugee  status,  and  their
    daughter, born on 21.12.19. It is relevant that both partner and  child
    are also citizens of Pakistan.

 2. In summary, the grounds assert that (1) that as the  judge  found  that
    family life could not be enjoyed outside the UK, the appeal should have
    been allowed on grounds  of  exceptional  circumstances  rendering  the
    decision unjustifiably harsh. (2), the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred
    in law in finding that the appellant could return to  Pakistan  without
    his partner and daughter as he would not be able  to  apply  for  Entry
    Clearance as his partner does not meet the financial requirements.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 10.9.20, on the basis that it  is  arguable  that  the
    judge did not properly apply EX1 of Appendix FM. In fact, as Mr Balroop
    accepted, that was never the appellant's case. It was accepted that EX1
    is parasitic on the Rules and if the Rules could not be met, there  was
    no purpose in considering EX1 and insurmountable obstacles. It  follows
    that the permission was granted on a misconception. Although Mr Balroop
    referred me to exceptional circumstances under GEN 3.2, he accepted  my
    point that as  the  Rules  could  not  be  met,  we  have  to  look  to
    exceptional circumstances outside the Rules which would render  removal
    unjustifiably harsh and, therefore, disproportionate.

 4. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the oral  and  written  submissions  and  the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 6.11.20, points out that  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, as noted at [19] and again at  [23]
    of the  impugned  decision,  the  appellant  conceded,  and  the  judge
    accepted, that he was unable to meet the Immigration Rules, which would
    include consideration of EX1 and the issue of insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing in Pakistan.

 6. It is further submitted that it was entirely open to the judge to  find
    that the appellant could leave the UK and make a proper Entry Clearance
    application in line with R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of
    State (Appendix FM - Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40  -  temporary
    separation - proportionality) [2015] UKUT 00189. The respondent  argues
    that there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that there would be  a
    disproportionate impact on either the partner or the child.  "The  fact
    that the separation may well be extended whilst his sponsor finds  work
    to meet the requirements does not suggest that the separation  will  be
    indefinite. If this was the case then evidence to  that  effect  should
    have been adduced."

 7. The Upper Tribunal has recently  received  the  appellant's  bundle  of
    documents, including what is said to have been the initial  bundle  and
    four supplementary bundles. However, Mr Balroop indicated that only the
    fourth supplementary bundle was relevant to the Upper Tribunal  hearing
    at this stage, and the material therein pulls together all the relevant
    documents  dealing  with  the  appeal  and  grounds.  I  have  in  fact
    considered all the bundles in addressing the issues set out below.

 8. As set out above, the appellant's primary case is that at [27]  of  the
    decision the judge found that his partner would be unable to  join  him
    in Pakistan, amounting to exceptional circumstances on the  basis  that
    it  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh   and,   therefore,   renders   the
    respondent's refusal decision disproportionate. The secondary  case  is
    that given her circumstances, without other family support  in  the  UK
    and with limited earning potential, the sponsoring partner would not be
    able to meet the financial income threshold to enable the appellant  to
    make a successful application for Entry Clearance as a spouse.   It  is
    submitted that this also amounts to  exceptional  circumstances,  which
    would render his removal permanent and, therefore, unjustifiably  harsh
    as it would effectively terminate the family life he  presently  enjoys
    with partner and daughter in the UK.

 9. Mr Balroop particularly directed my attention to the extract  from  the
    respondent's policy, set out at [4] of his  grounds.  In  essence,  the
    Home Office policy is that in consideration as  to  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances which would unjustifiably harsh consequences,
    the decision maker must consider "all relevant factors  raised  by  the
    appellant". Such relevant factors  as  stated  in  the  policy  include
    circumstances which would present a very  serious  obstacle  to  family
    life being pursued in the country of return. "You should  consider  the
    effect on the UK partner and the degree of difficulty that  the  family
    would face living in that country." Mr Balroop submitted that given the
    finding that family life could not continue in Pakistan, this in and of
    itself sufficient to amount to exceptional circumstances and there was,
    therefore, no need to go to consider the Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL
    40 point of a temporary separation.

10. The Rule 24 response refers to Chen, and the grant of  permission  also
    pointed out that "ordinarily the fact that an appellant could not  meet
    the Immigration Rules would not  enhance  an  article  8  claim  Ekinci
    [2003], paragraph 17, and a person can be expected to  return  to  make
    the appropriate application, Younas [2020]."

11. Mr McVeety relied on Chen and the Rule 24  response.  The  respondent's
    position as advanced in his oral submissions were that if the appellant
    had been able to demonstrate that the  separation  from  his  wife  and
    daughter would effectively be permanent, because his sponsoring partner
    could not meet the financial requirements for a successful Appendix  FM
    Entry  Clearance  application,  that  could   amount   to   exceptional
    circumstances rendering the decision unjustifiably harsh.  However,  he
    submitted that the burden was on the appellant to adduce evidence  that
    the sponsoring  partner  could  not  be  reasonably  expected  to  find
    employment sufficient to meet those stringent  financial  requirements,
    and  that  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    discharge that burden. In response, Mr Balroop pointed to the  evidence
    put  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  the  sponsor's  earning
    potential,  including  her  P60.  The  grounds  helpfully  explain  the
    evidence placed before the First-tier Tribunal, which  appears  between
    50-248 of the main appellant's bundle. This includes the sponsor's P60,
    payslips, employer contract and bank statement. Mr  Balroop  relied  on
    this evidence to support the claim  that  the  appellant  (through  the
    income of his sponsoring partner) would be unable  to  meet  the  Entry
    Clearance requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  She  does  not  earn
    �18,600. Mr Balroop also pointed out that she has a  very  young  child
    and no family support to help her look after the child.

12. In relation to Chen, relied on by the respondent, Mr  Balroop  directed
    my attention to [40] and [41] of that decision which demonstrates  that
    that case did not address and is not authority for what  was  described
    as the converse position (to where an Entry Clearance application would
    be successful), whether, where the Secretary of  State  took  the  view
    that an application for Entry Clearance would be unlikely  to  succeed,
    the Chikwamba principle could apply.

13. Mr Balroop also drew my  attention  to  [59]  of  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, where it was held that the ultimate
    question is how a fair balance should be struck between  the  competing
    public and individual interests involved,  applying  a  proportionality
    test. If refusal of (leave to remain)  in  circumstances  where  family
    life could not reasonably be expected to be enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking
    full account of the considerations weighing in favour of  the  refusal,
    prejudiced the family life of the applicant in  a  manner  sufficiently
    serious to amount to a breach of article 8, the refusal was unlawful.

14. It is clear from [27] of the  decision  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge accepted that the appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a person with refugee status (granted on the basis of
    sexual orientation) who would not be able to return with  or  join  the
    appellant in Pakistan. Given the very young age of their  daughter,  it
    follows that despite being citizens of Pakistan,  neither  partner  nor
    daughter could continue family life with  the  appellant  in  Pakistan.
    There would be a separation. On that basis, within the same  paragraph,
    the judge went on to ask whether there were  exceptional  circumstances
    which would make it unjustifiably harsh for the appellant to return  to
    Pakistan without his wife and daughter  and  make  an  Entry  Clearance
    application from there.

15. The judge accepted that the appellant was bonded to  his  daughter  and
    that he enjoyed family life with both partner and daughter. At [34] the
    judge accepted that it was in the child's best  interests  for  him  to
    continue living with  her  in  the  UK.  However,  at  [28]  the  judge
    considered that the child's needs (then 8  months  old)  could  be  met
    solely by her mother remaining in the UK. The judge also considered the
    appellant's immigration history,  applied  the  s117B  public  interest
    considerations, and pointed out that he entered into  the  relationship
    with NN  whilst  he  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  with  no  legitimate
    expectation of being able to remain. Effectively, the judge conducted a
    proportionality balancing exercise, which was found to fall  in  favour
    of maintaining immigration control and that  the  appellant  could  and
    should return to Pakistan and make application for entry clearance from
    there.

16. The House of Lords' judgment in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40,  held
    that there is no public interest in removing a person from  the  UK  in
    order to make an entry clearance from abroad that would be  certain  to
    succeed (now  referred  to  as  the  "Chikwamba  principle").  In  that
    decision, Lord Brown stated, "[I]t seems to me that only  comparatively
    rarely, certainly in family cases involving children, should an article
    8 appeal be dismissed on the basis that it would be  proportionate  and
    more appropriate for the appellant to apply for leave from abroad."

17. However, in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  Hayat
    (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, the Court of Appeal  upheld  a  First-
    tier Tribunal decision that removal would be proportionate, even though
    an entry clearance  application  would  succeed.  In  Chen,  the  Upper
    Tribunal concluded that that Lord Brown was not  laying  down  a  legal
    test when he suggested in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant  to  make
    an application for entry clearance would only "comparatively rarely" be
    proportionate in a case involving children, and that in  all  cases  it
    will be for the individual to demonstrate, through evidence, and  based
    on his or her individual circumstances, that temporary removal would be
    disproportionate.

18. In Ekinci [2003] the Court of Appeal held that a failure  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules does  not  improve  the  appellant's  argument  under
    Article 8 ECHR. Generally, the fact that he  cannot  do  so  is  highly
    relevant to the article 8 proportionality balancing  exercise.  Ekinci,
    held it was proportionate to remove the appellant, who had an appalling
    immigration history and who would only be required to travel to Germany
    and wait for one month for a decision on his application.

19.  The  recent  Upper  Tribunal  case  of  Younas  (section   117B(6)(b);
    Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 00129 (IAC), involved somewhat similar
    circumstances to those advanced by Mr Balroop in the present appeal. In
    that case, the  respondent  accepted  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to enjoying family life outside the UK and that it would  not
    be reasonable or proportionate for the family unit to  be  indefinitely
    separated. The respondent conceded that it  would  be  disproportionate
    for the appellant to be removed unless she would be  able  to  re-enter
    the UK but argued that a  temporary  separation  whilst  the  appellant
    applied for Entry Clearance to  re-join  her  partner  in  the  UK  was
    proportionate.

20. The appellant submitted that  that  respondent's  assumption  that  she
    would be able to re-enter the UK from  Pakistan  was  mistaken  as  she
    would be unable to satisfy the financial eligibility  requirements  for
    entry as a  partner.  Her  partner  gave  evidence  that  it  would  be
    impossible for him to meet the  minimum  financial  threshold.  It  was
    argued that because the consequence of her removal would be  permanent,
    or at least long-term, exclusion from the UK, which the respondent  has
    conceded is not reasonable  or  proportionate,  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

21. The Upper Tribunal rejected the claimed inability  of  the  partner  to
    earn sufficient to meet the threshold and found that she would be  able
    to re-enter the UK within 4-9 months, so that  there  would  not  be  a
    lengthy or infinite separation. It was held that neither Chikwamba  nor
    Agyarko support the contention that there cannot be a  public  interest
    in removing a person  from  the  UK  who  would  succeed  in  an  entry
    clearance application. In the light  of  that  appellant's  immigration
    history the Upper Tribunal concluded that there  was  a  strong  public
    interest in requiring the appellant's removal, even though she would be
    able to re-enter in due course.  "Requiring  the  appellant,  in  these
    circumstances, to leave the UK in order to make a valid entry clearance
    application as a partner, far from being merely a disruptive formality,
    serves the important public interest of the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls." Ultimately, after applying the  public  interest
    considerations  under  s117B  of  the  2002  Act,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that removal was proportionate despite the likely  period  of
    separation from her partner (finding she would take her young  daughter
    with her).

22.  On an assessment of the cases relied on  by  the  parties,  I  do  not
    accept Mr Balroop's submission that the inability of the  appellant  to
    enjoy family life outside the UK  is  sufficient  alone  to  amount  to
    exceptional  circumstances  on  the  basis  that  it  would   have   an
    unjustifiably harsh impact on him and  on  his  family  members.  There
    still has to be consideration of the period  of  potential  separation,
    balanced against the public interest in enforcing  immigration  control
    in  a  proportionality   assessment,   taking   the   public   interest
    considerations of s117B into account. Effectively,  that  is  what  the
    judge went on to do.

23. In light of the case authorities referred to above, the remaining issue
    is whether the appellant's separation from  his  partner  and  daughter
    would likely be permanent or at  least  so  lengthy  as  to  amount  to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for any or all of the  family  members
    so that his removal  would  be  disproportionate.  However,  I  am  not
    satisfied that this point was taken at the First-tier Tribunal. At [27]
    the judge stated that "From the position of being settled  and  working
    in Pakistan he can then apply for entry clearance  under  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules." At [28] the judge also stated, "The separation need
    only be temporary if the  appellant  applies  for  entry  clearance  on
    return." It is clear from these paragraphs and the conclusions drawn at
    [34] that the judge proceeded on  the  assumption  that  the  appellant
    would be able  to  return  to  the  UK  following  an  Entry  Clearance
    application.  Nowhere  in  the  decision  is  there  any  record  of  a
    submission that the appellant would be unable to  succeed  in  such  an
    Entry Clearance application because of the sponsoring partner's limited
    earning potential. Neither does such an argument appear in the  grounds
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision,
    nor  in  the  lengthy  skeleton  argument  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, nor in any of the witness statements of the appellant and his
    partner. I am satisfied that the  force  of  Mr  Balroop's  submissions
    before the First-tier Tribunal, as recorded at [27]  of  the  decision,
    was  that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  rendering   removal
    unjustifiably harsh, "in that the appellant was in a relationship  with
    an asylum seeker who also came from Pakistan  so  could  not  join  the
    appellant."

24. Although Mr Balroop now relies on the argument that the appellant could
    not successfully apply for Entry Clearance, relying  on  the  financial
    information contained within the appellant's bundles as put before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I am not satisfied  that  this  evidence  in  fact
    demonstrates that the  sponsoring  partner  would  be  unable  to  find
    employment producing an income sufficient for the appellant to meet the
    Entry Clearance financial threshold requirement. However, as Mr McVeety
    pointed out, it is for the appellant to  demonstrate  this  to  be  the
    case. In any event, as the point was not taken  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant can hardly expect the judge to make a  decision
    on such an issue.

25. In the premises, and for the reasons  explained  above,  I  reject  the
    primary argument that merely because  family  life  cannot  be  enjoyed
    outside the UK, this of itself  amounts  to  exceptional  circumstances
    having an unjustifiably harsh effect on the appellant and/or his family
    members. I also reject the secondary argument, advanced  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal but evidently not put before the First-tier Tribunal, that the
    appellant would be unable to meet the financial requirements for  Entry
    Clearance to join his partner and child in the UK. Not  only  was  that
    not raised before the First-tier Tribunal, but the evidence in  support
    did not demonstrate that the sponsor would be unable to find employment
    to meet the minimum income threshold under Appendix FM.

26. It follows that no error of  law  is  disclosed  by  either  ground  of
    appeal.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and the appeal remains
      dismissed on human rights grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       23 March 2021




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       23 March 2021

