
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/17962/2018
                                                               hu/19125/2018
                                                               hu/19126/2018
                                                               hu/19128/2018
                                                               hu/19129/2018
                                                               hu/19130/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2019                  |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D HARRIS


                                   Between

                           I S U (first Appellant)
                          C E u (second Appellant)
                           S D u (third Appellant)
                          C F u (fourth Appellant)
                           P C u (fifth Appellant)
                           E T u (sixth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Praisoody, Counsel, instructed by Global
                    Solicitors & Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first Appellant is the mother of the other five and  they  are  all
    Nigerian nationals.  By entry clearance applications made  on  9  March
    2018, they sought leave to enter to join  the  Sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom, he being the first Appellant's husband and the father  of  the
    children.  The Sponsor has at all material times had settled status  in
    this country.

 2.  By  a  decision  dated  25  July  2018,  the  Respondent  refused  the
    applications (deemed  human  rights  claims)  on  the  basis  that  the
    financial requirements under Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules  had
    not been satisfied.  This was the sole basis for  the  refusal  of  the
    applications, and it is a point to be  noted.   The  matter  then  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge George ("the judge") on 17 April 2019.
     By a decision promulgated on 12 June 2019,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeals.



The judge's decision

 3. It is fair to say  that  the  judge's  decision  is  an  example  of  a
    considered and  thorough  exercise  in  analysing  a  large  amount  of
    evidence placed before him.  At  various  stages  of  his  decision  he
    identifies  errors  made  by   the   Respondent   when   refusing   the
    applications.  However, he goes on to identify a number of deficiencies
    in the evidence relating to the Sponsor's earnings as that  related  to
    the mandatory requirements under Appendix FM-SE to  the  Rules.   These
    deficiencies related both to employed  and  self-employed  income.   In
    summary, the judge found that in a number of respects the  requirements
    to provide specified evidence under Appendix FM-SE had  not  been  met.
    These  being  mandatory  requirements  it  followed  that   the   Rules
    themselves had not been met.

 4. The judge made a very clear finding that the Sponsor, as  a  matter  of
    fact, earned in excess of the relevant income threshold relevant to the
    maintenance of all of the Appellants.

 5. Having found that the requirements of the Rules were not met, the judge
    went on to consider Article 8 in its wider  context.   This  of  course
    involved a consideration of the significance of a failure to  meet  the
    Rules.  Having regard to the best interests and welfare of the relevant
    children and other relevant factors in  the  proportionality  exercise,
    the judge concluded that the Article 8 claims could  not  succeed,  and
    the appeals were all duly dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge should  in  some  way  have
    exercised a discretion in respect of certain missing items of evidence.
     It is also said that the judge failed to place adequate or  sufficient
    weight on certain documents. Finally it  is  asserted  that  the  judge
    erred in respect of his assessment of the children's situation.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey  on
    7 August 2019.  It is right to say  that  in  granting  permission  the
    judge raised a point not articulated in the grounds of appeal.  He said
    that Judge George had arguably erred in failing to explain how  he  had
    distinguished between the principles within the substantive  Rules  and
    the methods by which those principles are evidenced.  Reference is made
    to paragraph 76 of MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10.



The hearing

 8. Ms Praisoody relied on the grounds of appeal.  She, in our view,  quite
    properly, accepted that  there  had  been  evidential  deficiencies  in
    relation to Appendix FM-SE.  She submitted however that as  these  were
    human  rights  appeals  the  judge  was  bound  to  make   an   overall
    proportionality assessment and that he was wrong to have concluded that
    the  Respondent's  decisions  were  indeed  proportionate.   This   was
    particularly in view of the fact that the Sponsor had earned in  excess
    of the relevant minimum income threshold.

 9. Mr Walker submitted that the judge had given adequate consideration  to
    all relevant matters and the conclusions reached were open to him.



Decision on error of law

10. We conclude that there are no errors of law in the judge's decision.

11. As mentioned previously, we consider that his decision is an example of
    a thorough analysis of  evidence  presented.   He  adopted  a  balanced
    approach, finding both  for  and  against  the  Appellants  in  certain
    respects.  The findings on  the  evidential  deficiencies  relating  to
    Appendix FM-SE were clearly open to  him.   Indeed,  he  was  bound  to
    conclude  that  certain  mandatory  specified  evidence  had  not  been
    produced, both in respect of employed and self-employed earnings.

12. His  conclusions  on  the  specified  evidence  issue  are  in  no  way
    inconsistent with his conclusion that the Sponsor had, as a  matter  of
    fact, earned in excess  of  the  minimum  income  threshold.   However,
    putting it bluntly, the Rules are the Rules, and Appendix FM-SE is part
    and parcel of those  provisions.   A  failure  to  meet  the  mandatory
    requirements of FM-SE, particularly where these are numerous in nature,
    would inevitably lead to the conclusion that the Rules  themselves  had
    not been met.

13. The judge was entitled to go on and conclude that the failure  to  have
    met the Rules was a relevant factor in his assessment of Article 8 on a
    wider basis.  In light of MM (Lebanon) and Agyarko [2017] 1 WLR 823, he
    was bound to regard this as a significant factor weighing  against  the
    Appellants in the balancing exercise.

14. The judge did not simply stop at that stage, but then, quite correctly,
    went on to take additional  relevant  matters  into  account,  both  in
    respect of the nature of the  family's  living  arrangements  over  the
    course of time in respect of the children and with reference to section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.

15. Having dealt with these relevant factors, the judge weighed  everything
    up and came to conclusions that in our view were clearly open to him.

16. The grounds of appeal simply do not identify any errors of law,  either
    in respect of the analysis of the evidence, the conclusions reached  on
    Appendix FM-SE, or in respect of the overall balancing exercise.

17. In light of the above, the Appellants' appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    must be dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.



Observations

18. We would make a couple of additional observations in these cases.   The
    first is to emphasise the fact that the sole basis that the  Respondent
    refused the applications in the first place  was  in  relation  to  the
    financial requirements under Appendix FM.  There is absolutely no issue
    about the nature of the relationship as between  the  Sponsor  and  his
    family members in Nigeria or any other matters under Appendix  FM.   It
    is also important to note that the judge made a clear finding as to the
    Sponsor's actual earnings and that a number of  matters  taken  against
    the Appellants by the Respondent have been found to be erroneous.

19. What the judge has  in  effect  done  is  to  provide  something  of  a
    checklist, so to speak, in respect of the relevant evidence that  would
    need to be provided in order for any potential  fresh  applications  to
    stand a better prospect of success.

20. We appreciate the Appellant's and Sponsor's concerns about the costs of
    making new applications. However, that is not a matter that we can take
    into account.  If a decision is made to make  fresh  applications,  our
    decision, in conjunction with that of the First-tier Tribunal,  may  be
    of some assistance. We would expect the Respondent  to  take  on  board
    what  the  two  Tribunals  have  said  in  respect  of   the   family's
    circumstances.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of  law  and
it shall stand.

The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 10 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

