
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17907/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                          |On 8 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, Counsel, instructed by Lupins,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State from  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith, promulgated on 20 December 2017.
    The appellant in the First-tier Tribunal was made  the  subject  of  an
    anonymity direction, which we continue, and we will refer to him as  SB
    in this decision.
2.   There were a number of issues which fell to be determined by the First-
    tier Tribunal which  included  SB's  nationality  and  whether  he  was
    married to his partner, a Dutch national,  Ms  DD.   Having  heard  and
    considered evidence and submissions on those points, the judge came  to
    the conclusion that SB was a  Liberian  national  and  that  the  proxy
    marriage to which he had been a party was a valid and regular  marriage
    in accordance with the local law where it was contracted.

3.   There is no  appeal  in  relation  to  these  findings.  The  issue  of
    substance for the purposes of this appeal concerns the consideration of
    whether SB's deportation to Liberia as a foreign criminal would  amount
    to a violation of his Article 8 rights.

3.   The immigration history concerning SB is fully set out  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision at paragraphs 3 and following and I do not  need
    to rehearse it  here.   At  paragraphs  12  and  following,  the  judge
    summarises the reasons given by the Secretary of State for refusing the
    application made by SB in her refusal  letter  of  14  July  2016.   At
    paragraphs 24 and following there is a recitation of the evidence given
    by SB in the hearing when he adopted three witness statements  and  was
    cross-examined on their content. In addition, evidence was given by  Ms
    DD, which was similarly subject to cross-examination.

4.   The other substantive evidence which  was  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was in the form of what has been classed as an  expert  report
    by Christine Brown, who is  an  independent  social  worker.   This  is
    summarised at paragraph 72 of the decision, which sets out the  content
    of the report and an addendum dealing primarily with  the  relationship
    between the children and SB.  By the term children in  this  context  I
    refer to two children of Ms DD  by  a  prior  relationship  which  were
    treated as SB's own children (and following  the  marriage  became  his
    stepchildren) and three biological  children  of  SB  born  during  the
    currency of his relationship with Ms DD.

5.   In the First-tier Tribunal it was conceded on behalf of SB that he  did
    not come within the provisions  of  paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules because (a) his children  are  not  British  citizens
    and/or have not lived in the United Kingdom for the  qualifying  period
    of 7 years;  (b)  the  lack  of  status  at  the  commencement  of  the
    relationship; and (c) the fact that SB had not been  lawfully  resident
    in the UK for most of his life. That concession is properly repeated in
    paragraph 5 of SB's rule 24 response,  settled  on  his  behalf  by  Ms
    Robinson of counsel who represents him today as he did before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

6.   In the circumstances it was unnecessary to address directly  the  issue
    of whether it would be "unduly harsh" either for  the  children  and/or
    partner to relocate to Liberia or, in the alternative, for them  to  be
    separated in consequence of SB's  deportation.  Instead,  the  question
    which then fell to be determined was whether in all  the  circumstances
    there very compelling circumstances over and above those in  rules  399
    and 399A by which the proposed deportation would amount to a  violation
    of SB's article 8 rights.  The  "unduly  harsh"  hurdle  is  however  a
    relevant feature in considering whether the public  interest  arguments
    should  prevail  notwithstanding  the  engagement  of  Article  8.  See
    generally Chenge (section 117D Article  8  approach)  [2015]  UKUT  165
    (IAC), particularly at paragraph 33.

7.   Perhaps in consequence of the time taken in the disposal of  the  other
    issues to which we have adverted  above,  the  judge  dealt  with  this
    substantive matter comparatively briefly in the  concluding  paragraphs
    of the decision. She made reference to  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
    Court in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 (reported  as  Ali  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] 1 WLR 4799) and  quoted  in  full
    from the judgment of Lord Reed at paragraph 38, which reads as follows:

         "The countervailing considerations must be very compelling in order
         to outweigh the general public interest in the deportation of  such
         offenders, as assessed by Parliament and the  Secretary  of  State.
         The  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  indicates   relevant   factors   to
         consider, and Rules 399 and 399A provide an indication of the sorts
         of matters which the Secretary of State regards as very compelling.
         As explained at  paragraph  26  above,  they  can  include  factors
         bearing on the weight of the public interest in the deportation  of
         the particular offender, such as his conduct since the offence  was
         committed, as well as factors relating to  his  private  or  family
         life.  Cases falling within the scope of Section 32 of the 2007 Act
         in which the public interest in deportation  is  outweighed,  other
         than those specified in the new Rules themselves, are likely to  be
         a very small minority (particularly in  non-settled  cases).   They
         need not necessarily involve any circumstance which is  exceptional
         in the sense of being extraordinary [...] but they can be  said  to
         involve 'exceptional circumstances' in the sense that they  involve
         a departure from the general rule."

8.   In oral submissions, Ms Robinson took us to this passage  and  also  to
    one from the concurring judgment of Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd:

         "[82] ... Judges should, after making their factual determinations,
             set out in clear and succinct terms their  reasoning  for  the
             conclusion  arrived  at  through   balancing   the   necessary
             considerations in the light of the matters  set  out  by  Lord
             Reed at paragraphs 37 to 38, 46 and 50.  It  should  generally
             not be necessary to refer to any further authorities involving
             the deportation of foreign offenders.


         [83] One way of structuring such a judgment would be to follow what
             has become known as the 'balance sheet' approach.   After  the
             judge has found the facts, the judge would set out each of the
             pros and cons in what has been described as  a  balance  sheet
             and then set  out  reasoned  conclusions  as  to  whether  the
             countervailing factors outweigh the importance attached to the
             public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders."


9.   As we have already noted, the judge's decision on this point  was  very
    briefly stated and did not seek to adopt the so-called "balance  sheet"
    approach by indicating the countervailing  factors  which  militate  in
    favour and against the contentions of SB. In paragraph 77,  whilst  the
    judge cites sections 117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, the consideration given to those provisions is  brief.
    The judge's conclusions can be found in paragraphs 78 and 79:

         "78. As stated in Hesham Ali,


                  'ultimately,  [the  Tribunal]  has   to   decide   whether
                  deportation is proportionate in the particular case before
                  it, balancing the strength of the public interest  in  the
                  deportation of the offender against the impact on  private
                  and family life.'


         79.  Taking into account all the  relevant  circumstances,  but  in
             particular the interests of the children and  the  potentially
             serious effect the removal of the  appellant  would  have  not
             only on his own biological children who are still quite  young
             but his two stepchildren, I find this is one  of  those  'very
             small  minority'  of  cases  where  the  public  interest   in
             requiring the appellant's deportation  is  outweighed  by  his
             family life."

10.  Despite the assertion made by the judge, there is no analysis  of  why,
    on its fact, this matter comes within one of those very small  minority
    of cases. Nowhere does the judge express with any degree of specificity
    her reason for finding that SB's case was within that that  very  small
    minority of cases, nor  the  evidence  upon  which  she  based  such  a
    conclusion.

11.  Ms Robinson has sought to place particular reliance upon  the  evidence
    of Christine Brown, the independent social worker.  She  has  taken  us
    not merely to the summary of the report by the judge in paragraph 75 of
    the decision but also  to  the  underlying  report  itself,  not  least
    paragraph 3.46, which for completeness, reads as follows:

         "Having spent time with the five children, in my view they will  be
         deeply affected on a number of levels by their  father/stepfather's
         removal from the United Kingdom. I would strongly suggest that  the
         older two children would become stuck  and  fixated  at  the  point
         where their stepfather had been removed from  the  United  Kingdom,
         with continued thoughts of what might have been,  as  indicated  by
         Chris  Beckett  and  Hilary  Taylor  in  their   study   of   human
         development, had the  family  been  able  to  remain  together  and
         continue to provide the elder children with the stability that  had
         been lacking in their younger  lives.   As  for  [the  three  named
         biological  children],  they  have  never  known   instability   or
         insecurity in their lives  and  it  would  be  a  travesty  to  now
         introduce this into their lives, with the removal of their  father,
         whether this  would  be  in  the  longer  or  short  term,  as  the
         separation between SB and the children could only introduce  severe
         elements of doubt and possibly  a  sense  of  rejection  that  will
         compromise their relationships with one another. I cannot  envisage
         this being averted, other than by [SB] being allowed to  remain  in
         situ with his family members and they with him."

12.  Taking the report in its totality, it does  not  come  close  to  being
    indicative, still less probative, of the existence of  very  compelling
    circumstances. Nowhere within the decision does the judge go so far  as
    to say that it is the content of the  report  which  demonstrates  very
    compelling circumstances or that she reached such a conclusion based on
    her independent assessment of the evidence. The judge  did  make  brief
    reference to the appellant's crime, albeit she  perhaps  miscategorised
    it as simply an offence of dishonesty whereas in reality it related  to
    the  possession  of  false  identity  documents,  engaging  issues   of
    immigration control.

13.  In all the circumstances, we consider  that  Christine  Brown's  report
    goes no further than setting out the typical consequences of fracturing
    of familial relationships when a father is separated from his children.
    There is no exceptional feature (such as  medical  need,  for  example)
    that might amount to very compelling circumstances. We are drawn to the
    inevitable conclusion that the judge failed  to  approach  and  resolve
    this appeal before her by applying the  proper  legal  framework.  This
    amounts to an error of law.

14.  Ms Robinson's fallback submission today has been that even  if  we  are
    satisfied that there is an error of law, such error is not material  to
    the eventual outcome of the matter.  She relies upon what is an  obiter
    statement from the judge at paragraph 68 of the  decision  relating  to
    the application of Regulation 27 and the  EEA  Regulations,  the  judge
    having found as a fact that SB was married to Ms DD,  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

15.  However, that  matter  was  not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    determination so any comment by  the  judge  is  at  best  illustrative
    background. It is certainly not dispositive of the appeal.  It  may  be
    that the judge's conclusions on  this  peripheral  issue  infected  her
    consideration of the substantive matter which fell to be determined.

16.  In our view, the error of law which has  been  identified  is  material
    and is such as to undermine the decision  in  its  totality.   Both  Mr
    Wilding, who acts for the Secretary of State, and Ms Robinson submit to
    us that were we to find there to be a material error of law the  proper
    course would be to remit the matter to be  reheard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by a judge other than Judge Griffith.  Amongst other  reasons,
    Mr Wilding has indicated that, in the light of the conclusions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, it would be appropriate for the Secretary of State
    to  give  further  consideration  to  the  application   of   the   EEA
    Regulations, which previously she had concluded were irrelevant as  she
    did not accept the validity of the proxy marriage. It is  not  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to direct reconsideration by the Secretary of State, but
    we are pleased to record Mr Wilding's assurance that he will refer  the
    matter internally in the light of the judge's finding on  the  validity
    of the marriage we do not disturb.


Notice of Decision

 1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside.
 2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  redetermination
    by a judge other than Judge Griffith.
 3) The following findings of fact are expressly preserved:
 i. that SB is a Liberian national;
ii. that SB is lawfully married to Ms DD.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the respondent  (SB)
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the respondent and the appellant.  Failure  to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     6 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


