
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
hu/17720/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 October 2019                         |On 14 November 2019               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                           Muhammad Usman Siddique
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sajid Mustafa, Counsel appearing by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M B Hussain who dismissed his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse him leave to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds either within  or  outwith  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as
    amended).

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  of  perversity  and/or
    inadequacy of reasons, including in particular  failure  to  take  into
    account or to resolve conflicts of fact or opinion on material matters,
    giving weight to immaterial matters, making a material misdirection  of
    law, procedural or other irregularity and mistakes as to material fact.
     To that I would add speculation,  with  particular  reference  to  the
    findings at [22] and [26]-[29] of the First-tier Tribunal decision,  in
    which the Judge substitutes his own alleged knowledge for the  evidence
    before him.

 3. The grounds of appeal are made out.  The First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    is  both  perverse  and  irrational  and  there  is  unfortunately   no
    alternative but to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing afresh with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.

DECISION

 4. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.
   The decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on
   a date to be fixed.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     12 November 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

