
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17235/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                             |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                         mrs thevampigai ariyaratnam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Eldridge promulgated on 25  October  2017.   The  appellant  sought
         entry clearance in order to settle in this country as  a  dependant
         of her son who came here has refugee status in the United Kingdom.


      2. The judge in a fully reasoned decision considered the  claim  under
         the Immigration Rules and dismissed it on the basis of the evidence
         that was before him, in particular  evidence  concerning  the  care
         that may have been available to the appellant in Sri Lanka.


      3. What the judge did not deal with  was  what  might  be  called  the
         'stand alone' Article 8 consideration having regard to family life.
         In paragraph 25, he wrongly  imposed  a  gateway  consideration  of
         "compelling reason". It is argued on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
         State that although the decision is silent on the matter, the Upper
         Tribunal  can  safely  assume  that  it  was  within  the   judge's
         contemplation and formed part of his decision-making process.


      4. A judge is not required to deal with each and every  separate  item
         of evidence and argument but a judge is  required  to  address  all
         issues which are in play and to resolve them expressly and  not  by
         their implication. The grant of permission to appeal in this matter
         identified the most attractive of the various grounds  pursued,  as
         there being no separate consideration of family life.


      5. It is well-established by decisions such as Kugathas v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ  31  that  particular
         care and scrutiny must be given by a court when considering  family
         life as between two adults. The  requirement  is  for  a  judge  to
         consider whether the basis of the relationship is of such a  degree
         as to engage the family life considerations of Article 8  and  then
         if it does to carry out a proportionality exercise in that  regard.
         Neither was done in this case.


      6. It follows that the decision must  be  set  aside  and  the  matter
         remitted for a rehearing.


      7. It may well be that the rehearing reaches the same result, and  the
         appellant and her family should not get their hopes up. The  recent
         decision of the Court of Appeal in Entry Clearance Officer,  Sierra
         Leone v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511  emphasises  the  narrowness  of
         Article 8. However, justice requires  that  the  decision  is  made
         afresh adopting the proper, and more nuanced, approach.

Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
   2) The matter is remitted to Hatton Cross for a fresh hearing by a  judge
      other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge
   3) No findings of fact are preserved.
   4) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         20 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
