
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17198/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2019                      |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [M E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, instructed by Howells solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 6 February 2005 and is a  female  citizen  of
    Uganda. She applied for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of family reunion with a  recognised  refugee,  her  father  [PE]
    (hereafter referred to as the sponsor). The First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    decision promulgation on 28  March  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. To be granted entry clearance, the appellant must meet the requirements
    of paragraph 352D of HC 395 (as amended):

         'Requirements for leave to enter  or  remain  as  the  child  of  a
         refugee


         352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
         parent who currently has refugee status are that the applicant:


         (i)  is the child of a parent  who  currently  has  refugee  status
         granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and


         (ii) is under the age of 18; and


         (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried  and  is
         not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit;
         and


         (iv) was part of the family unit of the person  granted  asylum  at
         the time that the person granted asylum left the country  of  their
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and


         (v)  the applicant would not be excluded from protection by  virtue
         of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article 1F  of  the
         Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in their own  right;
         and


         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom  entry
         clearance for entry in this capacity.'


 3. At the initial hearing at Bradford on 11 July 2019, Mr Mills,  who  had
    appeared for the Entry Clearance Officer, acknowledged that  the  judge
    had erred in law. He told me that  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    judge had not given any or any clear reasons to explain why he had  not
    believed the evidence of the sponsor. However, he  submitted  that  the
    error was not material and that the appeal was bound  to  fail  in  any
    event. He  relied  on  the  decision  of  the  Asylum  and  immigration
    Tribunal, BM and AL  (352D(iv);  meaning  of  "family  unit")  Colombia
    [2007] UKAIT 00055. The headnote reads:

         "What is  a  'family  unit'  for  the  purposes  of  para  352D(iv)
         Immigration Rules is a question of  fact.  It  is  not  limited  to
         children who lived in the same household as the refugee. But if the
         child belonged to  another  family  unit  in  the  country  of  the
         refugee's habitual residence it will be hard to establish that  the
         child was then part of two  different  'family  units'  and  should
         properly be separated from the 'family unit' that  remains  in  the
         country of origin."


    Mr Mills submitted that, whatever view a decision-maker might  take  of
    other parts of the sponsor's evidence, it was accepted by both  parties
    that the sponsor had not been part of the appellant's  family  unit  in
    Uganda at the time he had left the country to seek  asylum  abroad.  Mr
    Greer,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  the  rule
    contained no cohabitation requirement and  that  determining  of  which
    family unit the appellant had been a  member  prior  to  the  sponsor's
    departure was question of fact. He  submitted  that,  for  the  judge's
    errors to be immaterial, there must be no  doubt  whatever  as  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

 4. Whilst there is much force in Mr  Mills'  submission,  I  find  that  I
    prefer the submission of Mr Greer. I do so for the  following  reasons.
    The judge's assessment of the evidence and his findings  regarding  the
    credibility of the sponsor are, both advocates agree, deeply flawed.  I
    agree. I find the criticisms of the judge's analysis in the grounds  of
    appeal are in each case made out. The appellant,  therefore,  has  been
    denied a proper and thorough consideration of the evidence advanced  in
    her appeal. I agree with Mr Mills that the IAT decision in  BM  and  AL
    remains good law; paragraph 352D has not, so far as  I  can  see,  been
    amended since the IAT made its decision in 2007. However, the  IAT  did
    not conclude that it would be impossible for an appellant to prove that
    he or she is a member of two family units, only that it would be  'hard
    to establish.' Determining whether the appellant meets the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules is a question of fact and so far the appellant
    has not seen sustainable findings of fact made on  the  evidence  which
    she has adduced in support of her appeal. It may well be the case  that
    when a competent assessment of the evidence has been carried  out,  the
    appellant may fail for the reasons given by  Mr  Mills  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that the outcome of the appeal can accurately be said, before
    the assessment has concluded, to be inevitable.

 5. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  28
    March 2019 is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The
    appeal is returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  tribunal  to
    remake the decision at or following a hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 30 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
