
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17910/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                NINA LAIZANE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 5 August 1985 and  is  a  female  citizen  of
    Ukraine. She applied for  an  EEA  family  permit  to  accompany  Elmar
    Laizans (whom she claims is her  spouse  to  the  United  Kingdom).  Mr
    Laizans is a citizen of Latvia.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  in  a
    decision  issued  on  19  March  2018,  refused  the  application.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    considered on the papers and promulgated on 14 May 2019, dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is living in Riga, Latvia.  She  has  no  United  Kingdom
    representative. She did not attend the initial hearing. I am  satisfied
    that the appellant was served with notice of the hearing by post on  23
    July 2019. In the circumstances, I proceeded with the  hearing  in  the
    absence of the appellant.

 3. Mr Melvin, who appeared for the Entry Clearance  Officer,  agreed  that
    the judge had erred in law for the reasons by  the  judge  who  granted
    permission at [3-4]. The judge treated the appeal as an appeal made  on
    human rights grounds. This is problematic (see Amirteymour [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 353) plainly amounts to an error of law. The judge also  fell  into
    error at [7] by holding that the burden of proof in the  appeal  (which
    concerned an  allegation  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  that  the
    appellant is a party to  a  marriage  of  convenience)  rested  on  the
    appellant. It is clear that the burden of proof rests on the party  who
    makes the allegation, namely the Entry Clearance Officer (see  Sadovska
    [2017] UKSC 54). Accordingly,  I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

 4. I have proceeded to remake the decision. The burden of proving that the
    appellant is a party to a marriage of convenience rests  on  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer.  The  standard  of  proof   is   the   balance   of
    probabilities.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer considered that the appellant was  a  party
    to a marriage of convenience for several reasons detailed in the notice
    of refusal. The appellant claimed to have entered a  relationship  with
    the  man  she  claims  is  a  husband  in  April  2009.  The  appellant
    subsequently made a number of applications to enter the United Kingdom.
    In October 2012, the appellant claimed in an application form that  she
    was single, a statement which he repeated  June  and  August  2014  and
    again  in  July  2015.  Mr  Laizans  was  not  referred  to  in   these
    applications. Further, in March 2017, the appellant  claimed  that  her
    wedding had been planned for April 2017. However,  the  certificate  of
    marriage submitted to the Entry Clearance Officer  indicated  that  the
    marriage had taken place on 17 March 2017. The Entry Clearance  Officer
    considered that these discrepancies cast doubt upon the genuineness  of
    the marriage.

 6. I find that the discrepancies and anomalies referred to  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer are sufficiently serious to discharge the  burden  of
    proving that the marriage  is  not  genuine  or,  at  the  very  least,
    discharge any initial burden and the respondent following which  it  is
    for the appellant to provide an explanation. I acknowledge that  it  is
    not for the appellant to prove that the marriage is genuine but, in the
    light of the arguments advanced by the Entry Clearance Officer,  it  is
    necessary for the Tribunal to consider all the evidence, including that
    submitted by the appellant, in  order  to  determine  the  appeal.  The
    evidence submitted  by  the  appellant  is  scant  and  unhelpful.  The
    appellant has submitted copies of airline tickets and  boarding  passes
    in the names  of  the  appellant  and  her  claimed  husband  and  also
    photographs which show an unidentified man and woman and which, in some
    cases, appear to bear the date upon which the photograph may have  been
    taken. The probative value of this evidence is very limited indeed. The
    fact that two individuals may buy airline tickets for the  same  flight
    proves nothing at all regarding the nature  of  a  marriage.  Likewise,
    photographs produced shorn of any narrative or context  prove  nothing.
    Having considered all the evidence I conclude that the Entry  Clearance
    Officer in this instance has proved that the appellant is  party  to  a
    marriage of convenience. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    I set aside the decision of the FTT. I have remade  the  decision.  The
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
    dated 19 March 2018 is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 13 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

