
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17990/2018
                                                               HU/17993/2018
                                                               HU/17996/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2019                             |On 28 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                  mr a s s
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                                     and
                                  miss r a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and
                                   mrs e a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and third Appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  second
    Appellant is their daughter who was born on 2 March 2008. They are  all
    citizens of Pakistan. They made applications for leave to remain on the
    basis of their human rights. Following refusal  of  those  applications
    they appealed and after a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on  14
    January 2019, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M  M  Smith  dismissed
    their appeals.

 2. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  12
    February 2019 by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Scott  Baker.  Her
    reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  The Appellants seek permission to appeal against a decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge EMM Smith) who, by notice of
         decision and reasons promulgated on 14 January 2019, dismissed the
         Appellants' appeals against the decisions of the respondent made on
         15 August 2018 refusing the applications to remain on the basis of
         human rights.


         2.   The grounds assert that the First Tier Tribunal Judge had
         erred in law in that he considered his assessment of the child with
         reference to KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 without first considering
         the respondent's policy and the observations in MA (Pakistan)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 70 and failed to give adequate reasons for finding
         that the child could read and write in Urdu.


         3.   There was no issue that the second appellant was a qualifying
         child as set out at [20] and that the issue was whether it would be
         unreasonable to return to Pakistan with her parents, the first and
         third appellants. This was considered at [30] with reference to
         paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) but no findings have been made with
         regard to the first and third appellants nor was the appeals
         considered with reference to Article 8 outside the rules. Further
         there is arguably an inadequacy in the findings with reference to
         KO.


         4.   Leave is not granted in relation to the second ground as the
         finding that the child could speak Urdu at [27] was arguably open
         to the judge on the evidence.


         5.   Permission is granted."


 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Dhanji relied upon the first ground of appeal and urged me to accept
    that the Judge had materially erred by failing  to  consider  case  law
    with particular reference to MA (above) and in coming to  his  decision
    had  erred  in  his  consideration  of  best  interests  of  the  child
    Appellant.  The  Judge  had   failed   to   take   into   account   the
    acknowledgement by the Respondent in  his  published  document  "Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b  Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life: 10 -Year Routes (18 December 2018)" that  the
    starting point is that the  Respondent  would  not  normally  expect  a
    qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom. Mr Dhanji emphasised that
    in KO there is no suggestion that consideration of the Appellant's  age
    or length of time in the United Kingdom is incorrect. There is again in
    KO no suggestion that the view taken in MA "as a  starting  point  that
    leave should be granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary" is incorrect. Moreover, on two occassions in his decision the
    Judge has made reference to  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  where  the  focus
    should have been on paragraph 276ADE (iv).

 5. Mr Whitwell opposed the appeal but  acknowledged  that  "something  had
    gone wrong". However, whilst there were errors in relation  to  whether
    the  Judge  was  focusing  on  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)   or   (iv)   on
    consideration of the decision as a whole the Judge had dealt  with  all
    issues that fell to be considered. Mr Whitwell suggested that there  is
    doubt that following KO the "powerful reasons" referred to  in  MA  are
    still relevant. KO suggests that normally a child will leave the United
    Kingdom subject to the issue of reasonableness.

 6. I find there is an absence of findings, as referred to in the grant, in
    regard to the first and third Appellants positions. Finally, the  Judge
    has  inadequately  reasoned  his  rejection  of  the  first  and  third
    Appellants' claim to succeed on Article 8 grounds. For  these  reasons,
    subject to the preservation of the finding in relation  to  the  second
    Appellant's ability to speak Urdu, this decision cannot stand and  will
    need to be heard afresh.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge E M M Smith.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                                Date 26 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

