
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/17375/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 May 2021                     |On 03 June 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               NANGYALAY AMIRI

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For  the  appellant:      Mr  A  Badar  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Abbott
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. To avoid confusion, for the purpose of this decision  I  have  referred
    below to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is an Afghan national resident in Pakistan with  date  of
    birth given as 4.9.03.

 3. The Secretary of State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
    3.11.20 (Judge Phull), allowing on human rights grounds the appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's  decision  of  9.10.19  to  refuse  her
    application made on 19.7.19 for  entry  clearance  to  the  UK  as  the
    dependent child of her father and sponsor in  the  UK,  Gulamir  Amiri,
    pursuant to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The application was refused because the respondent was not satisfied as
    to the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor, or satisfied
    that the sponsor has had sole responsibility for the  appellant's  care
    and upbringing. The first issue was resolved by  DNA  testing,  leaving
    the single issue at the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  as  that  of  sole
    responsibility.

 5. Judge Phull concluded that the sponsor had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parent-child  relationship   with   the   appellant   and   that   "the
    circumstances are that the appellant remains dependent on (her)  father
    for all (his) needs. I find on balance that the sponsor  exercises  the
    necessary control and direction over the  appellant's  upbringing".  As
    the judge concluded that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were
    met, she concluded at [37] of the decision that the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was disproportionate to the article  8  ECHR  rights  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor.

 6. The grounds submit that the judge  misapplied  the  Rules  and  made  a
    material misdirection in applying  TD  (Paragraph  297  (i)(e)):  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049. It is submitted that on the facts as found  by  the
    judge the only conclusion can be that there  is  shared  and  not  sole
    responsibility.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Kelly) on 29.12.20, who considered "It is  arguable  that  it  was  not
    reasonably open to the Tribunal to conclude that the appellant's father
    had had sole responsibility for his upbringing given  the  evidence  of
    his  mother's  involvement  in  the  same.  Permission  to  appeal   is
    accordingly granted."

 8. The Upper Tribunal has received the appellant's poorly-drafted Rule  24
    reply, dated 12.1.21, which perpetuates the error of referring  to  the
    appellant as male when she is female. It is submitted that not only  is
    the sponsor financially responsible for the appellant "but  he  is  the
    only person who is performing important caring role in the  appellant's
    life and upbringing." It is  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge applied the  correct  legal  test  regarding  paragraph  297  and
    Article 8 ECHR and that the grounds are "nothing more  than  a  lengthy
    semantic argument without merit if the (First-tier  Tribunal)  decision
    is considered in its entirety."

 9. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  However, for  the  reasons
    set out below, I found an error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal requiring it to be set aside and remade.  Both  Mr  Badar
    and Mr Tan invited me to remake the decision on the  findings  of  fact
    made by the First-tier Tribunal.

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Tan relied on TD, particularly  paragraphs
    [45] to [47] and [52(iv)], which for convenience I have set out  below,
    adding emphasis as appropriate:

         "[45]    To understand the proper approach to the  issue  of  "sole
         responsibility", we begin with the situation where a child has both
         parents involved in its life.  The starting point must be that both
         parents share responsibility for their child's  upbringing.    This
         would be the position if the parents and child lived  in  the  same
         country and we can see no reason in  principle  why  it  should  be
         different if one parent has moved to the United Kingdom.

         [46]     In order to conclude that the UK-based  parent  had  "sole
         responsibility" for the child, it would be necessary to  show  that
         the parent abroad had abdicated any responsibility  for  the  child
         and was merely acting at the direction of the UK-based  parent  and
         was otherwise totally uninvolved in the  child's  upbringing.   The
         possibility clearly cannot be ruled out: Alagon provides an example
         of this exceptional situation and turns upon an acceptance  by  the
         judge of the wholly unusual situation that the  father  was  "doing
         nothing for the child beyond the bare fact of living  with  her  on
         reasonably good terms". (at p 345)

         [47]     Our conclusion on the likely decision that  responsibility
         is shared where a child has both parents involved in its  life  is,
         in our view, consistent with the policy relating to  the  admission
         of children for settlement  underlying  paragraph  297.   In  full,
         paragraph 297(i) provides as follows:

             "297.     The requirements to  be  met  by  a  person  seeking
             indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a
             parent, parents or a relative present  and  settled  or  being
             admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

                  (i)  is seeking leave to enter  to  accompany  or  join  a
                  parent, parents or a relative  in  one  of  the  following
                  circumstances:

                      (a)   both parents are present  and  settled  in  the
                      United Kingdom; or

                      (b)   both parents are being  admitted  on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement; or

                      (c)   one parent is present and settled in the United
                      Kingdom and the other is being admitted on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement; or

                      (d)   one parent is present and settled in the United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                      (e)   one parent is present and settled in the United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and has had sole  responsibility  for  the
                      child's upbringing; or

                      (f)   one parent or a relative is present and settled
                      in the United Kingdom or being admitted on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement and  there  are  serious  and
                      compelling family or other considerations which  make
                      exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                      arrangements have been made  for  the  child's  care;
                      and..."

         "[52]    Questions of "sole responsibility" under  the  immigration
         rules should be approached as follows:

          i. Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and  whether
             that responsibility is  "sole"  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
             decided upon all the evidence.

         ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should  not
             to be understood as a  theoretical  or  legal  obligation  but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the  child.    That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.

        iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing may be undertaken by
             individuals other than a child's parents  and  may  be  shared
             between different individuals: which  may  particularly  arise
             where the child remains in its own  country  whilst  the  only
             parent involved in its life travels to and lives in the UK.

         iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
             upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of
             them will have sole responsibility.

          v. If it is said that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
             longer has responsibility for the child.

         vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
             between the parents.  So even if  there  is  only  one  parent
             involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may  not  have
             sole responsibility.

        vii.   In   the   circumstances   likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
             friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
             parent and child.

       viii. That,  however,  does  not  prevent  the  parent  having  sole
             responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

         ix.  The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
             the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
             responsibility is shared and so not "sole"."

11. Mr Tan submitted that this was a case of both  parents  being  involved
    and therefore the judge should have taken shared responsibility as  the
    starting point. Neither had it been demonstrated that  the  mother  had
    abdicated  any  responsibility  for  the  child,  the  judge  accepting
    repeatedly that she provided day-to-day care for the appellant.  It  is
    important to also note that the appellant  had  never  lived  with  the
    sponsor, who has been in the UK since 2001  and  that  since  2009  the
    appellant has lived with her siblings and mother in Pakistan. In short,
    it is submitted that the judge made a material  misdirection  and  took
    the wrong approach.

12. For his part, Mr Badar submitted that it is  clear  from  [21]  of  the
    decision that the judge was alive to the respondent's  case  that  this
    was a case of shared responsibility. He also relied on  the  Edwards  v
    Bairstow principle as applied at [17] of the Upper Tribunal's  decision
    Dasgupta [2016] UKUT 00028 (IAC), that in  error  of  law  appeals  the
    standard of "the true and only reasonable conclusion" open, so that  no
    person acting judicially and properly instructed as to the relevant law
    could come to the determination under  appeal.  However,  it  was  also
    accepted that a finding of fact can be set aside if the  decision-maker
    actions without any evidence or upon a view of the  facts  which  could
    not reasonably be entertained.

13. I am satisfied that as this is a case of both parents being involved in
    the appellant's care, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to take share responsibility as  the  starting  point.  Neither
    does the judge make any finding that "the parent abroad  had  abdicated
    any responsibility for the child and was merely acting at the direction
    of the UK-based parent and was  otherwise  totally  uninvolved  in  the
    child's upbringing," nor could this be deduced from the other  findings
    and evidence available to the First-tier Tribunal.  Whilst  the  father
    sponsor in the UK appears  to  have  considerable  involvement  in  the
    appellant's life, as set out between [24]  and  [28]  of  the  impugned
    decision, even to the point that accepted at [28] that he made all  the
    decisions for the appellant "be they  major  or  minor,"  that  is  not
    equivalent to the exclusion of the mother's  continuing  responsibility
    as a parent. I am satisfied  that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  by
    focusing on the sponsor's role without consideration as to whether  the
    mother had abdicated all responsibility, for whatever reason.

14. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find  such
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.

15. In remaking the decision, I adopt the findings of fact and  take  share
    responsibility as the starting point. These are clear from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision and need not be  repeated  here.  I  accept  the
    extensive involvement and support of the  sponsor  in  the  appellant's
    life at the present time, including the evidence of  financial  support
    and contact with her.

16. However, as the Upper Tribunal held  in  TD,  where  both  parents  are
    involved in the upbringing of the child, it will  be  exceptional  that
    one of them will have sole responsibility.  For  the  reasons  set  out
    above, I do not accept that it has been demonstrated  that  the  mother
    has abdicated all responsibility for the appellant and is merely acting
    at the direction of the  sponsor  so  that  she  is  otherwise  totally
    uninvolved  in  the  appellant's  life.  That  is   not   an   accurate
    characterisation of the facts as they appear to be and as found by  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It  is  she  who  provides  the  day-to-day  care,
    despite her own difficulties as set out in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The very fact that the mother has given  permission  for
    the appellant to join the sponsor is also indicative of the  fact  that
    she retains responsibility.

17. In the premises, I do not accept and do not find that  the  mother  has
    abdicated all responsibility for the appellant. She has not disappeared
    from the appellant's life, far from it. I am satisfied that in practice
    the mother retains continuing care and control of the  appellant,  even
    if she has allowed decisions to be made by the absent father.  Further,
    I find that there are no exceptional features  that  justify  departing
    from the starting position of shared responsibility. In summary,  I  am
    satisfied that for the reasons set out above and  on  the  findings  of
    fact from the First-tier Tribunal that this is clearly a case of shared
    responsibility. It follows that the appellant has failed to demonstrate
    that the sponsor has had sole responsibility  for  her  upbringing.  It
    follows that this appeal must fail.



Decision

    The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The decision in the appeal is  remade  by  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 May 2021






