

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/17185/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice   | Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2018                    | On 07 January 2019                 |
|                                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     AT
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Nicolaou, of Counsel instructed by Turpin and
                    Miller
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Kimnell promulgated on 19 October 2018 dismissing  his  deportation
         appeal on human rights grounds.


      2. The appellant is a national of Guinea born on 31 December 1986.  He
         claims to have arrived in the UK in September 2006. His  subsequent
         asylum claim was refused, his claim was  found  to  be  a  complete
         fabrication by Judge Webb and his appeal was dismissed in  February
         2007.  However,  following  further  submissions,  he  was  granted
         indefinite leave to remain on 27 September 2010.


      3. There followed a number of criminal convictions. The appellant  was
         warned about the possibility of deportation, but  he  continued  to
         offend and following a conviction for robbery and the breach  of  a
         community order, he was, in April 2017, sentenced  to  imprisonment
         for two years and five months  and  notified  of  an  intention  to
         deport. On 30 December 2017 a deportation order  was  signed.   The
         appellant filed an appeal and that was heard by First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Kimnell at Harmondsworth on 5 October 2018.

      4. Permission to appeal was sought. The  application  was  granted  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan on 5 November  2018.  It  was
         considered arguable that the judge had applied the wrong test  when
         considering article 3. As to the appellant's  complaint  about  the
         refusal of an adjournment, the Tribunal found that the  appellant's
         challenge was a disagreement with a decision that had been properly
         open to the judge on the information before him  and  disclosed  no
         error.


      5. The matter then came before me.


         The Hearing


      6. His attendance not being necessary, the appellant was not  produced
         for  the  hearing  and  the  matter  proceeded  in  the  basis   of
         submissions.


      7. For the appellant, Ms Nicolaou submitted that the  judge  had  used
         the wrong test to assess  whether  the  appellant's  removal  would
         breach his human rights. She submitted that his  determination  (at
         paragraphs 48 and 57) demonstrated that he had used the balance  of
         probabilities test and that the extent to which he  had  relied  on
         the 50-50 possibility of harm  suggested  in  the  medical  report,
         reinforced the submission that the civil standard had been used.


      8. Ms Nicolaou also made submissions on the  first  ground  which  had
         been rejected by Judge O'Callaghan. She relied on Safi  and  others
         (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) as authority
         for her ability to renew ground 1. She submitted that  the  failure
         to grant the adjournment meant that the judge  had  to  rely  on  a
         medical report that did not provide the full picture. Material from
         2012 should have been considered by the doctor writing the  current
         report.


      9. Mr Clarke responded. He argued that it was clear from the grant  of
         permission that the  judge  had  rejected  the  argument  that  the
         refusal to adjourn had been an error  and  the  appellant  had  not
         sought to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal. With  respect
         to the other matter, to submitted that in recording the 50-50 risk,
         the judge was referring to what the doctor had  said  and  was  not
         making his own assessment. The judge could not  be  criticized  for
         taking account of the medical evidence submitted by  the  appellant
         himself. Mr Clarke also pointed out  that  all  references  to  any
         balancing exercise emanated from the doctor's report and  were  not
         assessments made  by  the  judge.  Paragraphs  47  and  48  of  the
         detention summarize paragraphs 129-130 of the report. The  findings
         of the judge commence at paragraph 55. It can be clearly seen  that
         the judge correctly refers to the standard of proof  and  the  case
         law (at 60-61) and that he  carefully  assesses  all  the  evidence
         concluding that the appellant would not be at a real risk of  being
         exposed to serious, rapid and  irreversible  decline  resulting  in
         intense suffering. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant  was  not
         pursuing an asylum claim so the  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
         test suggested in the grounds was not applicable. The decision  was
         not perverse. The judge correctly directed himself and  the  appeal
         should be dismissed.


     10. In reply, Ms Nicolaou submitted that her arguments on the  rejected
         ground were made following the guidance in Safi (op  cit).  On  the
         matter of the 50-50 assessment,  although  that  was  the  doctor's
         view, the judge had relied on it thereby  indicating  that  he  had
         applied the balance of probabilities test.


         Findings and Conclusions


     11. I have taken account of  the  submissions  made  and  the  evidence
         before me.  I deal first with Ms Nicolaou's first  complaint.  This
         was that the judge erred in refusing to  grant  an  adjournment  in
         order for the appellant to try and obtain  a  medical  report  from
         2012 which,  it  is  maintained,  would  assist  in  providing  the
         complete picture of  the  appellant's  health  when  read  with  Dr
         Chisholm's report, which was before the Tribunal. I agreed to  hear
         her  submissions  on  this  as  following  Safi,   although   Judge
         O'Callaghan had expressed a view on the merits of  this  point,  he
         had not restricted the upward appeal to the second ground only.


     12. I am not of the view that the submissions  added  anything  to  the
         arguments already made and rejected by two judges. I note that  the
         appeal had been adjourned on two previous occasions to  enable  the
         appellant to obtain a medical report and a country  expert  report.
         In the written request from Ms Nicolaou of 21  August  2018,  there
         was no reference to a need for the elusive 2012 report. If  it  had
         been of such importance, I would have expected a reference to it in
         the four pages of representations made. In any event,  it  was  not
         forthcoming by the date of the hearing before Judge Kimnell and nor
         was there any indication as to when or  if  it  could  be  obtained
         either at that stage or before the Upper Tribunal. As Judge Kimnell
         noted, there was not even any certainty as to how the report  could
         be found or from whom it  could  be  obtained.  Judge  Kimnell  had
         before him a currently prepared medical report  and  there  was  no
         reason at all why he could  not  reliably  look  to  that  expert's
         opinion to assess  the  claim.  On  the  information  before  Judge
         Kimnell, it was entirely open to him to conclude that he  would  be
         able  to  fairly  and  justly  dispose  of  the  appeal   and   to,
         accordingly, refuse the adjournment. I note further, that  contrary
         to the submission that Dr Chisholm did not have  the  first  report
         before  him  when  preparing  his  own  report,  he  certainly  had
         knowledge of its contents as he refers to it several times as  well
         as to other earlier medical reports of the appellant. There  is  no
         merit in the first ground.


     13. The second ground takes issue with the standard of proof applied by
         the judge in assessing  the  article  3  and  8  claim  on  medical
         grounds.  I would state at the outset, that  Judge  Kimnell  is  an
         extremely experienced judge of  many  years'  standing  and  it  is
         difficult to accept that he would make been so careless as to apply
         the wrong standard to a human rights appeal, the likes of which, he
         would have come across very many times before. Indeed, even putting
         aside the fact of his long years of experience, there is nothing in
         the determination which supports the appellant's complaint on  this
         score.


     14. As pointed out by Mr  Clarke,  the  judge's  findings  commence  at
         paragraph 55: "...I begin with  the  findings  of  Dr  Chisholm..."
         Those findings were summarized in the preceding paragraphs  (48-49)
         along with a summary of the other evidence adduced (the appellant's
         criminal offending at 40-43, the OASys report at 44-45 and 47,  the
         skeleton argument at 46, a 2012 report prepared by Dr Woerkom at 47
         and the previous determination of the appellant's asylum appeal  at
         52-53).  The reference  to  "on  the  balance  of  probability"  at
         paragraph 48 is a direct quote from paragraph 110  of  the  medical
         report as is the reference to being  split  50-50  on  whether  the
         appellant  would  require   antipsychotic   medication   or   anti-
         depressants if he did not take drugs. A further  reference  to  "on
         balance" (at paragraph 57  is  taken  from  paragraph  130  of  the
         medical report.


     15. I find that the appellant has therefore cherry-picked phrases  from
         the determination and put them forward as examples of the  standard
         of proof being wrong applied, completely misrepresenting  what  the
         judge said, when, in fact, it is plainly the case  that  the  judge
         was well aware of  the  correct  standard  and  indeed  applied  it
         throughout his assessment. It is wholly unfair to criticise him for
         citing extracts from the appellant's own  evidence  and  I  do  not
         accept that in so doing the judge adopted the standard used  by  Dr
         Chisholm.


     16. The judge considered N [2005] UKHL 31 and AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA
         Civ 64 and confirmed  that  the  test  was  whether  there  was  an
         imminence of intense suffering or death  in  the  receiving  state.
         Relying upon Counsel's own skeleton argument, the judge  cites  the
         issue for determination as "whether substantial grounds  have  been
         shown for believing the appellant although not at imminent risk  of
         dying, would face a real risk of being exposed  to  serious,  rapid
         and irreversible decline resulting in intense suffering"  (at  60).
         Based on the medical evidence, the judge then found that "he  would
         not be exposed to such a risk" (at 61; my  emphasis).   He  further
         concludes at the end of that paragraph that: "I am unable  to  find
         that a lack of access to treatment will lead to  a  serious,  rapid
         and irreversible decline resulting  in  intense  suffering".  I  am
         satisfied that there has been no error of law as  is  suggested  in
         the grounds and in submissions and that the judge was aware of  and
         applied the correct standard of proof.


     17. No challenge is made to the article 8 findings which stand. Nor has
         any issue been taken with the judge's finding that the asylum claim
         was  disposed  of  by  the  previous  appeal  and  that   following
         Devaseelan principles, there was no basis on which to  depart  from
         those findings.


     18. No errors of law have been established. The determination is wholly
         sustainable.


         Decision


     19. The appeal is dismissed.


         Anonymity


     20. I make an order for anonymity.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 17 December 2018




