
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/17145/2018
                                                hu/17153/2018, hu/17152/2018
                                                hu/17151/2018, hu/17148/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 May 2019                        |On 17 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ayda [A]
                                 Mohamed [a]
                                    [M a]
                                   [a a1]
                                   [a a2]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Appiah of Counsel, instructed by Vine Court
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an approved transcript of the extempore judgment given  at  the
    hearing.

 2. For ease of reference I shall refer to the Appellant before  the  Upper
    Tribunal as the Entry Clearance Officer  and  the  Respondents  as  the
    Claimants.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer seeks to challenge the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan ("the judge"), promulgated on  22  February
    2019, by which he allowed the  Claimants'  appeals  against  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer's  decisions  of  29  July  2018,   refusing   their
    respective human rights claims, which in  turn  had  been  made  on  24
    August 2016.

 4. I summarise a history of this matter as it has a direct bearing on  the
    outcome of this challenge.  The Claimants, all of whom  are  stateless,
    made applications for  entry  clearance  (deemed  to  be  human  rights
    claims) in order to join the first Claimant's  husband  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He is a recognised refugee in this country.  As part of  that
    application certain documents were submitted. These included  an  entry
    of marriage certificate  and  live  birth  certificates  for  all  four
    children.

 5. The applications were originally refused by the Entry Clearance Officer
    on 19 October 2016.  It was asserted that the documents mentioned above
    were "not genuine" and DVR reports were  provided  in  support  of  the
    allegation.  Paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules  ("the  Rules")
    was relied on.

 6. The Claimants appealed against that original refusal and  their  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson. Having considered the
    evidence before him, including the documentary evidence  and  the  DVRs
    provided by the Entry Clearance Officer, Judge Robertson concluded that
    the documents in questions were genuine and reliable and that the Entry
    Clearance Officer had failed to make out his allegation  of  deception.
    The appeals were duly allowed.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  did  not
    challenge Judge Robertson's decision nor was that decision  implemented
    by way of granting entry clearance to the Claimants.

 7. Some time passed and the Entry Clearance Officer  then  re-refused  the
    Claimants'  original  applications.   It  was  said  that   "new"   and
    "specific"  DVRs  had  been  obtained  in  relation  to  the  documents
    submitted with the original application. Paragraph 320(7A) of the Rules
    was once more relied upon.  The Claimants then appealed and the  matter
    came before Judge O'Hagan on 18 February 2019.

 8. There was no appearance on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer at the
    hearing before the judge.  The judge  noted  that  there  had  been  no
    application made in advance or indeed on the  day  of  the  hearing  to
    adjourn the appeal.  He noted that there was no appeal bundle from  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and that the DVRs referred  to  in  the  latest
    refusal letter had not been provided.  There had  been  no  explanation
    for the non-production of what would have appeared  to  have  been  the
    core evidence in the case against the Claimants.

 9. The judge proceeded to  determine  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  a
    representative for the Entry Clearance Officer.

10. He allowed  the  appeals  essentially  on  the  basis  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had failed to provide relevant evidence to  make  out
    the serious allegations against the Claimants and on the basis that the
    well-known principles in Devaseelan  applied,  with  reference  to  the
    decision of Judge Robertson.

11. The Entry Clearance Officer applied for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  His grounds are concise and narrow in focus.   It  was
    said that the judge had materially erred in law by failing  to  adjourn
    the hearing in order to allow for a further opportunity to produce  the
    relevant evidence (that being the "new"  DVRs).    The  grounds  assert
    that the judge had failed  to  expressly  consider  his  discretion  to
    proceed and whether or not it was in the interests of justice to do  so
    given the absence of a representative for the Entry Clearance Officer.

12. In a detailed grant of  permission  dated  26  March  2019,  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Callaghan  listed  the  omissions  on  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's part and confirmed that having checked the  Tribunal's  files
    there was no record of an adjournment application ever having been made
    prior  to  or  on  the  day  of   the   hearing   before   the   judge.
    Notwithstanding that history, Judge O'Callaghan deemed it arguable that
    the judge had failed to give any or any adequate consideration  to  the
    discretionary  power  under  rule  28  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    Procedure Rules.

13. In advance of the hearing, Ms Isherwood had confirmed  by  way  of  two
    email dated 3 May 2019 that she sought permission for the "new" DVRs to
    be admitted in evidence and that this evidence not be disclosed to  the
    Claimant or  their  representatives  (apparently  because  the  reports
    contained contact details of the source of relevant information).



The hearing before me

14. I indicated to Ms Isherwood at the outset that in light of the narrowly-
    drawn grounds  of  appeal,  the  DVRs  would  only  potentially  become
    relevant if I were to find that the judge had materially erred in  law.
    She did not demur from this.

15. Ms Isherwood relied on the  grounds  of  appeal.   She  emphasised  the
    importance of the allegation being made against the Claimants  and  the
    fact that the refusal letter had expressly confirmed that there was new
    evidence in the form of DVRs which were of great significance  in  this
    case.  Ms Isherwood emphasised the judge's failure to  have  considered
    the interests of justice.

16. Mr Appiah noted the failure of the Entry Clearance Officer to have made
    any adjournment application.  He submitted that the judge had,  in  all
    the circumstances, acted fairly.

17. In reply Ms Isherwood noted that the Claimants  and  indeed  the  judge
    would have been on notice of the existence of the new DVRs as this  was
    expressly pointed out in the refusal letter.



Error of law decision

18. I conclude that there are no material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  I say this for the following reasons.

19. Without wishing to unnecessarily labour the point, the Entry  Clearance
    Officer's conduct during the course of the  appellate  proceedings  has
    been, to put it somewhat mildly, extremely poor.

20. First, he declined to challenge the decision of Judge Robertson.

21. Second, he failed to implement  Judge  Robertson's  decision,  choosing
    instead to apparently obtain what  has  been  described  as  "new"  and
    "specific" DVRs relating to the very same documents that had previously
    been found to be genuine and reliable by Judge Robertson.

22. Third, having  re-refused  the  Claimants'  original  applications  and
    relying solely on the more recently obtained DVRs, the Entry  Clearance
    Officer then failed to  produce  any  appeal  bundle  contrary  to  the
    directions sent out by the First-tier Tribunal.

23. Fourth, the DVRs themselves were never produced, even in redacted form.
     There had never been any explanation as to why the DVRs had  not  been
    provided, as to why they could not be provided  in  redacted  form,  or
    whether a procedure under section 108 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 could not  have  been  undertaken.   There  was  in
    effect complete silence on what was clearly the  cornerstone  of  their
    case against the Claimants.

24. Fifth, I am fully satisfied that there had been no application  for  an
    adjournment in advance of the hearing before the judge.  There  was  no
    application on the day of the hearing itself  (although  there  was  no
    Presenting Officer on the day it  would  have  been  possible  for  the
    Presenting Officer's Unit to have made such an application  given  that
    they clearly had notice of the hearing itself).

25. In light of all of this it would  seem  somewhat  surprising  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer then complained that the judge  had  failed  of
    his own volition to have simply adjourned the case.

26. I take into account the fact that a judge can  exercise  discretion  to
    adjourn  of  their  own  volition,  but  in  view  of  the   particular
    circumstances of this case, as accurately set out by the judge in para.
    8 of his decision, I conclude that his decision to proceed was entirely
    fair and justified.  In saying this, I emphasise  that  the  issues  of
    fairness and the interests of justice in respect of rules 2 and  28  of
    the Procedure Rules are always touchstones when considering proceedings
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

27. Fairness of course applies to both parties.  In this case, on  the  one
    hand, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  failed  to  do  anything  to
    prosecute his case against the Claimants in respect of the very serious
    allegations made against them.  On the other hand, the  Claimants,  who
    had already waited some nine months for their appeal to be heard by the
    First-tier Tribunal, had attended and were ready to proceed.

28. In respect of the "interests of justice" limb  under  rule  28,  it  is
    right that matters concerning allegations of  the  obtaining  of  false
    documents is of serious concern, in any particular case, and on a wider
    basis as well.  However, it is clearly also in the interests of justice
    to deal with cases efficiently and effectively,  by  reference  to  the
    overriding objective, and of course the duty on both parties to  assist
    the Tribunal.  This is a case in which, in my view, the Entry Clearance
    Officer has conspicuously failed to assist the Tribunal and has  failed
    to adduce evidence underpinning the core allegation  made  against  the
    other party.

29. I would accept that the judge has not referred in terms to rules 2  and
    28 of the Procedure Rules. However, with reference to the clear factual
    matrix which was before him and bearing in mind what he says  at  para.
    8, in my view what the judge goes on to say in para.  9  is  more  than
    enough to show that he at least implicitly considered whether it  would
    be right to proceed with the appeal in the absence of a  representative
    for the Entry Clearance Officer.  Indeed, on the facts before him it is
    rather difficult to see that he could have  done  anything  else  other
    than proceed to determine the appeals given the inaction of the  absent
    party up until and at the date of the hearing before him.

30. I would add a final point.  The  grounds  assert  that  the  judge  had
    effectively "utilised the decision" (which  I  assume  relates  to  the
    judge's decision) to "punish" the Entry Clearance Officer.  In my  view
    that is an entirely misconceived comment.  The judge was clearly deeply
    dissatisfied with the  conduct  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and
    expressed this view in robust terms (see para.  10  of  his  decision).
    However, there was nothing in my view to indicate that he  was  in  any
    way punishing the losing side.  What he was doing, it seems to me,  was
    simply reflecting the factual history of the case and nothing more.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law and it shall stand.

It follows that the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                  Date: 15 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
