
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/17701/2016
                                 HU/18850/2016, HU/18856/2016, HU/18859/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 April 2018                              |On 8 May 2018                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mrs S K (first Appellant)
                          Mr G S (second Appellant)
                         Miss A K (third Appellant)
                        Master G S (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Rehman, legal representative from Mayfair
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Therefore the Secretary of State is the Respondent and Mrs  K
    and her family members are once more the Appellants.

 2. This is a challenge by the Respondent to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  (the  judge),  promulgated   on   1
    September 2017, in which she allowed the Appellants' appeals  on  human
    rights  grounds.   Those  appeals  had  in  turn   been   against   the
    Respondent's decision of 6 July 2016, refusing their  respective  human
    rights claims.

 3. Although there is  a  fairly  lengthy  immigration  history,  the  last
    applications made by the Appellants was in February 2015.   These  were
    deemed to be human rights claims.

 4. The first two Appellants are husband and wife, and they are the parents
    of the third and fourth Appellants.  The third Appellant  was  born  in
    2004 and came to this country in early 2010.  The fourth Appellant  was
    born in the United Kingdom in 2012.

The judge's decision

 5. Having considered the circumstances of the  first,  second  and  fourth
    Appellants the judge concludes that they could not satisfy any  of  the
    relevant Article 8-related Rules [38-43].   Viewed  in  isolation,  the
    judge also concludes that none of them can succeed in their  Article  8
    claims on a wider basis  [54-57  and  59].   However  she  regards  the
    position of the third Appellant as being significantly  different  from
    her other family members.  In light of her age and time spent  in  this
    country (seven years and seven months as at the date  of  hearing)  the
    judge concludes that the relevant Immigration Rules were satisfied  [44
    and 45] and that her best interests lay in remaining  in  this  country
    [64]. As a result of this the judge concluded that all of  the  appeals
    should succeed on human  rights  grounds  and  "under  the  Immigration
    Rules".

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The Respondent's grounds are succinct.  It is said that the  judge  was
    wrong to have found that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules  was
    satisfied because the third Appellant was under the  age  of  eighteen.
    It is also said that there was inadequate reasoning as to why the other
    appeals were allowed. Finally it is  said  that  the  judge  failed  to
    conduct an adequate proportionality assessment, having regard to  wider
    public interest factors.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell
    on 20 February 2018.

The hearing before me

 8. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge erred in two basic ways.  First, none
    of the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1) could  be  met  by  the  third
    Appellant because she was under eighteen as at the  date  of  the  last
    application and, as at the same date, she had not been in this  country
    for the requisite seven years.  Second, the judge had failed to conduct
    a reasonableness assessment as  required  in  light  of  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 9. In response, Mr Rehman eventually accepted that paragraph 276ADE  could
    not apply to the third Appellant for the reasons set out by  Mr  Tufan.
    However, he submitted that the judge had in fact looked at wider public
    interest issues at [52-59] and had then looked at the third Appellant's
    circumstances outside of the Rules.   There  was  a  reference  to  the
    public interest in [57].  He submitted  that  there  were  no  material
    errors in the judge's decision.

10. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had only paid "lip service"
    to the public interest in [57] and that more was required.

11. At the end of the submissions I asked  the  representatives  for  their
    views as to what should happen  if  I  concluded  there  were  material
    errors of law.  Both representatives initially stated that I could  and
    should remake the decision based on the evidence now before me.

12. Mr Rehman relied on section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Mr Tufan asked  me  to  consider  MA  (Pakistan),  AM
    (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180 and also Treebohowan No.2.

13. At this stage Mr Rehman raised a new point, namely that an  application
    has apparently  been  made  on  behalf  of  the  fourth  Appellant  for
    registration as a British citizen under paragraph 3 of  schedule  2  to
    the British Nationality Act 1981 (that the child was stateless and  has
    been in the United Kingdom for more than five years).  He  referred  me
    to the decision of the Administrative Court in  MK  [2017]  EWHC  1365.
    Although this application was outstanding before the Respondent it  was
    very likely that the fourth Appellant would be registered as a  British
    citizen in due course.  He suggested that this of itself was a relevant
    factor in any reasonableness assessment that I may conduct.

14. In the end he did not ask me to adjourn a remaking decision until  that
    application has been decided.  I indicated that I  would  consider  the
    best course of action to take.  I then reserved my decision on error of
    law.

Decision on error of law

15. I conclude that the judge has erred in law  in  certain  respects  but,
    having found this to be so and wit reference to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007,  I  do  not  exercise  my
    discretion to set her decision aside. This conclusion is based  on  the
    following.

16. It is an indisputable fact that as at the  date  of  the  human  rights
    claims in February 2015 the third Appellant was under eighteen and  had
    not been in this country for seven years. Therefore  neither  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) or (vi) could have applied.  To this extent the judge was
    wrong in concluding otherwise.

17. In turning to a consideration of Article 8 outside the context  of  the
    relevant Rules, the judge was of course obliged to  consider  at  least
    the mandatory factors set out under section 117B of the 2002  Act.   In
    particular, as the third Appellant was clearly a qualifying  child  for
    the purposes of section 117B(6), a  balancing  exercise  was  required,
    comprising of a best interests assessment, together with  wider  public
    interest  considerations  under  section  117B(1)-(5).  A  very   brief
    reference is made to these provisions in [24] where the judge sets  out
    the submissions of the Presenting Officer.  Somewhat unfortunately,  no
    further reference is made later on in the decision  when  it  comes  to
    what is described  as  the  "assessment  of  proportionality"  at  [53]
    onwards. There is also no specific reference to MA (Pakistan)  and  the
    reasonableness test. It appears as  though  the  judge  has  failed  to
    approach a core issue in the appeals in a legally correct manner. There
    is, on the face of it, an error here too.

18. However, substance is almost always more important than form.  For  the
    reasons set out below, there are a number of factors which, when viewed
    cumulatively and realistically, strongly point towards  the  conclusion
    that the judge was fully entitled to find that  the  Appellants  should
    succeed on Article 8 grounds, notwithstanding the errors made.

19. The judge correctly noted that the third Appellant had arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom aged five, and had then spent  important  years  of  her
    life here, placing her in the category of children who  are  likely  to
    have formed stronger ties in this country than  those  who  were  still
    only very young [60]. This was a significant factor.

20. The  error  relating  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)  makes  little  material
    difference to the substance of the third Appellant's  case  as  at  the
    date of the hearing because of the engagement  of  section  117B(6)(a),
    with reference to section 117D(1) (she being a qualifying child).

21. There has been no challenge to the judge's factual  findings,  nor  has
    any of the evidence  before  her  been  called  into  question  by  the
    Respondent. This evidence  included  a  very  supportive  psychological
    report on the third Appellant, together with letters  from  her  school
    and other family members in the United Kingdom. Having read all of this
    material for myself, it  is  quite  clear  that  the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to place significant weight upon this (as she clearly did)  at
    [60-63]. In summary, the evidence indicated  that  departure  from  the
    United Kingdom at that stage of her life would be  detrimental  to  the
    third Appellant's emotional, educational and mental wellbeing. There is
    also a finding that the third Appellant has very close bonds  with  her
    grandparents in this country [44] and [60].

22. It clearly follows that the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    third Appellant's best interests lay in remaining with her  family  and
    in the United Kingdom [64].

23. Bringing the preceding factors together, and bearing in mind the recent
    useful reminder by the President at [33] of MT  and  ET  (child's  best
    interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC), "powerful
    reasons" were required to show that the third Appellant should have  to
    leave this country.

24. Did such "powerful reasons" exist here? What is of  note  is  the  fact
    that the judge did actually consider  relevant  wider  public  interest
    factors, albeit not perhaps  in  a  particularly  well-structured  form
    (i.e. within a methodical reasonableness assessment).  The  immigration
    history and other circumstances of the first and second Appellants  are
    dealt with in [54-56]. The history is not, on  any  view,  particularly
    poor. The judge found the parents to be  credible,  and  accepted  that
    "every effort" had been made to regularise the family's status  in  the
    United Kingdom [56].

25. Importantly, specific reference  is  made  to  the  overarching  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control at [57]. In my  view,  this
    was more than mere "lip service" as suggested by Mr  Tufan.  The  judge
    states that notwithstanding her favourable view  of  the  parents,  the
    significance of the public interest was undiminished.

26. The judge has  considered  the  issue  of  the  ability  of  the  third
    Appellant to re-integrate into Indian society [44]. This has to be seen
    in the context of the manifestly strong bonds established in the United
    Kingdom (see above).

27. Even factoring in the  inability  of  the  Appellants  to  satisfy  the
    relevant Rules and leaving out  of  account  the  application  made  on
    behalf of the fourth Appellant  (which  I  accept  has  occurred),  the
    combination of the evidence, the judge's findings and conclusions,  and
    the current legal landscape, leads me to  the  ultimate  view  set  out
    earlier. Whilst there are errors in the decision, they do  not  warrant
    setting it aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of  law.   However,
with reference to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
Act 2007, I do not set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands  in  respect  of  all  four
appeals.

This has the effect that the Respondent's  decisions  of  6  July  2016  are
unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 1 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have upheld  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
appeals, I have considered making a fee award and have decided  to  make  no
fee awards. I agree with  what  the  First-tier  Tribunal  said  about  this
issue: important evidence had only been provided  for  the  appeals  and  no
awards are appropriate.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 1 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

