
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17970/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2019                 |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    S R A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S A Salam of Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  a  consequence  of
    remittal from the Court of Appeal following a challenge to the decision
    of a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal who found no error  of  law  in
    the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's decision of 8 July  2016  refusing  him
    further leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  terms  of  the
    remittal are that  the  hearing  is  limited  to  determining  how  the
    respondent's current policy in relation to qualifying children  affects
    the proportionality exercise.

2.   The case is one in which the appellant sought leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of family and private life.

3.   The appellant married his wife in Bangladesh in June  2008.   His  wife
    entered the United Kingdom in 2012 and became a British citizen by  way
    of the right of abode.  Their son was born in the United Kingdom on  10
    May 2016 and like his mother is a British citizen.  It seems  that  the
    appellant had joined his wife in the United Kingdom on a spouse visa on
    16 July 2013.

4.   The appellant sought to extend his leave to remain  under  the  partner
    route, but his application was refused on the basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that he had taken a TOEIC test himself, and as  a  consequence
    it was concluded that he could not meet the suitability requirements of
    Appendix FM of HC 395.

5.   The judge upheld the refusal on the grounds of suitability,  concluding
    that the respondent had adduced sufficient evidence to raise the  issue
    of  fraud  with  no  innocent  explanation  so  that  the   appellant's
    explanation should be rejected for reasons set out in the judgment.  As
    a consequence, because the appellant had utilised deception he did  not
    qualify for leave to remain under either the five or ten  year  partner
    route.

6.   The judge noted in findings in respect of Article 8 that the  appellant
    is the father of a British citizen child.  It was also noted  that  the
    appellant's evidence was that he undertook the majority of  the  duties
    of caring for his son and wife.  His wife's self-concerns related to  a
    diagnosis of polio she had contracted within a month of her birth.   It
    affected one of her legs and she was receiving treatment for  it.   The
    judge noted that there was no objective evidence presented  to  suggest
    that she would not be able to access  similar  medical  treatment  upon
    return if she decided to accompany her husband to Bangladesh.  She  had
    been aware there was no guarantee her husband would be allowed to enter
    the United Kingdom and remain for  an  indefinite  period.   The  claim
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules because of the failure to
    satisfy the suitability requirement, and the judge in her consideration
    of proportionality  concluded  that  the  decision  was  proportionate,
    taking into account a number of authorities  and  the  evidence  before
    her.  She did not consider that the  submission  that  the  appellant's
    wife would not be able to cope with regard to  a  temporary  separation
    was supported by objective evidence.  She had  family  members  in  the
    United Kingdom, the judge found, with whom she had  contact.   She  did
    not consider it to be unreasonable to expect the British child and  his
    mother to accompany the appellant to Bangladesh.  She noted  that  they
    all speak Bengali and both parents were fully familiar with  the  local
    traditions and customs, having both been born in Bangladesh.  There was
    no evidence to suggest it would be unreasonable to expect the child  to
    return with his parents if that was the decision they made.

7.   As noted above, the matter comes  back  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  a
    consequence  of  the  judge's  failure  to  take   into   account   the
    respondent's current policy in relation to  qualifying  children.   The
    reference to qualifying children comes  from  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is said in that  sub-
    section that in the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
    the public interest does not require the  person's  removal  where  the
    person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  A qualifying child is, for the  purposes  of
    this case, a child who is a British citizen.  I should also  note  that
    it is accepted that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with his child.  The question is therefore the one set out
    at section 117B(6)(b) as to whether  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom, and with  regard  to  the
    specific issue which was the subject of the remittal in this case,  how
    that is informed by the Secretary of State's current policy.

8.   Mr Salam has set out helpfully in his grounds of  appeal  the  relevant
    guidance, at paragraph 22(c) of the grounds.  This states as follows:

         "A child is a qualifying child if they are a British child who  has
         an automatic right of abode in the UK, to  live  here  without  any
         immigration restrictions as a result of their citizenship, or a non-
         British citizen child, who has lived in the  UK  for  a  continuous
         period of at least the seven years immediately preceding  the  date
         of application, which recognises that over time children  start  to
         put down roots and to integrate into life in the UK.  The  starting
         point is that we would not normally expect a  qualifying  child  to
         leave the UK.

         It is normally in a child's best interest for the whole  family  to
         remain together, which means if the child is not expected to leave,
         then the parent or parents or primary carer of the child will  also
         not be expected to leave the UK.  In the case law of KO and  Others
         [2018] UKSC 53, with particular reference to the case  of  NS  (Sri
         Lanka), the Supreme Court found  that  'reasonableness'  is  to  be
         considered in the real world  context  in  which  the  child  finds
         themselves.  The parents' immigration status is a relevant fact  to
         establish that context.  The  determination  sets  out  that  if  a
         child's parents are both expected to leave the  UK,  the  child  is
         normally expected to leave with them, unless there is evidence that
         it would not be reasonable.

         There  may  be  some  specific  circumstances  where  it  would  be
         reasonable to either expect the qualifying child to  leave  the  UK
         with the parent(s) or primary carer or for the parent(s) or primary
         carer to leave the UK and for the child to stay.  In deciding  such
         cases, the decision maker must consider the best interests  of  the
         child and the facts  relating  to  the  family  as  a  whole.   The
         decision maker should also consider any specific issues  raised  by
         the family or by, or on behalf of the child (or other  children  in
         the family)."

9.   In his submissions Mr Salam argued that little was said in  the  policy
    about British children, in contrast to what had been said  in  previous
    policies.  He made the point that the particular cases considered in KO
    did not involve the scenario in this case of a British child  and  non-
    deportation case.  In MA (Pakistan)  it  had  been  said  that  it  was
    relatively rare to expect a British child to leave the United  Kingdom.
    The Home Office said it would  be  relatively  rare  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect a British child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    There was no policy to say it was frequently reasonable for  a  British
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

10.  He also made the point concerning  the  appellant's  wife's  disability
    and the fact that she was in receipt of disability  allowance  and  the
    appellant received the carer's allowance in respect of her.   His  role
    therefore was in helping both of  them  and  he  was  their  source  of
    support, so even if the child were not British or  had  not  had  seven
    years in the United Kingdom it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to remain in the United Kingdom without the father.

11.  Reference was also made to the decision of the  Grand  Chamber  of  the
    CJEU in Chavez-Vilchez C153/15, where it was said  that  if  the  other
    parent had a right to live, was willing and able to care for the  child
    in the host state then they should  not  be  removed  if  there  was  a
    relationship,  a  dependency  or  other  emotional  factors,  and  this
    expanded beyond the primary carer  situation  considered  in  Zambrano.
    The family should not be separated.  It was not  in  the  child's  best
    interests.

12.  In his submissions Mr Walker said it was clear  that  in  his  decision
    the  judge  had  not  fully  considered  the  circumstances  about  the
    marriage, given the mother's disabilities, but it was still argued that
    the  appellant  had  committed  an  offence   which   could   undermine
    immigration control, with regard to the ETS issue, but it was  conceded
    that the full aspects of the family situation had not been  considered.
    With regard to what view the  respondent  took  on  reasonableness,  he
    referred to the case  law  quoted  by  Mr  Salam,  in  fact  they  were
    deportation cases, and the only aspect was the ETS point and there  was
    nothing in the bundle about the reasonableness  of  a  wife  and  child
    accompanying the appellant to Bangladesh and it  did  not  include  the
    information about the medical concerns.  If the appellant had been  and
    was her carer and she received disability allowance, then clearly  that
    aspect of her difficulties had  been  assessed  by  another  Government
    department.

13.  By way of reply Mr Salam made the point that the  refusal  was  on  the
    basis of suitability and it was not a question of a criminal offence or
    a conviction.  It was not very serious, taken in context.   The  matter
    had to be balanced.  Section 117B contained a complete policy  in  sub-
    section (6).  Criminality was addressed in section  117C.   Criminality
    and suitability were only  relevant  where  deportation  was  involved.
    There were factors not present here  such  as  cheating  and  deception
    which were  issues  from  paragraph  320(11).   The  appellant  had  no
    criminal  convictions  and  it  was  a  balancing   exercise   in   the
    proportionality evaluation.

14.  I reserved my decision.

15.  The missing element from the judge's  decision  in  this  case  was  an
    evaluation of the situation in the context of the current policy of the
    Secretary of State.  I have set out what is now the policy  above.   It
    is clear  under  the  policy  that  the  starting  point  is  that  the
    respondent would not normally expect a qualifying  child  such  as  the
    appellant's child in this case to leave the United Kingdom, but that is
    qualified to a degree in the subsequent paragraph.  There was in fact a
    detailed consideration by  the  judge  of  reasonableness,  other  than
    consideration of the policy, of the child and his mother  to  accompany
    the appellant to Bangladesh, as set out at paragraph 53 of the  judge's
    decision which I have set out elements of above.  She  noted  the  fact
    that they all speak Bengali, that the parents were born in  Bangladesh,
    the appellant's wife having come to the United Kingdom in 2012  and  he
    in 2013.  She considered it was unarguable to  suggest  that  both  had
    left all ties in Bangladesh.   They  had  lived  with  the  appellant's
    mother before coming to the United Kingdom  and  had  frequent  contact
    with family members in Bangladesh, the appellant speaking to his mother
    at least twice weekly.  She also noted that the appellant's son has  no
    health concerns and there was  no  evidence  to  suggest  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect him to return with his parents if that were  the
    decision his parents reached.

16.  There  is  nothing  in  the  respondent's  current  policy  which  goes
    contrary to this.  The starting point is no more than a starting point,
    and the judge gave full consideration, a consideration which I endorse,
    to the issue of reasonableness in this case.   No  fresh  evidence  has
    been adduced as to the reasonableness issue.  The appellant's wife  was
    treated for polio while she  was  in  Bangladesh,  and  I  endorse  the
    judge's comment that there  was  no  objective  evidence  presented  to
    suggest that she would not be  able  to  access  similar  treatment  on
    return in Bangladesh.  The fact that the appellant carries out  various
    responsibilities for his son and wife is something that could  just  as
    easily be carried on in Bangladesh, in particular bearing in  mind  the
    clear closeness they have to the family there and  the  support  it  is
    reasonable to expect from them.  The couple have spent  most  of  their
    lives in Bangladesh, and the family all speak Bengali.  In my  view  it
    has not been shown that it would not be reasonable to expect the  child
    to leave the United Kingdom with his parents.

Notice of Decision

17.  Accordingly I find that the proportionality balance falls in favour  of
    the public interest in removal in this case, and  as  a  consequence  I
    find that the human rights claim falls to be dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 08 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 08 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

