
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17558/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |On 9 September 2020                  |
|via Skype for Business and BT Meetme |                                     |
|On 1 September 2020                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                SAFEER AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Bazini, instructed by Gulbenkian Andonian,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on the 10 January 1983 and is a male citizen  of
    Pakistan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State refusing his application  for  settlement  under
    the  10  years  residence  rule.   The   First-tier   Tribunal   (Judge
    Nightingale), in a decision promulgated on 16 December 2019,  dismissed
    the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Mr McVeety, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State  at  the  initial
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal, told me that the Secretary of State  did
    not oppose the appeal and further stated that the  decision  should  be
    remade allowing the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds (Article
    8 ECHR). I shall, therefore, be brief.

 3. Both parties agree that the  appellant  has  enjoyed  lawful  residence
    throughout a 10 year period save for a gap in leave which  occurred  in
    2010-2011. The first ground of appeal concerns the argument  that,  but
    for the operation of the respondent's unlawful Certificate of  Approval
    of Marriage scheme (hereafter COA), there would have been no gap as the
    appellant would have married and applied for further  leave  to  remain
    leave in time. At [47], the judge wrote that,  'if  the  appellant  had
    married in December 2009, on his  own  evidence  he  would  have  still
    waited for 3-4 months to make this application [for  further  leave  to
    remain]...it is therefore not  entirely  clear  that  this  application
    would have been made before the expiry of, or within  28  days  of  the
    expiry of, his leave under Section 3C.' The appellant had been approved
    for marriage on 19 October 2010 and had married promptly thereafter. He
    submitted an application for leave  on  19  February  2011,  exactly  4
    months later. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted as  from  23
    April 2010; 28 days from that date would have given him  until  21  May
    2010 to make his application to the respondent. It is  the  appellant's
    case (which the respondent now accepts) that,  even  allowing  for  the
    full 4 month period and calculating from late 2009, the appellant would
    have made his application in time. As a matter  of  simply  arithmetic,
    both parties agree that the judge's concluding remark at [47], that  is
    'not entirely clear' that the application would have been made in time,
    was incorrect.

 4. The second ground of appeal concerns the maintenance and  accommodation
    requirements under the immigration rules. At [48], the judge found that
    'even assuming that his application been made in time' the evidence did
    not establish that the appellant's application  on  the  basis  of  his
    marriage would have been successful as it was not clear that  he  would
    have  been  able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  for  maintenance  and
    accommodation. The application was granted eventually in  October  2011
    but the judge found that there was insufficient evidence to show  that,
    some 12 months earlier, success would have been 'most  likely'  as  the
    appellant submitted. The parties now accept that that  finding  is  not
    sound. The appellant's oral evidence had been that his wife had enjoyed
    a secure tenancy with Camden Council for many  years.  There  was  also
    evidence before the judge to show that the appellant's wife was a  very
    successful musician and teacher with a  stable  income.  Moreover,  the
    question of maintenance and accommodation had not  been  argued  before
    the First-tier Tribunal; there had been a Case Management Review  prior
    to the hearing before Judge Nightingale at  which  the  respondent  had
    been directed to file and serve a supplementary refusal letter  dealing
    with maintenance and accommodation should she wish to put those matters
    at issue in the appeal. No such supplementary refusal letter  had  been
    produced. Not surprisingly, the appellant  contends  that  the  judge's
    findings on this issue amount to a procedural irregularity and that, in
    any event, there had been adequate evidence before the  judge  to  show
    that maintenance and accommodation requirements would  have  been  met.
    That submission is now accepted, in full, by the respondent.

 5. Finally, at [50], the judge wrote:

         "I am fully  satisfied  that  the  appellant  did  not  inform  the
         respondent at the basis of his leave to remain  attended  and  that
         his marriage had ceased to subsist in  mid-2012.  He  continued  to
         remain in the United Kingdom after mid-2012 with leave which he was
         no  longer  entitled  and,  but  for  his  failure  to  inform  the
         respondent of the marriage breakdown, that leave was highly  likely
         to have been revoked. Had he been honest with  the  respondent  and
         informed her that his marriage had ended, I find it  highly  likely
         his leave would have been revoked and any further  appeals  against
         such a decision ended far earlier than October 2016. Even if, which
         I do not find has been established on balance, the appellant  would
         have had continuous leave over the  2010/2011  period,  that  leave
         would, but his dishonesty, as found by Judge Plumptre,  have  ended
         prior to October 2016."

    Judge Plumptre had dismissed an earlier appeal by the appellant and had
    stated [19]: 'I find that the  application  for  further  discretionary
    leave to remain was made without informing  the  Home  Office  that  is
    marriage had broken down that it was not until the Home Office wrote  a
    letter dated 12 January 2015 requesting evidence of the continuance  of
    the marriage that the first time the Home Office was informed that  the
    marriage had broken down.' Mr Bazini, who appeared for the appellant at
    the Upper Tribunal initial hearing, submitted that, in the  absence  of
    any relevant policy or direct notification  to  the  appellant  by  the
    respondent that he should inform her if his marriage  did  break  down,
    the appellant was under no duty in law to inform the Secretary of State
    that he was no longer married. Obviously, if, following the termination
    of his marriage, the appellant had applied for  further  leave  on  the
    basis of  marriage  then  he  would  prima  facie  have  perpetrated  a
    dishonest act. That was not the case with the  present  appellant  who,
    though remaining silent as regards the breakdown of his  marriage,  had
    made his most recent  application  for  leave  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence, not marriage. What was merely an observation in the decision
    of Judge Plumptre had at [50] of Judge Nightingale's decision become  a
    firm finding of dishonesty justifying  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal.
    However, the Judge Nightingale has fallen into  legal  error,  as  both
    parties now acknowledge. The appellant had never been told in terms  by
    the respondent that he should notify her should his marriage break down
    and there had been at the time no rule or policy obliging the appellant
    to notify the Secretary of State. In those circumstances, whilst it  is
    perhaps arguable that a moral duty to inform arose, there had  been  no
    dishonesty on the part of the appellant. The  appellant  had  not  been
    dishonest by failing to notify the Secretary of State either  when  his
    marriage broke down or when he applied for further leave to  remain  on
    the basis of long residence; whether a failure to disclose the marriage
    breakdown at the time the appellant made his long residence application
    amounted to a material non-disclosure (see paragraph 322(1)(A)) was not
    addressed by the representatives on this occasion. Mr Bazini did submit
    (correctly, in  my  view)  that  the  judge's  finding  that,  had  the
    Secretary of State been notified of the termination of the marriage, it
    was 'highly likely' that the appellant's leave would have been  revoked
    was speculative; the judge  had  been  referred  to  no  evidence  (eg.
    statistics, research etc) capable of supporting it.

 6. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
    Secretary of State  dated  10  August  2018  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  I  remade  the
    decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 10 August  2018  is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).




    Signed   Date 2 September 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


