
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17347/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th December 2017                         |On 16th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 NADEEM [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal of Counsel instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Telford
    made following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 31st March 2017.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the UK on 30th June
    2008 and claimed asylum.  He  was  refused  and  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 17th February 2009.

 3. His former wife came to the UK with him but only lived with him for   a
    very short period of time.  She removed herself from the appellant with
    the children and when he followed her to her new home she chose to move
    again to avoid him and did not tell him where  she  lived.   Relatively
    recently, the appellant made contact with her and  the  four  children,
    who were born in 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008.  He sought and  obtained  a
    contact order on 11th December 2015 allowing him  unsupervised  contact
    from 15th January 2016 on Fridays from 5 till 9, and on Saturdays  from
    10 till 5.

 4. On 11th March 2016 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK
    under the ten year parent route on the basis of his family and  private
    life in the UK, on health grounds and outside the Rules on the basis of
    exceptional circumstances.  He was refused on 4th July 2016 and it  was
    this refusal which was the subject of the appeal before the Immigration
    Judge.

 5. The judge formed a very negative view of the appellant.  He  found  him
    to be an incredible witness overall and did not accept his word that he
    was either now or in the future willing, able or capable of  exercising
    contact rights with the children.

 6. He wrote:

         "I find that the order as made is one in which the court  has  been
         willing to test the water so to speak when a father turns up out of
         the blue as the appellant has done but it is by no means  something
         settled in stone".

    The judge concluded that it was no coincidence that the  appellant  had
    made his application only in the last few months after  making  contact
    with the mother of the children.  In his view he could  have  contacted
    them much earlier had he been interested in  their  welfare,  he  could
    have been in touch through his brother.

 7. The judge concluded:

         "The best interests of the children are frankly not served  by  him
         being in the UK in order for him to simply have contact  or  access
         which is allowed under the Family Court order.  The actual practice
         here is as I find it not one of real benefit to the children".

 8. The judge observed that the  appellant  had  little  knowledge  of  the
    children's daily lives and their schooling.  He assessed  the  evidence
    with which he had been provided, namely photographs  and  letters,  and
    took into account the very poor record that the appellant had with  his
    family. There was no merit in the appellant's claim that he ought to be
    allowed to remain in the UK  on  medical  grounds.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal.



The Grounds of Application

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the ground that the  judge
    had failed to place any weight on the evidence from the  children  that
    they were overjoyed to have their father back in their lives.   He  had
    acted against the principles of family law which makes no criticism  of
    periods of non-contact between an absent parent and  his/her  children,
    and had failed to consider that in  granting  a  final  order  for  the
    father to spend regular unsupervised time with his children the  Family
    Court had carried out safeguarding checks and deemed the father to pose
    no threat to their welfare.  In essence, the judge had indicated highly
    subjective opinions which raised issues as to his impartiality and  had
    failed to properly assess the positive evidence from the  children  and
    the impact upon them if the appellant were required to leave the UK.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused but granted,  upon  renewal,
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 9th October 2017.

Submissions

11. Ms Vidal relied on her grounds and submitted that the judge  had  erred
    in failing to separate his adverse feelings for the appellant from  the
    evidence which was actually before him.  There was substantial evidence
    from the children, both from the letters and the numerous  photographs,
    that they were delighted to have their father back in their  lives  and
    looking forward to a future in which he might play a part.  The  eldest
    child in particular, as  could  be  seen  from  his  demeanour  in  the
    photographs, was particularly attached to his father.  Furthermore, the
    judge had erred in his approach  to  the  order  of  the  Family  Court
    failing to realise that a great deal  of  work  would  have  been  done
    before the  court  would  have  agreed  to  such  regular  unsupervised
    contact.

12. Mr Duffy defended the determination and submitted that  simply  because
    the appellant had obtained  a  contact  order  did  not  mean  that  he
    intended to take an effective role in his  children's  lives.   It  was
    open to the judge to conclude that he did not, on the  evidence  before
    him, and the grounds amounted to a mere disagreement with the decision.

Findings and Conclusions

13. E-LTRPT.2.4 states:

      a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either -

         (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child (or that the  child
             normally lives with them); or

         (ii)     access rights to the child; and

      b) the applicant must provide  evidence  that  they  are  taking,  and
         intend  to  continue  to  take,  an  active  role  in  the  child's
         upbringing.

14. It is quite clear that the appellant obtained a  court  order  granting
    him access to the children and the judge was wrong to surmise  that  it
    had been made because the court was willing "to test the water" and not
    as a consequence  of  having  undertaken  proper  investigation  as  to
    whether contact would be in the best interests  of  the  children.   To
    that extent, the grounds are arguable.

15. The judge also rendered his decision vulnerable to appeal by the use of
    intemperate language, thereby appearing to display an antipathy to  the
    appellant which might cast doubt upon his impartiality.

16. Having said that, the judge reached conclusions which were open to  him
    on the evidence.

17. This is an appellant who made  no  effort  to  have  contact  with  his
    children for some six years  after  he  separated  from  their  mother,
    having apparently been violent towards her.  He  obtained  the  contact
    order very shortly before making this present application. Moreover, at
    the hearing, he appeared to know little about the children's lives,  in
    particular, their schooling.

18. The judge  took  into  account  all  of  the  evidence,  including  the
    photographs provided by the appellant of him with the children, and was
    entitled to observe that they all appear to have been taken recently in
    a fairly short space of time.  He also considered  the  letters,  which
    are certainly supportive of their  father.  However,  in  essence,  the
    complaint in the grounds is about the weight which the  judge  attached
    to them. The judge weighed up the evidence in favour of the  appellant,
    but was entitled to conclude that more weight ought to be  attached  to
    the appellant's past behaviour when considering whether he intended  to
    continue to take an active role in his children's upbringing.

Notice of Decision

19. The original judge did not err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made



Signed[pic]                             Date 13 January 2018

Deputy  Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
