
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17298/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24th October 2017                     |On 14th November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                SAMUEL OBUOBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Haruma, Counsel instructed by Braidwood Law
                    Practice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Ghana, born on 8th  September  1974.
    He first arrived in the UK on 20th November  2010  when  he  was  given
    leave to enter as a visitor until 1st May 2011.  He  then  applied  for
    leave to remain as the father of a British citizen, namely Jaydan  John
    Obuobi born on 5th November 2015.  That application was refused for the
    reasons given in a Reasons to Refuse letter dated 21st June 2016.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  considered  on  the  papers  by
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  (the  Judge)  on  2nd
    November 2016.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given
    in his Decision dated 5th November 2016.  The Appellant sought leave to
    appeal that decision, and on 17th February  2017  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. It is by no means clear from the Decision why the Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal.  Suffice it to say that at  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Avery
    conceded that there was a material error of law in the decision of  the
    Judge.  I therefore find that there was such an error of law and  as  a
    consequence set aside the decision of the Judge.  There is no need  for
    me to give my full reasons for that decision  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of Rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  I did not proceed to re-make the decision in the appeal in
    accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements as there is
    a substantial amount of judicial fact-finding still to be done.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.




Signed                              Date 13th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton





