
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17022/2018
                                                               HU/17024/2018
                                                               HU/17028/2018
                                                               HU/17029/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2019                             |On 27 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     FH
                                     JAA
                                     JMA
                                     JOD
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms F Allen, Counsel, instructed by Maliks & Khan
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. These are appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal James (the judge), promulgated on 2 January 2019, in which
         she dismissed the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  respondent's
         decisions dated 31 July 2018 refusing their human rights claims.

Factual Background

      2. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria. The 1st appellant was born
         in 1983 and is the mother of  the  remaining  appellants.  The  2nd
         appellant, at the date of the First-tier Tribunal decision,  was  5
         years old, the 3rd appellant was 3 years old and the 4th  appellant
         was 2 years old. The 2nd  to  4th  appellants  were  born  and  had
         continuously resided in the UK.

      3. The 1st appellant entered the UK on 16 June 2009 as a student.  She
         was granted further leave to remain  which  expired  on  30  August
         2011. She claimed that the father  of  her  children  was  a  Dutch
         national and she made several applications to obtain EEA  residence
         cards for herself and her children but these were all  refused.  On
         10 May 2017 she and her children made human rights claims.

      4. In his decision dated 31 July 2018 the respondent found there  were
         no  very  significant   obstacles,   as   required   by   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi), to the 1st appellant's reintegration into Ghana, and
         that the 2nd to 4th appellants did not  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) because they had not resided in the UK  for
         at least 7 continuous years. Nor was the respondent satisfied  that
         there were any exceptional circumstances sufficient  to  warrant  a
         grant of leave to remain in accordance with  Article  8  principles
         outside the immigration rules. The appellants had a right of appeal
         to the First-tier Tribunal which they exercised.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The judge heard oral evidence from the 1st appellant and took  into
         account a 38-page bundle provided by the appellants that  included,
         inter alia, a signed statement from the 1st  appellant,  statements
         from the 1st appellant's sister and cousin, a letter from  the  2nd
         appellants' Head Teacher dated 26 September 2018, and a letter from
         the 2nd appellant's GP dated 9 October 2018. The GP's short  letter
         stated,

             "This 4 years old boy suffers with severe speech and  language
             impairment.  He  also  suffers   with   social   communication
             difficulties, probably related  to  his  speech  and  language
             delay."

      6. In her  findings  the  judge  provided  a  number  of  reasons  for
         rejecting the 1st  appellant's  claim  that  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to her integration in Ghana. The judge found,
         inter alia, that there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  financial
         support received by the appellants from the 1st appellant's  sister
         in the UK would not continue if they were returned  to  Ghana.  The
         judge also noted that the 1st appellant had a younger sister living
         in Ghana who would  be  able  to  provide  information  about  work
         availability. The judge was not satisfied that  the  1st  appellant
         would be unable to work. The 1st appellant's claim that  she  would
         be destitute in Ghana was said to have been an  overstatement.  The
         judge noted that the 1st appellant  previously  received  treatment
         for breast cancer, but there was no new medical  evidence  relating
         to her current condition and a letter dated 8 September 2017 in the
         respondent's bundle indicated that the 1st appellant was  currently
         considered to be cured. Other than a mammogram  appointment  for  3
         January 2019 and an invitation to a Health and Well-being Event  on
         8 November 2018 there was no other supporting documentary  evidence
         that the 1st appellant's cancer would return. The judge found there
         was no evidence that the 1st appellant's  removal  to  Ghana  would
         have any increased impact on her by reason of her  being  a  cancer
         survivor.

      7. At paragraph 19 the judge considered the medical evidence  relating
         to the 2nd appellant. The judge referred to the  GPs  letter  of  9
         October 2018 and set out a relevant extract. The judge had this  to
         say about the GP's short letter.

             "He [the GP] provides no greater insight  into  his  condition
             beyond saying that he has  social  communication  difficulties
             which are probably related to his speech and  language  delay.
             Before me the  1st  Appellant  has  stated  that  as  the  2nd
             Appellant is only aged 5 it is not clear how his developmental
             delay will turn out and it is still being assessed. I  am  not
             satisfied that the  2nd  Appellant  has  shown  he  will  have
             significant long-term impairment."

      8. At paragraph 23 the judge  found  that  the  "appellants"  had  not
         demonstrated that they would face  very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration and return to Ghana. I pause to note  that  this  is  a
         misstatement of the relevant  immigration  rules  so  far  as  they
         relate to the children. There is no requirement for the 2nd to  4th
         appellants  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  very   significant
         obstacles. It was not however disputed that the children could not,
         in any event, have met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
         as they had not lived in the UK for at least 7 years.

      9. At paragraph 24 the judge stated,

             "Before  considering  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  I  have
             considered the best interests of the children  under  s.55  of
             the 2009 Act. The Respondent considered this issue  in  detail
             in the RFR and  I  concur  with  their  conclusions  with  one
             additional comment. The Appellants rely on the 2nd Appellant's
             condition to assert that he should remain in the UK  and,  for
             the sake of family unity, they should all remain  together  in
             the  UK.  I  do  not  accept  that  argument.  First  the  2nd
             Appellant's  condition  is  unspecified   beyond   the   broad
             generalisation. There is no prognosis. It has  been  described
             as a delay  suggesting  that  given  time  there  will  be  no
             problem. I am not satisfied that the 2nd Appellant's condition
             is such as to make his best interests  to  remain  in  the  UK
             rather than stay in the family unit in Ghana."



     10. The judge then engaged in an assessment of article  8  outside  the
         immigration rules and in accordance with  the  structured  approach
         identified in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  In  assessing  the  issue  of
         proportionality, the judge referred to s.117B of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, noted that it was  in  the  public
         interest to maintain effective immigration controls, noted that the
         appellants did not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules,
         noted that  they  could  speak  English  and  that  they  were  not
         financially independent.  The  judge  noted  that  the  appellants'
         immigration status was precarious. The judge stated that, "the best
         interests of the children are to remain with the 1st  Appellant  on
         her return to Ghana. They  have  not  shown  they  will  face  very
         significant obstacles to integration on return to Ghana.  In  those
         circumstances I find the decision was proportionate."  The  appeals
         were dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

     11. The initial grounds, drafted by the 1st appellant, took issue  with
         the judge's factual findings relating to financial support from the
         1st appellant's sister  and  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  2nd
         appellant's  medical  condition.  The  grounds  claimed  that   the
         appellants had established private lives in the UK  and  that  they
         had no house, income or financial support in Ghana.

     12. In granting permission Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Keane found
         that the grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement  with  the
         findings of the judge, and an attempt to reargue the appeals. Judge
         Keane however found it arguable that the judge did  not  take  into
         account or accord weight to the private lives that the 2nd, 3rd and
         4th appellants may have developed in the UK during their periods of
         residence, and that there were no  relevant  findings  of  fact  in
         respect of the children's private lives. Judge  Keane  additionally
         found it arguable that the judge failed to  accord  weight  to  the
         evidence relating to the 2nd appellant's  condition  and  that  her
         assessment of that medical evidence was irrational.

     13. Ms Allen provided a document  headed  "amended  Grounds  of  appeal
         further to grant of permission." It was agreed that  this  document
         did  not  constitute  an  application  to  amend  the  grounds  but
         reflected the basis of the grant  of  permission.  In  her  written
         grounds, amplified by her oral submissions, Ms Allen submitted that
         the judge erred in her consideration of the best interests  of  the
         three children, failed to make any  findings  of  fact  as  to  the
         private lives of the children, failed to accord any weight  to  the
         children's length of residence in her  proportionality  assessment,
         and failed to consider the impact of removal on  the  children.  It
         was further submitted that the judge failed to take proper  account
         of material evidence, namely the letter from the Head Teacher dated
         26 September 2018 and the GPs letter dated 9 October 2018.  It  was
         submitted that the judge's characterisation of the 2nd  appellant's
         condition as being "unspecified beyond a broad generalisation"  was
         irrational. Mr Avery, representing the respondent,  submitted  that
         the decision showed that the judge was alive to  the  circumstances
         of the family in  the  UK  and  the  particular  circumstances  the
         children and that any criticism of the  judge's  lack  of  detailed
         findings reflected the lack  of  cogent  evidence  before  her.  He
         submitted  that  the  judge  adequately  dealt  with  the   medical
         evidence.

Discussion

     14. There has been no challenge to the judge's actual factual findings,
         other than her assessment of the medical evidence relating  to  the
         2nd appellant. The judge found that the 1st appellant would receive
         financial support from her sister in the UK, that the 1st appellant
         also had a sister in Ghana who could provide information about work
         availability, and that the 1st appellant was able to work in Ghana.
         The judge expressly rejected the 1st  appellant's  claim  that  she
         would be destitute if returned to  Ghana.  The  judge  additionally
         rejected the 1st appellant's claim that  her  status  as  a  cancer
         survivor would have any increased impact on her return to Ghana. In
         it with these factual findings in mind that I approach the  grounds
         of challenge.

     15. Ms Allen contends that the judge was  not  rationally  entitled  to
         describe the 2nd appellant's condition as "unspecified  beyond  the
         broad generalisation." I find the judge was rationally entitled  to
         his description based on the generality of the GP's  assertion  and
         the absence of any  details  of  the  2nd  appellant's  speech  and
         language impairment. The letter from the GP  was  very  brief.  The
         judge demonstrably had regard to this letter at paragraph 19 of her
         decision, where she referred to the 2nd appellant as suffering from
         "severe speech and language impairment." No  further  details  were
         provided by the GP in respect of the nature  and  severity  of  the
         impairment. As the judge  accurately  pointed  out,  there  was  no
         prognosis. The GP referred to the "delay" of  the  2nd  appellant's
         speech and language  and  the  judge  was  rationally  entitled  to
         conclude from this that there was insufficient  evidence  that  the
         2nd appellant would  have  significant  long-term  impairment.  The
         judge was clearly aware of the medical evidence  and  she  provided
         legally adequate reasons for her assessment of that  evidence.  The
         challenge to her assessment therefore fails on rationality  grounds
         fails.

     16. Ms Allen submits that the judge failed to  take  into  account  the
         letter from the Head Teacher of the 2nd appellant's school dated 26
         September 2018. I cannot accept the submission. Firstly, the  judge
         made general reference  to  the  38-page  bundle  produced  by  the
         appellant at paragraph 10, indicating that he  had  taken  all  the
         documents into consideration. Secondly, at paragraph 19  the  judge
         stated that the 2nd appellant's developmental delay was still being
         assessed. The GP's letter  was  silent  on  the  issue  of  current
         assessment, but this was mentioned in the  Head  Teacher's  letter.
         This suggests that the judge did take the letter into account.  The
         letter from the headteacher did not, in any event, add anything  of
         significance to the GP's letter other than  to  say  that  the  2nd
         appellant was currently on a waiting list for Speech  and  Language
         Therapy. The Head Teacher's letter did not describe the  nature  or
         severity of the 2nd appellant's speech and language impairment.

     17. Ms Allen criticises the judge's assessment of the best interests of
         the children pursuant to  s.55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009. It is  apparent  from  paragraph  24  of  the
         judge's decision, again set out in  paragraph  9  above,  that  she
         adopted the detailed s.55 assessment contained in the  Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter. The judge was entitled to adopt the clear reasoning
         contained in the Reasons for Refusal Letter. In  his  decision  the
         respondent noted the ages of the  children  (at  the  date  of  the
         respondent's decision), that they had lived in  the  UK  all  their
         lives, that the children would be removed with  the  1st  appellant
         and their siblings and that the family unit would not be disrupted,
         that the children were nationals of Ghana  and  would  be  able  to
         enjoy the benefits and advantages that citizenship  entailed,  that
         the children would be returning to a  country  where  the  official
         language was English and where English was  spoken  throughout  the
         country, that the children would be returned  to  a  country  where
         there was provision for their education, and that they were not yet
         old  enough  to  have  started  to  study  towards   a   recognised
         qualification. These points  reflect  the  relevant  considerations
         identified in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 (at [35]), as did  the  judge's
         assessment of the 2nd appellants medical condition. Having properly
         adopted the reasoning contained in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter,
         I find the judge was rationally entitled to her conclusion relating
         to the best interests of the children.

     18. Ms Allen contends that the judge failed to make findings in respect
         of and failed to take into account the private lives established by
         the children, and in particular their length of residence, the fact
         that they were born in the UK,  and  the  2nd  appellant's  medical
         condition, when assessing proportionality. At the date of the First-
         tier Tribunal's decision the children were aged 5, 3 and  2.  There
         was very little evidence before the judge going to the  nature  and
         extent  of  the  children's  private  lives.  It  is  difficult  to
         ascertain, based on the evidence that was  made  available  to  the
         judge, what particular findings she could have made in  respect  of
         the children's private lives. This is not  surprising  given  their
         ages. Headnote (ii) of Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting
         children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 reads,

             "Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin
             can lead to development of  social  cultural  and  educational
             ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence
             of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts to  lengthy
             residence is not clear cut but past and present policies  have
             identified seven years as a relevant period."

         Headnote (iv) of the same case indicates,




             Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life.

     19. Although the judge does not expressly refer to the children's  ages
         or the fact that they were born in the UK  in  her  proportionality
         assessment, it is clear that the judge was aware of the  children's
         ages since she set out their dates of birth in paragraph 1  of  her
         decision, and she expressly adopted the respondent's assessment  of
         their best interests which included consideration of their ages and
         the fact that they had always lived in  the  UK.  The  judge  again
         noted that the best interests of the children were to  remain  with
         their mother. The judge had already considered the 2nd  appellant's
         medical condition and was rationally entitled to conclude  that  it
         was not such as to make his best interests  to  remain  in  the  UK
         rather than stay with the family unit and return to Ghana. Although
         the 2nd to 4th appellants did not have to show that they faced very
         significant obstacles to integration  and  return  to  Ghana,  they
         could not meet the requirements of the immigration rules  and  they
         were  not  'qualified'  children  as  defined  in  s.117D  of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I am  satisfied  that
         the judge did have in mind all of these relevant factors  when  she
         carried out her proportionality assessment.

     20.  For  the  reasons  given  above  I  am  not  persuaded  that   the
         determination contains any material legal error.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain a material error of  law.
The appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellants  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]                               31 March 2019
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
