
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17493/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard on papers                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 8th September 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                  Sam John
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of India.  He and his wife appealed to the
First-tier Tribunal against adverse decisions made in respect of the
appellant on 24 April 2018 and of his wife on 30 May 2018.

2.   The appeals were dismissed and permission to appeal was subsequently
granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   I need say little more about the history of this case since
submissions were received from the Secretary of State dated 9 July 2020 in
a Rule 24 response.  In that response it was conceded that the grounds of
appeal were made out and the Tribunal was invited to set aside the First-
tier Tribunal's determination.

4.   As regards the remaking of the decision, the Secretary of State
acknowledged that the appellant's three children are now British citizens
following their naturalisation on 2 June 2020 and that in the light of this
change of circumstances it was conceded that the appeal fell to be allowed.
 As a consequence, the respondent invited the Tribunal to remake the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and allow the appellant's appeal.

5.   I am grateful for this helpful submission made on behalf of the
respondent by Mr Clarke.  I see no reason not to agree with the conclusions
set out there and it follows that the First-tier Tribunal's decision is set
aside and the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision is as a
consequence allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 30 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

