
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17690/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given immediately following     |                              |
|hearing                                       |                              |
|On 12 September 2018                          |On 5 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ANDRIUS [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cockrill.   For  ease  of  convenience  I  shall
    throughout this  decision  refer  to  Mr  [K],  who  was  the  original
    appellant as "the claimant" and to the Secretary of State, who was  the
    original respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant is a national of Lithuania who was born in March 1971.  He
    arrived in this country in or about 2014.  Although  the  Secretary  of
    State did not appreciate this at the  time  he  entered,  he  had  only
    recently been released from a long sentence of imprisonment  which  had
    been imposed in Lithuania in 2005 for murder.  He  was  released  on  1
    April 2014.  The decision of the court in Lithuania is contained within
    the file and was also before the First-tier Tribunal when that Tribunal
    considered this issue.

 3. When the Secretary of State appreciated  that  the  claimant  had  been
    convicted of murder she (as the Secretary of State  then  was)  made  a
    decision to deport him.  The decision was not appealed and although  it
    was not served personally at that time because the Secretary  of  State
    did not know where the claimant was, it was subsequently served on  him
    in 2015 when the Secretary of State became aware that he was  about  to
    travel to Lithuania.

 4. The Secretary of State certified under  Regulation  24AA  of  the  2006
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations (which  were  then  in
    force, subsequently having been replaced by the 2016 Regulations)  that
    the appeals process not having been begun or not  having  been  finally
    determined the claimant's removal would not be unlawful under Section 6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998.  The effect of this  certification  which
    can only be made when the Secretary of State considers  that  a  person
    would not face a real risk of serious irreversible harm if  removed  to
    the country to which he is proposed to be removed, notwithstanding that
    the appeal process has not yet begun and/or been exhausted, is that the
    claimant was to be removed prior to the hearing of any appeal he  might
    chose to bring.  In cases where certification is made under  Regulation
    24AA (or its successor  under  the  2016  Regulations)  there  is  also
    provision under Regulation 29AA for notice to be given by an  applicant
    so that he can be permitted to come back for this appeal.  However,  in
    this case the claimant did not appeal against the decision.

 5. While in the UK the claimant had begun a relationship with  a  Ms  [P],
    and they had commenced living together in September 2014.  Ms  [P]  has
    two children and there does not appear  to  have  been  any  particular
    problem within the relationship.

 6. Having been removed, the claimant made two attempts to come back,  even
    though his return was unlawful.  On the first occasion he came over  on
    Eurostar but was stopped and sent back again.  On the  second  occasion
    he successfully came in and was not discovered until a later stage when
    he was again removed.

 7. Having not appealed  against  the  original  deportation  decision  the
    claimant subsequently made an application  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order which had been made but  that  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State.  It is in respect of this refusal that he  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal and it is that appeal which  was  considered
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill sitting  at  Hendon  Magistrates'
    Court on 14 June 2018.

 8. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated shortly  thereafter,  on  3  July
    2018, Judge Cockrill allowed the claimant's appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State  now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  against  that
    decision with leave granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  on  23
    July 2018.

10. It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision to do  more  than
    summarise the grounds.  As explained to  this  Tribunal  by  Mr  Jarvis
    acting on behalf of the Secretary of State the first ground is that the
    judge failed to apply binding European and domestic law, in  particular
    the decision of the Grand Chamber in Bouchereau,  (EU:C:1977:  at  172,
    and in particular at paragraph 29) and also the recent decision of  the
    Court of Appeal in Robinson (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 85, in particular
    at paragraph 84.  The decision of Bouchereau was affirmed  and  applied
    in the very recent case, also in the Grand Chamber, of K [2018] EUECJ C-
    331/16.

11. It is common ground that in order  to  justify  deportation  of  an  EU
    national who does not have a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  this
    country (and it is not suggested that this claimant does) the Secretary
    of State has to show that the deportation is  justified  on  the  basis
    that "the personal conduct of [the claimant] must represent a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".  The respondent, through Mr  Jarvis,
    refers in particular to what is  set  out  at  paragraph  43  of  Judge
    Cockrill's decision, as follows:

         "43. The point made by [the claimant's Counsel], in my judgment, is
             entirely sound.  The Appellant, as matters stand, simply  does
             not represent a threat, let alone a serious threat,  affecting
             one of the fundamental interests of  society.   All  that  the
             Respondent can rely upon is the bare fact that  the  Appellant
             committed this act of murder and was convicted  and  sentenced
             for that offence in Lithuania.   It  should  be  recalled,  of
             course, that  previous  convictions  do  not,  in  themselves,
             justify  the  decision.   As  has  been  highlighted  this  is
             precisely what the Respondent has done in this case.  She made
             the decision before really carrying out any  full  and  proper
             assessment of the Appellant and his  family's  situation.   He
             had not done anything in this country of  any  adverse  nature
             that would possibly justify this decision to deport him".

12. This follows on from what had been said at paragraph 36 where the judge
    had stated that:

         "There is no suggestion whatsoever that the Appellant had any other
         convictions at all  in  Lithuania  and  it  is  striking  that  the
         Appellant has had absolutely no criminal convictions in the  United
         Kingdom".

13. Also, at paragraph 39, the judge stated that:

         "The Respondent made this Deportation Order against  the  Appellant
         not as a result of anything which the Appellant  had  done  in  the
         United Kingdom, but simply upon the basis that  it  was  identified
         that he had been convicted and sentenced for the grave  offence  of
         murder".

14. The point which Mr Jarvis made is that this overlooks what  was  stated
    within  Bouchereau,  as  affirmed  in  K  which  is  summarised  within
    paragraph 56 of K:

         "Moreover, while, in general, the finding of a genuine, present and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society, within the meaning of the second subparagraph
         of Article 27(2) of Directive 2004/38, implies the existence in the
         individual  concerned  of  a  propensity  to  repeat  the   conduct
         constituting such a threat in the future, it is also possible  that
         past conduct alone may constitute such a threat to the requirements
         of public policy (judgment of 27 October 1977,  Bouchereau,  30/77,
         EU:C:1977:172, paragraph 29)".

15. Then at paragraph 58 of K, the court went on to state as follows:

         "However, the possible exceptional gravity of the acts in  question
         may be such as to require, even after a relatively long  period  of
         time, that the genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
         affecting one of the fundamental interests of society be classified
         as persistent".

16. Then, at paragraph 60 the court went on as follows:

         "60. In that regard, it must be observed that,  however  improbable
             it may appear that such crimes or acts may recur outside their
             specific  historical  and  social  context,  conduct  of   the
             individual concerned that shows the persistence in  him  of  a
             disposition hostile to the  fundamental  values  enshrined  in
             Articles 2 and 3 TEU, such as human dignity and human  rights,
             as revealed by those crimes or those acts, is, for  its  part,
             capable of constituting a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
             serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
             society, within the meaning  of  the  first  sentence  of  the
             second subparagraph of Article 27(2) of Directive 2004/38".

17. The Secretary of State also relies upon the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Robinson (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 85, where at paragraph 84,
    Singh LJ stated as follows:

         "Although the CJEU did  not  expressly  refer  to  Bouchereau  with
         approval in CS, nor did it in terms overrule it or depart from  it.
         Further, there is  no  reason,  in  my  view,  to  regard  the  two
         decisions as being necessarily inconsistent with each  other.  This
         is because, as I have said in my earlier  analysis  of  Bouchereau,
         that case itself recognised that what  one  is  looking  for  is  a
         present threat to the requirements of public policy;  but  it  also
         recognised that, in an extreme case, that threat might be evidenced
         by past conduct which has caused deep public revulsion".

18. The second main submission made on behalf of the  respondent  was  that
    when considering the claimant's conduct, the judge had failed  to  have
    regard, or at any rate, adequate regard to  the  claimant's  persistent
    breach of the order which had been made removing him from the  country.
    Although the judge does  make  one  reference  to  the  return  of  the
    claimant to this country in breach of the order, he does not  refer  to
    the previous attempt and therefore to the fact that this was a repeated
    breach of the Rule as Mr Singer  was  obliged  to  accept  in  argument
    before the Tribunal.  The way in which Mr Jarvis says this is  relevant
    is that it shows that not only was this claimant someone who has  shown
    that he is capable of committing such a serious offence as to  show  in
    the terms suggested in previous authority that he  is  hostile  to  the
    fundamental values enshrined in the European law such as human  dignity
    and human rights, but that he remained someone who is prepared to flout
    orders which have been made.

19. On behalf of the claimant Mr Singer,  both  in  his  very  concise  and
    persuasive Rule 24 response and also in oral argument, sought to  argue
    that the judge had in fact considered all the matters he ought to  have
    done.  However, the difficulty with this submission is that  the  judge
    did not only make no reference to  the  authorities  to  which  I  have
    referred above,  but  there  is  another  fundamental  error  which  is
    contained in what I have  already  quoted  from  paragraph  36  of  his
    decision where he said that there was "no  suggestion  whatsoever  that
    the Appellant had any other convictions at all in Lithuania and  it  is
    striking that the Appellant has had absolutely no criminal  convictions
    in the United Kingdom".

20. Regarding the second part of this sentence first, it  is  hard  to  see
    what real weight can be given to the fact that somebody  who  does  not
    arrive in this country until late 2014 and is served with a deportation
    decision in 2015 and thereafter comes back  twice  knowing  he  has  no
    right to return, has not been convicted of anything  else  within  that
    very brief period of time.  But  there  is  one  further  very  serious
    problem with this statement which is that it is clear from the judgment
    of the Lithuanian court, which was before the judge, that the judge was
    simply wrong when he stated that the claimant did not  have  any  other
    convictions at all.  The judgment of the Lithuanian court sets out that
    in 1998 (when the claimant would have been 17) he received a  suspended
    sentence of imprisonment of one year six months and  that  subsequently
    within the period of suspension in 1990 he received a further  sentence
    of two years' imprisonment for  another  offence,  which  sentence  was
    consolidated with the  earlier  sentence  "using  partially  cumulative
    sentence method" so that "the final sentence of imprisonment  of  three
    years was imposed".  The claimant was  released  from  imprisonment  in
    November 1992.

21. Although it is not stated within the judgment what  that  sentence  was
    for, it could not have been a minor matter because he  would  not  have
    received a sentence of imprisonment totalling three  years  if  it  had
    been, and clearly this is a relevant matter which the judge was obliged
    to take into account before considering whether  or  not  the  claimant
    could be said to represent a serious threat to one of  the  fundamental
    interests of society.  His failure to do so was an error of law.

22. Mr Jarvis did  not  seek  to  persuade  the  court  that  it  would  be
    appropriate now for this Tribunal simply  to  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing the claimant's appeal, (and indeed accepted  that  it  would
    not), but he did submit that the errors were sufficiently serious  that
    it could not be said that they were not material.

23. In my judgement, Mr Jarvis is undoubtedly correct when he submits  that
    the errors were material, because all  the  factors  to  which  he  had
    regard are relevant factors.

24. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Singer submitted that were I to find that
    there was a material error of law it would  follow  that  none  of  the
    findings could stand and that there would have to be a de novo  hearing
    and in these  circumstances,  having  in  mind  the  relevant  Practice
    Direction and also that if the decision was to be re-made in the  Upper
    Tribunal the claimant would  be  deprived  possibly  of  one  layer  of
    appeal, it would be  appropriate  for  the  case  to  be  remitted  for
    rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  On behalf of the  respondent
    Mr Jarvis did not seek to persuade the Tribunal that the appeal  should
    remain in the Upper Tribunal.

25. Accordingly, I agree that the appropriate course will be to  remit  the
    appeal now to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  by  a  new  judge
    other than Judge Cockrill, and my decision is as follows:

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill, allowing the  claimant's
appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  refusing  to  revoke  the
deportation order which had been made, is set aside and the appeal  will  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Taylor House, for  rehearing
de novo (with no findings retained) before any judge other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cockrill.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
         Dated: 28 November

