

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/17017/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |  Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 December 2017                         |  On 13 April 2018             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Mr OSENI HASSAN MUSA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Semega-Janneh instructed by Binas Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1     This is an appeal brought by Secretary of State against  the  decision
      of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  Davies  dated  7.8.17,
      allowing the applicant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision of 11.5.16 refusing the applicant leave to remain in the  UK.
      I will retain the designations of the parties as they were before  the
      First tier.

2     The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. He had been granted  a  multi-
      entry visit visa valid from October 2010 to 27 October  2015.  He  was
      present in the United Kingdom in 2011, when the  Appellant  met  Grace
      Isaiah, the Sponsor. They have been in a  relationship  since  January
      2012. They married in Nigeria on 5.1.13, and the Appellant entered the
      United Kingdom again on 10.2.13 with his entry clearance as a visitor.

3     The Appellant then applied for further leave to remain  on  7.6.13  as
      spouse of  the  Sponsor.  In  a  decision  dated  13.8.13  ('the  2013
      decision') the Appellant was granted leave to remain until 13.2.16, on
      the 10 year route. I return below to the reasons  for  that  grant  of
      leave to remain.

4     On 16.1.16 the Appellant applied for further leave to  remain  on  the
      basis of his family life with the Sponsor. This  was  refused  on  the
      grounds  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  English   language
      requirement of Appendix FM, and did not meet the requirements of  EX.1
      on the grounds the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the  United
      Kingdom,  and  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
      integration into life Nigeria under paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi). Further,
      the Respondent  was  of  the  view  that  there  were  no  exceptional
      circumstances warranting granted leave to remain outside the rules.

5     In the subsequent appeal, there was a dispute between the  parties  as
      to the reason for the grant of leave to remain in 2013. The Respondent
      asserted in the decision letter of 11.5.16 that the previous grant  of
      leave to remain had been on the basis that the Sponsor had children in
      the UK with whom she  was  in  a  parental  relationship,  whereas  by
      contrast, in the most  recent,  2016,  application,  no  reference  to
      children had been made. The  Respondent  relied  upon  the  GCID  case
      record sheets within the Respondent's bundle, showing minutes made  on
      22.4.16 and 10.5.16 (not, it is to be  noted,  from  2013)  suggesting
      that there had  been a reference to children in the 2013 application.

6     The Appellant and Sponsor continued to deny  that  any  reference  had
      been made in the Appellant's 2013  application  to  the  existence  of
      children, and the Appellant relied upon the text of the grant of leave
      to remain dated 13.4.13 which provided as follows:

           "We are satisfied the from the  information  you  have  provided
           that  you  meet  the  relevant   eligibility   and   suitability
           requirements and you have a genuine and subsisting  relationship
           with a partner and there are insurmountable obstacles to  family
           life continuing outside the United Kingdom.

           Because of your particular circumstances you have  been  granted
           leave to remain within the immigration rules under D - LTR P  .1
           .1 of Appendix FM"

7     In his decision dated 7.8.17,  the  Judge  noted  at  [12]  the  above
      reason for the grant of  leave  to  remain  in  2013,  and  noted  the
      Respondent's assertion within that letter that provided the  Appellant
      continued to meet the relevant criteria as set out in Appendix FM  Ex1
      or relevant legislation in force at  the  time  he  should  apply  for
      further leave prior to expiry of is currently and subject  to  meeting
      the requirements will be granted a further period of 30 months.

8     Significantly, the Judge accepted at [20] the  evidence  of  both  the
      Appellant and Sponsor that no mention of children had been made in the
      application of 2013. There is no challenge  to  that  finding  in  the
      Respondent's application for permission to appeal.

9     In considering the Appellant's  satisfaction  the  immigration  rules,
      the Judge held, inter alia, as follows:

           "22 I accept that there will be significant difficulties for  Ms
           Isaiah if she returned to Nigeria. Those  difficulties  are  not
           related to the language but to the difficulties of adapting to a
           country, which she left at the age of 12 and without the support
           of close family. She has no work experience in Nigeria.  In  EX1
           of Appendix FM at (b) the exception applies to an applicant  who
           has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who  is
           in the UK and is a British citizen. The  Appellant  has  such  a
           relationship. I must consider whether there  are  insurmountable
           obstacles to family life continuing with such a partner  outside
           of the UK. EX2 defines 'insurmountable obstacles'  as  the  very
           significant difficulties faced by the applicant or  the  partner
           and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
           hardship for either.

           23 I do not accept that such  difficulties  will  apply  in  the
           Appellant's case given that he has lived in Nigeria all his life
           until relatively recently, has visited on a number of  occasions
           since he came to the UK,  has  close  family,  particularly  his
           adult children, and has long experience of running a business in
           that country. I accept that it would be  inconvenient  and  that
           there will be some difficulties but in  his  case  they  do  not
           amount to anything beyond those difficulties.

           24 The position is different with Ms  Isaiah.  The  difficulties
           are not literally insurmountable and of course I take account of
           the fact that she would have  the  support  both  financial  and
           otherwise of her husband. I do accept however that to leave  the
           UK for a country  she  has  not  known,  other  than  for  short
           holidays, in her adult life would represent a significant degree
           of hardship as the she would have to lose proximity to her close
           family, her course, the way of life and her  British  employment
           history with the advantages it would give her when  she  returns
           to the labour market after completing her current course.

           25  ...

           26 I am satisfied that Ms Isaiah in particular would  face  very
           serious hardship in order to continue her family life in Nigeria
           and  taken  together  with  the   difficulties   the   Appellant
           (insufficient on their own) meet the definition in EX2.


10    Having directed himself at [27] that the appeal could only be  allowed
      on the grounds that the decision was unlawful under s.6 HRA 1998,  the
      Judge considered the application of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, and held at
      [31]:

           "31 The fact that the requirements of the immigration rules  are
           met is a weighting factor on the Appellant's side of the  scales
           and it goes a long way to balancing the  scales.  I  have  found
           that there  are  insurmountable  obstacles.  I  also  take  into
           account the Appellant appears to have been  conducting  a  clear
           impression that there was, on certain conditions, clear path  to
           settlement. That basis you disposed of his business  in  Nigeria
           and set up in the UK.

           32 I am satisfied that, taking the  balance  sheet  approach  to
           proportionality  assessment,  the  personal  interests  of   the
           Appellant and  his  partner  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
           immigration control. I am satisfied that  refusal  was  unlawful
           under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. I allow the appeal
           on human rights grounds."

11    The Respondent Secretary of State applied  for  permission  to  appeal
      against a decision on 14.8.17, arguing  that  the  factors  which  the
      Judge  had  taken  into  account  as  suggesting   that   there   were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside  the  UK,
      i.e. the Sponsor had not lived in Nigeria, she  had  only  visited  on
      short occasions, would lose  the  ability  to  access  the  employment
      market and her British way of life, including proximity to her family,
       were the very factors which  were  found  to  have  been  of  limited
      importance in determining the existence of insurmountable obstacles in
      the  Supreme  Court  decision  of  Agyarko   [2017]  UKSC  00011.  The
      Respondent  then  set  out  lengthy  extracts   from   the   Judgement
      (paragraphs 33- 36, and 68), and argued that the factors  relied  upon
      by the Judge were wholly inadequate to establish that there  were  any
      insurmountable obstacles in the present case. It was also argued  that
      such error was significant, as it was  this  finding  that  the  Judge
      relied upon to establish that the Appellant had shifted the balance to
      his favour and  that  this  had  been  a  significant  factor  in  the
      Appellant's favour.

12    Permission to appeal was granted by the first-tier Tribunal Mailer  on
      4.9.17, finding that the Respondent's grounds of appeal were arguable.

13    I heard submissions from the parties before  me.  Mr  Harrison  relied
      upon the grounds  of  appeal,  and  Mr  Samega-Janneh  relied  upon  a
      skeleton argument provided prior to the hearing.

      Discussion

14    Paragraphs 33-36 of the Supreme Court Judgement  in  Agyarko  actually
      contain the Court's summary of the Judgement of the Court  of  Appeal,
      below, in  those  proceedings.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  those
      proceedings, the courts had  been  considering  two  applications  for
      judicial review of decisions of the Respondent in which the applicants
      had been refused leave to remain, with no right of appeal.  The  Court
      of Appeal's comments about the paucity of the evidence in those cases,
      is also to be seen in the light that  the  courts  were  conducting  a
      judicial review, not a merits based appeal.

15    Those passages are as follows:

           "33.  The Court of Appeal  dismissed  the  appeals  for  reasons
                 given in the judgment of Sales LJ, with which Longmore  and
                 Gloster LJJ agreed. Sales LJ considered first  an  argument
                 based on the phrase  "insurmountable  obstacles",  used  in
                 paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM. Sales  LJ  accepted  that
                 the phrase was intended to have the same meaning as in  the
                 jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights,  where
                 it originated. It imposed  a  stringent  test,  illustrated
                 byJeunesse v The Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17,  para  117,
                 where the court found that  there  were  no  insurmountable
                 obstacles to the applicant's family settling  in  Suriname,
                 although they would experience  a  degree  of  hardship  if
                 forced to do so. It was to  be  interpreted,  both  in  the
                 European case law and in  the  Rules,  in  a  sensible  and
                 practical rather than a purely literal way. On the facts of
                 Ms Agyarko's case, the Secretary of State's conclusion that
                 there were no insurmountable obstacles to  relocation,  and
                 that paragraph EX.1(b)  was  therefore  not  met,  was  not
                 irrational:

                       "The  statement  made  in  Mrs  Agyarko's  letter  of
                       application of 26 September 2012  that  'she  may  be
                       separated from' her husband was very  weak,  and  was
                       not supported by any evidence which might lead to the
                       conclusion that insurmountable obstacles  existed  to
                       them pursuing their family  life  together  overseas.
                       There was no witness statement from Mrs Agyarko or Mr
                       Benette to explain what obstacles  might  exist.  The
                       mere facts that Mr Benette is a British citizen,  has
                       lived all his life in the United Kingdom  and  has  a
                       job here - and hence  might  find  it  difficult  and
                       might be reluctant to relocate to Ghana  to  continue
                       their  family  life  there  -  could  not  constitute
                       insurmountable obstacles to his doing so." (para 25)

                 On the facts of Ms Ikuga's case, Sales LJ agreed  with  the
                 Upper Tribunal Judge's assessment that "the factors  relied
                 upon by Mrs Ikuga could not possibly persuade any decision-
                 maker that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
                 life  continuing  in  Nigeria,  within   the   meaning   of
                 [paragraph EX.1(b)]" (para 50).

           34.   The alternative argument in each case was that the refusal
                 to grant leave to remain outside the Rules was in breach of
                 article 8. It was argued that it  was  disproportionate  to
                 remove each of the Appellants in  circumstances  where  her
                 husband or partner would have to  follow  her  overseas  if
                 they  wished  to  continue  their  family  life   together,
                 especially   when   he   was   a   British   citizen;   or,
                 alternatively, because an  out-of-country  application  for
                 leave to enter would inevitably be  granted,  so  that  her
                 removal served no good purpose. In relation to  the  latter
                 argument, reliance was placed on the case of Chikwamba.

           35.   These arguments were rejected. In the case of Ms  Agyarko,
                 Sales LJ stated that, since her family life was established
                 in the knowledge that she had no right to be in the UK  and
                 was therefore "precarious" in the sense in which that  term
                 had been used in the European and domestic case law, it was
                 only if her case was exceptional for some reason  that  she
                 would be able to establish a violation of article 8.

           36.   On the facts of Ms Agyarko's  case,  Sales  LJ  considered
                 that there were no exceptional circumstances. The fact that
                 Ms Agyarko's spouse was a British citizen did not make  the
                 case exceptional: several of the European  cases  in  which
                 applications were rejected had involved a partner or spouse
                 who was a national of the state from  which  the  applicant
                 was to be removed. So far as Chikwamba was  concerned,  the
                 House of Lords had found that there would be a violation of
                 article 8 if the applicant for leave to remain in that case
                 were removed from the UK and  forced  to  make  an  out-of-
                 country application for leave to enter which would  clearly
                 be successful, in circumstances where the interference with
                 her family life  could  not  be  said  to  serve  any  good
                 purpose. In Sales LJ's view, Ms Agyarko's case was very far
                 from a Chikwamba type  of  case.  She  had  not  asked  the
                 Secretary of State to  consider  whether  leave  to  remain
                 should be granted on the basis of Chikwamba. This  was  not
                 an argument of such obviousness that the Secretary of State
                 had been obliged to consider it regardless  of  whether  it
                 was mentioned. Accordingly, the Secretary  of  State  could
                 not be said to have erred in law in failing to grant  leave
                 to remain on  that  basis.  In  any  event,  the  materials
                 submitted by Ms Agyarko did not demonstrate that an out-of-
                 country application for leave to enter  would  succeed.  On
                 the contrary, the information provided  about  her  and  Mr
                 Benette's financial circumstances, for  example,  indicated
                 that she had no income and that he  earned  less  than  the
                 minimum income requirement specified in Appendix FM.

16    These passages in themselves say nothing about what the ratio  of  the
      Supreme Court Judgements in Agyako is.   I  find  that  the  following
      passages from the Court's  judgment  are  relevant  to  ascertain  the
      guidance actually given:

           "41.  As the European court  has  noted,  the  boundary  between
                 cases best analysed in terms of positive  obligations,  and
                 those best analysed in terms of negative  obligations,  can
                 be difficult to  draw.  As  this  court  explained  in  its
                 judgment in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for  the
                 Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799, para 32,
                 the mode of analysis  is  unlikely  to  be  of  substantial
                 importance in the present context. Ultimately, whether  the
                 case is considered to concern  a  positive  or  a  negative
                 obligation, the question for the European court is  whether
                 a fair balance has been struck. As was explained in  Hesham
                 Ali at paras 47-49, that question is determined  under  our
                 domestic  law  by  applying  the  structured  approach   to
                 proportionality which has been followed since Huang.

           ...

           44.   Domestically, the  expression  "insurmountable  obstacles"
                 appears in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to  the  Rules.
                 As explained in para 15 above, that  paragraph  applies  in
                 cases where an applicant for  leave  to  remain  under  the
                 partner route is in the UK in breach of  immigration  laws,
                 and requires that there should be insurmountable  obstacles
                 to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.
                 The expression "insurmountable obstacles" is now defined by
                 paragraph EX.2 as meaning  "very  significant  difficulties
                 which would be faced by the applicant or their  partner  in
                 continuing their family life together outside  the  UK  and
                 which could not be overcome or would  entail  very  serious
                 hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their   partner."   That
                 definition appears to me to be consistent with the  meaning
                 which can be derived  from  the  Strasbourg  case  law.  As
                 explained  in  para  16  above,  paragraph  EX.2  was   not
                 introduced until after the dates of the  decisions  in  the
                 present cases. Prior to the insertion of  that  definition,
                 it would nevertheless be reasonable to infer,  consistently
                 with  the  Secretary  of  State's  statutory  duty  to  act
                 compatibly with Convention rights, that the expression  was
                 intended to bear the same meaning in the Rules  as  in  the
                 Strasbourg case law from which  it  was  derived.  I  would
                 therefore interpret it as bearing the same  meaning  as  is
                 now set out in paragraph EX.2.


           45.   By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles"
                 are treated as a requirement for the grant of  leave  under
                 the  Rules  in  cases  to  which  that  paragraph  applies.
                 Accordingly, interpreting the expression in the same  sense
                 as in the Strasbourg case law, leave to  remain  would  not
                 normally be granted in cases where an applicant  for  leave
                 to remain under the partner route was in the UK  in  breach
                 of immigration laws, unless the applicant or their  partner
                 would face very serious difficulties  in  continuing  their
                 family life together outside the UK,  which  could  not  be
                 overcome or would entail very serious hardship. Even  in  a
                 case where such difficulties do not exist,  however,  leave
                 to remain can nevertheless be granted outside the Rules  in
                 "exceptional  circumstances",  in   accordance   with   the
                 Instructions: that is to say, in  "circumstances  in  which
                 refusal would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
                 for the individual such that  refusal  of  the  application
                 would not be proportionate". Is that  situation  compatible
                 with article 8?

           ...

           48.   The Secretary of State's view that the public interest  in
                 the removal of persons who are  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                 immigration laws is, in all but exceptional  circumstances,
                 sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh   the   individual's
                 interest in family life with a partner in  the  UK,  unless
                 there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
                 partner continuing outside the UK, is challenged  in  these
                 proceedings as being too stringent to  be  compatible  with
                 article 8. It is argued that the  Secretary  of  State  has
                 treated "insurmountable obstacles" as a test applicable  to
                 persons in the UK in breach of  immigration  laws,  whereas
                 the European court  treats  it  as  a  relevant  factor  in
                 relation to non-settled migrants. That is true, but it does
                 not mean that the Secretary of State's test is incompatible
                 with article 8. As has been explained, the Rules are not  a
                 summary of the European court's case law, but  a  statement
                 of  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy.  That  policy   is
                 qualified by the scope allowed for leave to  remain  to  be
                 granted outside the Rules. If the applicant or his  or  her
                 partner  would  face  very  significant   difficulties   in
                 continuing their family life together outside the UK, which
                 could  not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very   serious
                 hardship, then the "insurmountable obstacles" test will  be
                 met, and leave will be granted under  the  Rules.  If  that
                 test is not met, but the refusal of the  application  would
                 result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences,  such  that
                 refusal would not be  proportionate,  then  leave  will  be
                 granted outside the Rules  on  the  basis  that  there  are
                 "exceptional  circumstances".  In  the  absence  of  either
                 "insurmountable obstacles" or  "exceptional  circumstances"
                 as defined, however, it is not apparent why  it  should  be
                 incompatible with article 8 for leave to  be  refused.  The
                 Rules  and  Instructions  are  therefore  compatible   with
                 article 8. That is not, of course, to  say  that  decisions
                 applying the Rules and  Instructions  in  individual  cases
                 will necessarily be compatible with article 8:  that  is  a
                 question which,  if  a  decision  is  challenged,  must  be
                 determined independently by the court or  tribunal  in  the
                 light of the particular circumstances of each case.

           Precariousness
           ...

           52.   It is also necessary to bear in mind that the  cogency  of
                 the public interest in the removal of a  person  living  in
                 the UK unlawfully is liable to diminish -  or,  looking  at
                 the matter from the opposite perspective, the weight to  be
                 given to precarious family life is liable to increase -  if
                 there  is  a  protracted  delay  in  the   enforcement   of
                 immigration control. This point was made  by  Lord  Bingham
                 and Lord Brown of  Eaton-under-Heywood  in  EB  (Kosovo)  v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  41;
                 [2009] AC 1159, paras 15 and 37. It is also illustrated  by
                 the judgment of the European court in Jeunesse.

           53.   Finally, in relation to this matter, the reference in  the
                 instruction to "full knowledge  that  their  stay  here  is
                 unlawful or precarious" is also consistent  with  the  case
                 law of the European court,  which  refers  to  the  persons
                 concerned being aware that the persistence of  family  life
                 in the host state would be precarious from the  outset  (as
                 in Jeunesse, para 108).  One  can,  for  example,  envisage
                 circumstances in which people might be under  a  reasonable
                 misapprehension as to their ability to  maintain  a  family
                 life in the UK, and in  which  a  less  stringent  approach
                 might therefore be appropriate."

17    The outcome in appeals  such  as  the  present  are  necessarily  fact
      sensitive. I find that the Respondent does not  necessarily  establish
      any error of law in the Judge's decision by citing that  part  of  the
      Supreme Court Judgement in Agyarko, in which the Court was summarising
      the findings of the Court of Appeal below, which  had  referenced  the
      case of Jeunesse. In that case, the European Court of Human Rights had
      held that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  that  family
      settling in Suriname. However, it is to be noted that  notwithstanding
      that finding, the European Court held in that  case  nonetheless  that
      that family's long tolerated presence in Netherlands resulted in there
      being inadequate reasons of public policy to  warrant  their  removal,
      and a breach of Article 8 was found. The outcome was fact specific.

18    However, I do find, on balance, that the Judge erred  in  law  in  his
      assessment of the existence of insurmountable obstacles in the present
      case. I repeat the Judge's finding at [24]:

           "I do accept however that to leave the UK for a country she  has
           not known, other than for short  holidays,  in  her  adult  life
           would represent a significant degree  of  hardship  as  the  she
           would have to lose proximity to her close  family,  her  course,
           the way of life and her  British  employment  history  with  the
           advantages it would give her when  she  returns  to  the  labour
           market after completing her current course."

      I find that this passage provides reasons for finding the existence of
      insurmountable obstacles, which are not  sufficiently  distinguishable
      from the factors set  out  in  the  Court  of  Appeal's  Judgement  in
      Agyaorko, which were held not to represent insurmountable obstacles:

            "The mere facts  that Mr  Benette  is  a  British  citizen,  has
           lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a  job  here  -
           and hence might find it difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to
           relocate to Ghana to continue their family life  there  -  could
           not constitute insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

19    The Judge therefore erred in law in his assessment at  [31]  that  the
      Immigration Rules were met in the case.

20    However, I  decline  to  set  aside  the  Judge's  decision,  for  the
      following reasons.

21    I find that the  Judge's  error  was  not  material.  The  Judge  made
      specific reference at [31] to  the  Appellant  having  been  given  an
      impression, as a result of the grant of leave to remain in 2013,  that
      he was, on a certain conditions, on a path to settlement  in  the  UK.
      The Judge had held that the grant of leave to remain had been  on  the
      basis of the Respondent's previous acceptance in 2013, that there were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK, and
      that the Appellant had not mentioned anything about  children  in  the
      2013  application.  His  situation  was  no  different  in  the   2016
      application than it was in the 2013 application, except of course that
      the Appellant had been permitted to remain living with the Sponsor  in
      the UK for that  three  year  period,  and  the  Appellant  had  as  a
      consequence of that grant, disposed of his business assets in Nigeria,
      and set up a business in the UK.

22    I find that the Judge's decision would have  been  no  different,  had
      the error of law not been made.

23    In the alternative, and if I am wrong about  the  materiality  of  the
      Judge's error, and wrong to find that the Judge would inevitably  have
      come to the same decision, and if instead the decision falls to be set
      aside,  the task would then arise for me to remake the decision.

24    In those circumstances, I would remake the decision  by  allowing  the
      Appellant's appeal.

25    There was nothing different in the Appellant's application  for  leave
      to remain in 2016 compared with the one in 2013,  save,  as  mentioned
      above, that the Appellant had as a consequence of the  2013  decision,
      divested himself of his business in  Nigeria.   The  Judge  held  that
      there was no reference  to  children  in  the  2013  application,  and
      observed that  the  Respondent  had  held  in  2013  that  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.

26    There as been no relevant change in law since 2013  which  would  have
      justified a different outcome upon a repeat application; the  addition
      of para Ex 2 of Appendix FM  in  the  meantime  would  not  have  been
      sufficient justification for a different outcome - Mr Harrison did not
      argue this, and see the last three lines of paragraph 44  of  Agyarko,
      above, and para 7.16 of the Explanatory memorandum of the Statement of
      Changes of Immigration Rules, HC532, inserting para Ex.2:

           "The amendments to the Immigration Rules on family  and  private
           life in Appendix FM and paragraphs  276ADE-276DH  made  by  this
           Statement of Changes do not represent any substantive change  to
           the policies reflected in the Statement of Changes HC 194  which
           came into force on  9  July  2012,  but  ensure  consistency  of
           language with that used in section 19 of the 2014 Act, which now
           provides statutory underpinning for those policies."

27    If, as per my finding at para 18-19 above, the Judge was not  entitled
      to find that the immigration rules were met, the appeal then  fell  to
      be considered outside the rules.  That involved, as  per  para  48  of
      Agyarko,  a  consideration  of  whether  the  decision   resulted   in
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant. The assessment  of
      whether  consequences  are  unjustifiable  depends  entirely  on   the
      context.

28    The context here is that the Appellant has been  permitted  to  reside
      in the UK by reason of the Respondent's decision in 2013. His ties  to
      the UK have only deepened since that time.

29    Para 46 of Agyarko requires that the Appellant's  rights  be  balanced
      against the competing public  interests.  However,  I  find  that  the
      public interest does not require a person to be required to leave  the
      UK after having been permitted to remain here for three  years,  where
      there has been no material change in his circumstances,  or  the  law.
      The decision will have consequences, including being required to leave
      the United Kingdom; giving up his business in the UK,  thereby  making
      is two employees redundant; needing to find accommodation and work, or
      to  set  another  business  in  Nigeria;  the  Sponsor  needing   find
      employment. These consequences do not have to be extreme; they have to
      be unjustifiably harsh. In the particular circumstances of the present
      case, these consequences are harsh and not justifiable.

30    Insofar as it could be  said  that  the  decision  of  2013  was  made
      erroneously as a result of a misapprehension of the facts or  the  law
      by the Respondent, or was over generous (which is not in  fact  argued
      by the Respondent),  I  find  that  there  was  nothing  done  by  the
      Appellant to bring that about, and the  Appellant  has  been  under  a
      'reasonable misapprehension' as to his ability to  maintain  a  family
      life in the UK. There is, as per para 53 of Agyarko, room for  a  less
      stringent approach to the weight to be attached to the public interest
      in maintaining immigration control, in such circumstances.

31    To require the Appellant to leave the UK, when he has been  previously
      granted leave to remain in similar circumstances; and where there  has
      been no material changes in the law, would in my  view  be  arbitrary,
      and thus disproportionate. It is not necessary for me to  address  the
      Appellant's submissions regarding legitimate expectation.

      Decision

      I find that the making of the decision involved the making of an error
      of law.

      However, the error was not material.

      I do not set aside the decision.

      The Judges decision is upheld and the Secretary of State's  appeal  is
      dismissed.

      In the alternative, if I were required to set the decision  aside  and
      re make the decision, I would allow the Appellant's appeal.


Signed:                                            Date: 5.4.18


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





