
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17859/2016
                                                               HU/17863/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2018                      |On 9 November 2018            |
|                                        |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

                             harvinder singh (1)
                              sandeep kaur (2)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks, instructed by Super Immigration
Services Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants  appeal,  with  permission,  against  the  decision  and
    reasons statement of FtT Judge Anthony that was  issued  on  2  October
    2017.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and there is
    no need to make such an order in the Upper Tribunal.



Error on a point of law

 3. The dispute in this appeal centres on whether  the  assessment  of  the
    appellants' private and family life rights protected by article 8  ECHR
    was adequate.  The grounds argue that Judge Anthony failed to  consider
    the guidance given in UE (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975,
    [2011] Imm AR 1 in that  she  made  no  finding  as  to  value  of  the
    appellant's various activities to the community in the  United  Kingdom
    even though that is a factor that must be considered when assessing the
    public interest and finding where a fair balance lies.

 4. After I confirmed that Mr M Azmi, who represented the appellants before
    Judge Anthony, had made submissions on this point (as recorded  in  the
    record of proceedings), Ms Aboni conceded that there was legal error in
    the decision and  reasons  statement  because  Judge  Anthony  made  no
    findings on that issue.  Given this concession, there was  no  need  to
    hear further from Mr Brooks on the error on a point of law issue.

Materiality

 5. I asked Mr Brooks why the failure might be  material  to  the  outcome,
    given the comments made by the Court  of  Appeal  in  UE  (Nigeria)  at
    paragraphs 36 and 23.

 6. At paragraph 36, Sir David Keene said.

         36.  I would, however, before  concluding,  emphasise  that,  while
         this factor of public value can be relevant in the way which I have
         described, I would expect it to make a difference to the outcome of
         immigration cases only in a  relatively  few  instances  where  the
         positive contribution to this country is very significant,  perhaps
         of the kind referred to by Lord Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh. The  main
         element in the public interest will normally consist of the need to
         maintain a firm policy of immigration control, and little  will  go
         to undermine that. It will be unusual for the loss  of  benefit  to
         the community to tip the scales in an applicant's  favour,  but  of
         course all will depend upon the detailed facts which exist  in  the
         individual case and in particular on the extent of the interference
         with his private and/or family life.

 7. At 43, Richards LJ commented:

         43. As to the other side of the balance, in MA (Afghanistan) [2006]
         EWCA Civ 1440 at paragraph 28 Moses LJ suggested that "It may  well
         be that the benefit of the community of the work performed  by  the
         applicant diminishes the weight to be given to the public  interest
         in immigration control." So far as I can  recall  and  can  discern
         from the material we have been shown, that judgment was  not  drawn
         to the court's attention, and the possibility  of  contribution  to
         the community being factored into the analysis in that way was  not
         explored or even raised, in RU (Sri Lanka)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  753.
         Faced with the issue in the present case, however, I  would  accept
         that the matters relied on here  by  way  of  contribution  to  the
         community are indeed capable in principle of affecting  the  weight
         to be given to the maintenance of effective immigration control.  I
         agree that that public  interest  aim  can  and  should  be  viewed
         sufficiently   widely   and   flexibly    to    accommodate    such
         considerations. But they do not have as obvious a bearing  as,  for
         example, delay by the Secretary of State in processing a  claim  or
         the applicability of a specific immigration  policy  favouring  the
         applicant, and I doubt if they would in practice  carry  a  lot  of
         weight even on the relatively favourable facts of the present case.
         But I do agree that they should not be excluded from  consideration
         altogether.

 8. I raised the question about materiality of the issue in the appellants'
    case because of the lack of evidence that the appellants'  contribution
    to the community, particularly that of the first appellant, was in  any
    sense very significant.  The evidence before Judge Anthony was limited.
     The appellant made  reference  to  his  community  activities  in  his
    witness statement, focusing on his charitable and voluntary work  since
    he ceased to act as a minister of  religion.   That  evidence  was  not
    developed during the appeal hearing because the appellant was asked  no
    questions about his activities.  The appellant relied on a letter  from
    his Gurdwara, which did not specify anything more  than  the  appellant
    was a key member of the congregation and  an  experienced  minister  of
    religion.  The appellant also relied on several  character  references.
    They all contain similar  information,  referring  to  the  appellant's
    abilities as a minister of religion and his voluntary community work.

 9. Mr Brooks admitted the evidence was not particularly clear and asked me
    to adjourn so more evidence could be obtained.  I refused  the  request
    because the appellant has been fully aware of the issue, having  raised
    it himself.  He was also aware of the directions issued on 24 September
    2018, which indicated that if an error of law were found  then  it  was
    likely the Upper Tribunal would proceed to remake the decision  at  the
    same hearing.  Although Mr Brooks suggest fairness demanded giving  the
    appellants an opportunity to obtain further evidence, it would be wrong
    in my opinion to allow the appellants to benefit from their failure  to
    comply with directions.

10. Nevertheless, I decided that I needed to remake the decision because  a
    fresh assessment of proportionality was required.

Remaking the decision

11. There was no need to hear from the appellant. He was not called  by  Mr
    Brooks.  I assume his evidence remains the  same  as  given  previously
    since he did not provide a further witness  statement.   There  was  no
    indication there were other witnesses.  Mr Brooks reminded me that what
    was required was for me to find a fair balance between the  appellants'
    circumstances and the public interest in refusing them leave to remain.

12. In deciding not to hear from the first appellant, I remind myself  that
    the findings by Judge Anthony are preserved.  They are unchallenged  by
    the grounds of  appeal.  The  error  of  law  does  not  undermine  the
    findings; the legal error is that Judge Anthony  failed  to  include  a
    relevant factor in her balancing exercise.  It is her  assessment  that
    is challenged.

13. Judge Anthony's key findings are as follows:

      i) The respondent failed to prove the first appellant  had  obtain  an
         English language qualification by deception.

     ii) The appellants are not settled in the UK and do  not  benefit  from
         the provisions of appendix to the immigration rules.

    iii)  The  first  appellant  did  not  meet  the  continuous   residence
         requirements of paragraph  276B  of  the  immigration  rules  (long
         residence).

     iv)  There  are  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellants'
         integration in  India  and  they  do  not  benefit  from  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi).

      v) The best interests of the appellants' daughter are that she remains
         with her parents.

14. Mr Brooks reminded me that the first appellant has been in the UK since
    October 2005 and that during that  time  he  has  been  a  minister  of
    religion and thereby a constitutive  part  of  the  Sikh  community  in
    Smethwick.  The appellants were financially support by a relative  here
    and were not a burden on  state  funds.   The  first  appellant  speaks
    English and in integrated into British society.  His ability in English
    is established by his qualifications, which the  Home  Office  has  not
    proven to be false.  The appellants have established family life in the
    UK with their daughter.

15. Ms Aboni argued the public interest required the  appellants  to  leave
    the UK because they did not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules.  Their private lives  had  been  established  at  a  time  their
    immigration status was precarious.  Their daughter is not a  qualifying
    child.  In addition, the evidence fails to show the appellants  make  a
    substantive contribution to the community.  Since the first appellant's
    leave was curtailed in 2015, it would appear that his  activities  have
    been no more than voluntary work within the Sikh community.

The appellants' private and family life in the UK

16. I begin by considering the appellants circumstances.

17. The first appellant arrived in the UK on 29  October  2005  as  a  work
    permit holder.  He was granted various periods of leave as  a  minister
    of religion until 22 March  2009.   His  leave  expired  on  that  date
    because  his  application  made  the  day  before  was  rejected.   The
    appellant made three further applications for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    minister of religion, the last of which was granted on 25 May 2011.

18. Prior to that period of leave to remain expiring (which was  on  2  May
    2013) the first appellant applied for further leave, which was granted,
    so that his leave expired on  30  April  2016.   The  second  appellant
    entered the UK on 13 September 2014, with leave in line with the  first
    appellant.

19. On 23 February 2015, the respondent curtailed that period of  leave  so
    that it expired on 30 August 2015.  On 28 August 2015,  the  appellants
    applied for leave outside the rules and because no  decision  had  been
    reached by 8 December  2015,  the  appellants  applied  to  vary  their
    application to one for indefinite leave to  remain.   That  application
    was refused on 12 July 2016 and it is against that decision the appeals
    are brought.

20. I remind myself that by operation of s.3C of the immigration Act  1971,
    the appellants' leave to remain as a minister of religion  and  as  the
    spouse of a minister of religion are statutorily  extended  whilst  the
    applications and appeals are pending.

21. I have recorded the appellants' immigration histories because it  shows
    the first appellant has been lawfully resident in  the  UK  between  29
    October 2005 and 22 March 2009 and again from 25 May 2011 until  today.
    The second appellant has always had lawful residence in the UK.

22. I mention that the evidence shows  the  appellants  enjoy  family  life
    together with their daughter, who was born on 25 July 2015 (as  best  I
    can tell from the evidence).  Since the first appellant ceased to  have
    permission to work in  2015,  the  family  group  have  been  financial
    supported by Mr Balbir Singh.  I understand from the statement  of  the
    first appellant that Mr Balbir Singh is a  cousin.   Since  ceasing  to
    work as a minister of religion, the first appellant spends  time  as  a
    volunteer in the Sikh community.

23. It is reasonable to infer from  their  immigration  histories  and  the
    other evidence that the appellants have established their private lives
    in the UK during such periods  and  that  a  decision  to  refuse  them
    further leave will necessitate their departure from  the  UK  with  the
    consequence of interfering with  and  potentially  ending  the  private
    lives they have developed here.

24. The interference in family life rights will  be  much  less  since  the
    proposal is that the appellants and their daughter would leave  the  UK
    together.  Any interference would be to where they  enjoy  family  life
    rather than being interference in the family dynamics.   Judge  Anthony
    found, and I have adopted these findings, that  the  circumstances  the
    appellants would return to in India are not as claimed.  She  found  in
    paragraph 25 that the appellants would be able to resume  their  family
    ties in India and to find work, thus being able  to  establish  private
    lives there.

Public interest factors

25. I turn to consider the strength of the public interest.  I have already
    indicated that Judge Anthony's findings are preserved  including  those
    in paragraphs 24 to 26.  She found that the  evidence  failed  to  show
    there are very significant obstacles to the appellants  integrating  in
    India.  Her reasons for those findings are drawn from the evidence  and
    are sound.  Even if Judge Anthony's  findings  were  not  preserved,  I
    would draw the same conclusions from the evidence.

26. Because of those findings, I am satisfied the appellants do not satisfy
    any part of the immigration rules.  The appellants do not  fall  within
    the provisions of appendix FM  because  neither  of  them  has  settled
    status in the UK.  They do not benefit from paragraphs 276B because  of
    the interruption in the lawful residence of the first appellant.   They
    do not benefit from paragraph 276ADE(1) because they do  not  meet  the
    age and residence requirements of the earlier  provisions  and  do  not
    meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) because they have not shown there are very
    significant obstacles to integration in India.

27. Because the public  interest  requires  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls (s.117B(1)), the fact the appellants do  not  meet
    the requirements of the immigration  rules,  which  express  government
    policy regarding immigration, there  is  public  interest  in  refusing
    leave to remain and for expecting the appellants to leave the UK.

28. I consider the extent the appellants have integrated into  the  society
    of the UK.  They are not able to support themselves  because  they  are
    not allowed to work.  Their ability in English has  not  been  observed
    but the first appellant has gained a qualification. I bear in  mind  he
    has been able to work in the UK previously and he  is  integrated  into
    the Sikh community  in  Smethwick.   I  find  the  strength  of  public
    interest does not increase because of factors relating to the  economic
    wellbeing of the UK because on the evidence provided it is more  likely
    than not that the appellants would be able  to  support  themselves  if
    they had permission to work.  I find the provisions  of  s.117B(2)  and
    (3) to be neutral factors in assessing the public interest.

29. Nor do I find the public interest is increased because  the  appellants
    developed their private life rights in the UK whilst  here  unlawfully.
    I have indicated the periods when the first appellant was here  without
    leave to remain.  Most of his time has been spent here lawfully, as has
    all his wife's residence.  However, the fact the appellants have had to
    apply for further leave for a reason not  covered  by  the  immigration
    rules is an indication that their immigration status is precarious (see
    s.117(5)).  This strengthens the public interest in refusing leave  and
    expecting the couple to leave the UK.

30. The appellants' daughter is not a qualifying  child  and  therefore  no
    benefit is derived from s.117B(6).

Other issues - best interests of the appellants' daughter

31. Before I decide where a fair balance lies between the interests of  the
    appellants to remain in the UK and  the  public  interest  in  refusing
    further leave and expecting them to go to India, I  bear  in  mind  the
    following  two  further  factors.   First,  I  adopt  Judge   Anthony's
    assessment of the best interests of the appellants' daughter, expressed
    at paragraph 27 of her decision.  This has  been  unchallenged  and  is
    obvious.  The child is and infant and in the absence  of  any  contrary
    evidence her best interests are to be with her  parents  wherever  they
    are.  The best interests of the appellants' daughter do not  affect  my
    assessment of the public interest in  refusing  further  leave  to  the
    appellants even though that will result in  the  appellants  and  their
    daughter leaving the UK.

Other issues - value to the community

32. The second issue, which is the issue that underlies this appeal, is the
    value of  the  first  appellant's  community  activities.   As  I  have
    indicated, the evidence is limited.  The  comments  of  Sir  David  and
    Richards LJ that I have  cited  above  indicate  that  for  significant
    weight to be given  to  such  activities,  the  activities  must  bring
    substantial benefit to the community.  Lane J, President of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, has recently commented on this aspect in  Thakrar  (Cart  JR,
    Art 8, Value to Community) [2018] UKUT 336 and I follow his guidance.

         106.  It is, of course, the case that the balancing exercise to  be
         undertaken in Article 8(2) situations is  a  wide-ranging  one.  So
         much is plain not just from UE but,  more  particularly,  from  the
         House of Lords' opinions in Razgar v Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2007] UKHL 27 and Huang v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.

         107.  That does not, however, mean there is no difference  between,
         on the one hand, the factors which the respondent may  consider  in
         deciding how to exercise discretion under the Immigration Rules  or
         other statements of immigration policy and, on the other hand,  the
         factors to be decided in determining the weight to be given to  the
         public interest in maintaining immigration control. On this  issue,
         I respectfully consider that Richards LJ was right to say  what  he
         did in paragraphs 39 and 40 of UE.

         108.  In 1986, the appellate regime was such that  an  adjudicator,
         determining a deportation appeal of the kind described in  Bakhtaur
         Singh, was required to decide  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
         discretion  under  the  Immigration  Rules  should   be   exercised
         differently. In a real sense, therefore,  the  adjudicator  was  an
         extension of the decision-making process and so had to take his  or
         her own view  of  matters  of  immigration  policy,  albeit  giving
         appropriate weight to the view of the Secretary of State.

         109.  The present appellate regime is radically different.  Appeals
         no longer lie against decisions taken under the Immigration  Rules.
         Leaving aside revocation of protection status  and  deprivation  of
         citizenship, immigration appeals now lie only against  refusals  of
         protection and human rights claims. First-tier Tribunal judges  are
         no longer empowered by Parliament to  decide  how  a  discretionary
         policy expressed in the Immigration Rules should be exercised in  a
         particular case.

         110.  Even before the radical changes effected to the appeal regime
         by the Immigration Act 2014, there had  been,  over  the  years,  a
         marked decline in the instances  of  discretionary  decision-making
         under the Rules. In particular, the adoption of the  "points-based"
         system removed much of the  discretion  for  which  the  Rules  had
         previously provided.

         111.  The fact that the respondent has to operate  his  immigration
         policy compatibly with Article 8 does not mean that each and  every
         decision he makes, pursuant to the Immigration Rules and his  other
         policies, as to who should and should not be allowed to  enter  and
         remain in the United Kingdom, must be based on considerations which
         are necessarily the same as those  relevant  to  a  proportionality
         balancing exercise under Article 8.

         112.  Accordingly, the warnings contained in the judgments  of  Sir
         David Keene and Richards LJ are important.  Before  coming  to  the
         conclusion that submissions  regarding  the  positive  contribution
         made to the United Kingdom by an individual fall to be  taken  into
         account, as diminishing the importance to be given  to  immigration
         controls, a judge must not only be satisfied that the  contribution
         in question directly relates to those controls. He or she must also
         be satisfied  that  the  contribution  is  "very  significant".  In
         practice, this is likely to arise only where the matter is one over
         which there can be no real disagreement.

         113.  I am not sure that the list of examples given by Lord  Bridge
         in Bakhtaur Singh are all of this kind. It must be remembered  that
         those examples were given against  the  background  of  the  former
         appellate regime  which,  as  I  have  said,  gave  adjudicators  a
         foothold  in  the  policy  realm  that  is  not  shared  by   their
         successors.

         114.  Without in any way intending to be prescriptive, it is likely
         that one touchstone for distinguishing between instances that  lie,
         respectively, exclusively in the policy realm and in  the  area  of
         Article 8, is whether the removal of the person concerned will lead
         to an irreplaceable loss to the community of the United Kingdom  or
         to a significant element of it.

         115.  If judicial restraint is  not  properly  maintained  in  this
         area, there is a danger  that  the  public's  perception  of  human
         rights law will be adversely affected.

33. Thereafter, Lane J comments upon  the  proper  interpretation  of  Lama
    (video recorded evidence - weight - art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 16.  It  is
    authority only for the principle that a person's value to the community
    is a factor that  may  legitimately  be  considered  in  the  balancing
    exercise.

34. In the case I am deciding, I bear in mind not only the  fact  that  the
    first  appellant's  contribution  to  the  community  is  by  means  of
    voluntary work, which itself may be contrary to the restriction on  his
    permission to work in the UK (such restrictions often stating, no work,
    paid or unpaid), I bear in mind that his voluntary work is not  related
    to being a minister of religion.  It does not matter that the appellant
    was previously a minister of religion.  I must bear in  mind  that  the
    application on 28 August 2015 was for leave outside the rules  and  not
    as a minister of religion, and the variation made on  8  December  2015
    were for indefinite leave because  of  long  residence  and  not  as  a
    minister of religion.

35. I find, in this case, that the weight to be given  to  the  appellant's
    activities in the community is at best marginal and does not materially
    reduce the public interest in refusing leave to  remain  and  expecting
    the appellants to leave the UK.  This is because the evidence fails  to
    demonstrate that the appellants' contribution to  the  community  comes
    anywhere near the threshold expressed in case law.

Finding a fair balance

36. I turn to my final task, therefore, which is to  find  a  fair  balance
    between the competing positions.  In  this  case,  I  find  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration controls  is  strong  and
    much stronger than the need to permit the appellants to preserve  their
    private lives in the UK  because  there  is  no  good  reason  why  the
    appellants would be unable  to  re-establish  their  private  lives  in
    India.

Other grounds - Nasim and others

37. There is one final issue on which  I  must  comment.   The  grounds  of
    appeal suggest Judge Anthony erred by relying on the decision in  Nasim
    and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 because it did not  relate  to  a
    person such as the appellant.  This is to misunderstand  the  relevance
    of that case.  As I reminded Mr Brooks, the case was  reported  by  the
    Upper Tribunal to remind all those dealing with article 8 in  terms  of
    private life rights that the European Court of Human Rights  has  often
    viewed the threshold in terms  of  whether  expelling  a  person  would
    undermine their moral and physical integrity.  That is  the  conclusion
    relied upon by Judge Anthony.  On the evidence provided, I can find  no
    basis to conclude that the  moral  and  physical  integrity  of  either
    appellant or their daughter would be  undermined  by  their  return  to
    India.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Anthony contains no legal error and is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         31 October 2018

         Judge McCarthy
         Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
