

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: HU/17791/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th November 2017                         |On 5th December 2017         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                   Mr W A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr C.APPIAH    (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P. KOTAS (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    I shall refer to the parties as "the appellant" and "the  Respondent".
    This is an error of law hearing and I consider whether or not there  is
    a material error of law in the decision the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Frazer) ("FTT") promulgated on 30th March 2017  dismissing  the  appeal
    against a refusal of leave to remain in the UK.

Background
2.  The appellant is a citizen of Ghana and he entered the UK as  a  visitor
    until 10th March 2010.  He and his partner have a child  aged  4  years
    who have limited leave until  October  2018.   The  appellant  is  step
    father to his partner's first child aged  6  years  who  is  a  British
    citizen.
 FTT decision
3.  The FTT concluded that the appellant failed  to  meet  the  requirements
    for Suitability and under EX 1(b).  The  FTT  considered  Ex  1(a)  and
    found that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  as  between
    the appellant and his partner and with his  step  son  [19].   The  FTT
    found that the best interests of the children lay with  them  remaining
    with both parents [21-22].  Given that the appellant had no  leave  and
    his partner and child had limited leave in the UK, the FTT  found  that
    it was not unreasonable for them to return to Ghana and  that  EX  1(b)
    was  not  met  [23].   The  FTT  concluded  that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to the family's integration in Ghana.  There were
    no compelling circumstances to justify consideration of Article 8  ECHR
    [25].

Application for permission to appeal
4.  In renewed grounds to the UT it  was  argued  that  the  FTT  failed  to
    properly consider the evidence from the appellant's  partner  that  she
    did not intend to return to Ghana and that she was lawfully resident in
    the UK and intended to seek to extend her stay.
5.   The  FTT  failed  to  assess  whether  or  not  there  were  compelling
    circumstances for consideration of Article 8 (MF(Article 8- new  rules)
    Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).

Permission grant
6. Permission was granted by UTJ Reeds who found that ground 1 was  arguable
    in that the decision that it was reasonable  for  the  British  citizen
    child to move to Ghana was inadequately reasoned in the  light  of  the
    respondent's guidance which explains that the effect  of  the  parent's
    removal must not be to force the BC child to leave the EU, as  held  in
    (SF & Ors(Guidance, post 2014 Act [2017] UKUT 120(IAC)

Rule 24 Response
7.  The respondent  opposed  the  application  arguing  that  the  FTT  made
    findings that were reasonably open to make on the evidence.


Submisssions
8.  I heard submissions from both representatives which are set out  in  the
    record of proceedings.  Mr Appiah also produced a skeleton argument and
    the Guidance Appendix FM section 1.0b,  and  SF.  At  the  end  of  the
    hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion and conclusion

9.   I have referred to the guidance at 11.2.3 which provides that "where  a
    decision to refuse and application would require a  parent  or  primary
    carer to return to a country outside of the EU, the case must always be
    assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  BC
    child to leave the EU with that parent or primary carer..." and in such
    cases it would be appropriate to grant leave to the  parent  to  enable
    them to remain in the  UK  with  the  child,  provided  that  there  is
    satisfactory  evidence   of   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship.  In this appeal there is no evidence of  any  criminality
    or other countervailing factors.

10.   I am satisfied that the FTT ought to have  considered  the  impact  of
    the partner's position on the family  under  EX  1(a)  and  or  section
    117B(6) and that the decision as to the reasonableness of the BC  child
    was  inadequately  reasoned  and  failed  to  take  into  account   the
    respondent's clear guidance section 1.0b.  There is a material  of  law
    and I set aside the decision.  Ground 1 is made out.

Re - making the decision
11.  The facts are not disputed. The eldest child is a British  citizen  and
    he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with the appellant.   Both
    of the children were born in the UK  and  have  lived  here  all  their
    lives, and have never visited Ghana.  Their mother  had  not  lived  in
    Ghana for 13 years and had lawful leave in the UK until  October  2018.
    There is a family unit established in the UK. I am satisfied  that  the
    evidence shows that the appellant comes within the definition of parent
    of the BC child. I am not satisfied however that the decision would  in
    effect force the child to leave the UK. The appellant's partner  stated
    that she did not intend to leave the UK and would not return  to  Ghana
    and thus the children could remain in the UK with her. She  has  lawful
    leave to remain in the UK at  least  until  2018.  There  would  be  an
    interference with the family life as the partner and the children would
    remain in the UK and the appellant returned to Ghana.  In the light  of
    the fact that the appellant has a  subsisting  relationship  with  both
    children it would not in  my  view  be  in  the  best  interest  to  be
    separated from the appellant. The appellant's partner has lawful  leave
    to remain until October 2018 and a son who is a British  citizen.  Even
    if she were not to be granted further leave to remain, there would be a
    separation of the family until October 2018 which is significant  given
    the ages of the children. These factors in my view amount to compelling
    circumstances which justify consideration of Article 8.

12.   Following the stages in Razgar I am satisfied  that  there  is  family
    life established in the UK and that  there  would  be  an  interference
    caused by the separation of the family.  The decision is lawful as  the
    appellant cannot meet the Rules. The  question  of  proportionality  is
    determinative.  The British citizen child is a qualifying child and the
    provisions of reasonableness under EX 1(a) and section 117B(6) 2002 Act
    are met on the facts as found above. I conclude that the  break  up  of
    the family life in such  circumstances  would  be  disproportionate.  I
    place weight on the respondent's guidance cited above.


 Decision

13.   There is a material error of law in the decision which  shall  be  set
    aside.  I remake the decision and substitute a decision  to  allow  the
    appeal.


                               Signed                     Date 2.12.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




 Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                               NO FEE AWARD






Signed
                  Date 2.12.2017

GA Black

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


