
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/17531/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 December 2017                       |  On 18 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    O T A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by David Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because the appeal concerns or touches on the welfare  of  a
    minor.

 2. This is an appeal by  a  16-year  old  citizen  of  Nigeria  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State refusing  him  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 3. The short point is that the appellant has been living in Nigeria  under
    the care of his grandmother but now  claims  that  his  grandmother  is
    incapable of giving him care.  There is evidence to support that  claim
    and including evidence from the school that the appellant  attends  and
    the hospital that his grandmother attends.  The judge has  acknowledged
    these documents but has made no findings on their veracity or the value
    of their  contents.   This,  as  Mr  Tarlow  conceded,  is  a  material
    omission.

 4. Additionally, the First-tier Tribunal Judge is criticised  because  the
    judge found that the appellant would be  cared  for  adequately  by  an
    aunt.  The basis of this finding was a throwaway remark in the evidence
    of the appellant's mother, who for the first time in these proceedings,
    said that that is an arrangement that could take place.

 5. We do not agree with Ms Jegarajah's submission that the law  has  moved
    on to the point where there is  a  positive  inquisitorial  duty  on  a
    Tribunal to investigate every point pertinent to the welfare of a child
    but we do understand her concern  that  a  judge  would  make  such  an
    important finding, assuming that he did, on such slender evidence.

 6. One of the criticisms of this Decision and Reasons is that there is  no
    clear finding about where the best interests of the child lie.   It  is
    trite law that by reason of  a  policy  statement  section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2002 must be treated as if  it
    applies to out of country applications although on the face of the  Act
    it does not.

 7. We are therefore satisfied that the determination is unsatisfactory and
    we have to consider the remedy.  Ms Jegarajah invited us  to  hear  the
    appellant's mother today but we see two difficulties with that.  First,
    there is no further witness statement from her.  We think it  would  be
    helpful to have a statement from her explaining why she says  what  she
    said about the possibility of the aunt in Nigeria taking care  of  both
    the appellant and grandmother and second, it would be helpful to have a
    statement from the aunt  explaining  why  that  is  not  a  good  idea,
    assuming that that is her case.  We  find  that  to  go  ahead  without
    addressing these points would risk an unjust finding that would not  be
    fair to the appellant.

 8. We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  we
    direct that the decision is  made  again  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because we do not think it right to go ahead today for the reasons that
    we have explained. We respectfully invite the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    expedite the hearing of this appeal because we have been told that  the
    boy's situation is getting quite serious and  needs  to  be  looked  at
    quickly.  This is especially important as I have inadvertently  delayed
    promulgating this decision. We do not make any directions but the First-
    tier Tribunal will know what we have said and  we  hope  that  it  will
    agree with us on this point.

    Notice of Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We set aside its decision and  we
    direct that the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed




|                                     |                               |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 12 April 2018           |
|Judge                                |                               |


