
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17142/2017
                                                               HU/17145/2017
                                                               HU/17146/2017
                                                               HU/17147/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 16 January 2019                      |on 11 February 2019                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 NATASHA [G]
                                 WELANI [N]
                                    [H N]
                                    [H G]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellants appeal with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Mensah promulgated on 5  April  2018  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellants appeals on human rights grounds.
     2. There was no attendance on behalf of the appellants at the  hearing
        before the Upper Tribunal. Notice setting  out  clearly  the  date,
        time, and venue was sent by first-class post to the  appellants  at
        their residential address and to their nominated advocates Crown  &
        Law Solicitors on 26 November 2018. None of the notices  have  been
        returned as not having been delivered  by  the  Royal  Mail.  I  am
        satisfied that there has been valid service of the notice informing
        the appellants and their advocate of the hearing in accordance with
        the Procedure Rules. There is no explanation  for  the  failure  to
        attend by the appellants  or  their  nominated  representative.  No
        application for an adjournment on grounds that warrant the same, or
        at all,  has  been  made.  In  the  absence  of  any  communication
        explaining the failure to attend I consider it appropriate  in  all
        the circumstances, including the principles  of  fairness  and  the
        overriding objective, to proceed with this appeal in the absence of
        the appellants.



Background


     3. The appellants are a family group, all citizens of Malawi, born  on
        1 August 1985, 11 November 1985, 7 January  2010  and  7  September
        2013 respectively. The Judge sets out their immigration history  at
        [2] of the decision under challenge. The Judge notes  at  [3]  that
        the appellants seek leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the
        basis of their family and private life arguing in  particular  that
        the eldest child has now been in the United  Kingdom  for  7  years
        from January 2018 and that to ask  them  to  leave  and  return  to
        Malawi would not be in the interests of the children and will be in
        breach of their family life.
     4. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny  considering  the  family  circumstances  in  a
        structured manner. The Judge's core findings are set out at  [13  -
        15] in the following terms:

             "13.     Taking all of the evidence  together,  I  accept  the
                  eldest child has developed a private life  in  the  United
                  Kingdom. In fact I accept  the  entire  family  will  live
                  develops and private life given the time they  have  spent
                  in the UK. I accept the eldest child  has  spent  7  years
                  here and has not previously lived in Malawi. I accept as a
                  child at primary school she will have  developed  her  own
                  network of friends and will feels settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom.


             14.  However, I find her family life with her two siblings and
                  her  parents  far  outweighs  any  private  life  she  has
                  developed. I am of the view it is with that family support
                  she will be able to adjust to a life in  Malawi.  I  don't
                  accept the eldest doesn't speak any Chichewa and  I  don't
                  accept the  parents  would  be  unable  to  support  their
                  children. They have shown themselves to  be  very  capable
                  individuals who have both spent significant times  in  the
                  United Kingdom without any leave. They have  both  managed
                  to care for the children without a right to  work  in  the
                  United Kingdom.


             15.  Whilst generally I accept it would not be reasonable  for
                  a child to leave after 7 years I  also  consider  it  very
                  fact sensitive and dependent upon all the circumstances. A
                  child who spent 7 years in the United  Kingdom  is  not  a
                  trump card for status in the United  Kingdom.  I  consider
                  the best interests of the child are met by returning  with
                  her entire family to the country they  are  nationals  and
                  where they have worked, are familiar with the culture  and
                  language and  can  reintegrate.  There  is  a  paucity  of
                  evidence to support a claim it would  be  unreasonable.  I
                  find it is reasonable for all the children  including  the
                  eldest child to return to Malawi with their parents."

     5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by a  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
        granted on a renewed application by a judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
        on 4 October 2018 who found it  arguable  that  the  Judge's  brief
        findings at 13 - 15 inadequately assess the factors  under  117B(6)
        and fail to consider relevant jurisprudence.
     6. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 6  November  2018
        opposing the application.



Error of law


     7. The Judge accepts that the eldest child is a "qualifying child". By
        virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a person  who  is
        under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or  (b)  has
        lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years
        or more.  If a child is a qualifying  child  for  the  purposes  of
        section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended, the issue  will  generally
        be whether it is not reasonable for that child to return.
     8. The Secretary of State in  her  Rule  24  response  refers  to  the
        decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC  53.  In
        this decision the Court disapproved the reasoning in MA  (Pakistan)
        & Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in so far as the  immigration  history
        of the parent being relevant and found that the question of whether
        it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK is to be decided
        without considering the immigration history of  the  parents.   The
        immigration history is relevant however to whether the parents will
        be leaving the UK.  To that extent their record becomes  indirectly
        material because it may lead to them having to leave the UK.  It is
        only if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
        the child to leave that the provision may give the parents a  right
        to remain.  The reasonableness of the child leaving the UK is to be
        considered on the basis that the facts are as they are in the  real
        world, so that if one parent has no right to remain, but the  other
        does, or if both parents have  no  right  to  remain  that  is  the
        background  against  which  the  best  interests'   assessment   is
        conducted. The ultimate question is whether  it  is  reasonable  to
        expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
        their country of origin
     9. Although the Judge  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  the  guidance
        provided by the Supreme Court available the approach she adopted in
        determining this appeal is arguably in accordance with the decision
        in KO.
    10. The grounds seeking permission to appeal claim the Judge  erred  in
        finding it will be reasonable for the child  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom arguing the  child  will  have  problems  integrating  into
        Malawian society as she does not speak  the  language  and  has  no
        experience of what life is like in that country and has forged  her
        own ties to the United Kingdom. The grounds also assert  the  Judge
        is supposed to take into account that it will be difficult for  the
        parents to provide for the child when returning to Malawi.
    11. The submissions amount  to  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
        findings of the Judge who gives adequate reasons in support of  the
        findings to the contrary.
    12. It is also important to note the specific finding of the Judge that
        the appellants had provided "a paucity of evidence to  support  the
        claim that removing the child would be unreasonable".
    13. I find the  appellants  fail  to  establish  arguable  legal  error
        material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this  matter.
        The conclusions are within the range  of  those  available  to  the
        Judge on the evidence and whilst the appellants disagree  with  the
        findings and clearly seek a more favourable outcome  enabling  them
        to remain in the United Kingdom, there is  nothing  arguably  wrong
        with this decision on the evidence made available to the Judge.


Decision

    14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 17 January 2019

