
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17028/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without a Hearing under Rule 34  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 October 2020                        |On 09 October 2020                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                             THAJ PASHA MOHAMMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, instructed on a direct access basis
     (Written submissions only)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
     (Written submissions only)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 11 May 1986.

 2. The appellant entered the UK with entry clearance as  a  student  on  5
    October 2007 and with leave valid until 31 October 2008.  On 21 October
    2008, the appellant made an application for further leave as a  student
    but this was rejected on 19 November 2008.  On 20  November  2008,  the
    appellant again made an application for  further  leave  as  a  student
    which was granted until  31  August  2010.   On  28  August  2010,  the
    appellant again made an application for further leave as a student  and
    that was granted until 30 January 2012.

 3. On 3 January 2012, the appellant made an application as a Tier 1 highly
    skilled migrant which was  granted  until  16  February  2014.   On  11
    February 2014, the appellant made an application based upon his private
    and family life under Art 8 which was  refused  on  1  May  2014.   The
    appellant appealed that decision but his appeal  was  dismissed  on  13
    March 2015 and he became appeal rights exhausted on 29 July 2015.

 4. On 14 August 2015, the appellant made a further application based  upon
    his private and family life.  On 7 June 2016, the appellant varied that
    application to that of a Tier 2 skilled worker.  The appellant  further
    varied that application to one seeking indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of long residence on 15 September 2017.  That application was
    refused on 7 April 2018.  The appellant unsuccessfully sought  judicial
    review of that decision and those  proceedings  were  concluded  on  13
    February 2019.

 5. On 12 February 2019, the appellant made a further application for leave
    based upon his private and family life under Art 8 of  the  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State refused that application on 20 September 2019.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 20 January 2020, Judge Skehan dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8.  The judge accepted that  the  appellant  had  established
    private (but not family) life in the UK over a twelve-year period since
    arriving in the UK on 5 October 2007.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant's  removal  would   interfere   with   that   private   life.
    Nevertheless, under Art 8.2 the judge found that any interference  with
    the appellant's private life was proportionate and, therefore, a breach
    of Art 8 had not been established.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal ("UT").
      The  appellant  relied  upon  a  number  of  factors  including   the
    respondent's delay in dealing with his Art 8  application  made  on  14
    August 2015; that the respondent should have exercised discretion  "due
    to the lackadaisical approach" taken  by  the  Home  Office;  his  long
    residence of more than ten years; his  educational  qualifications  and
    the private life he had  established  in  the  UK.   Relying  upon  the
    Supreme Court's decision in R (Agyarko) and Another v SSHD [2017]  UKSC
    11, the appellant contended that the judge had failed to carry out  the
    fair balance that  had  to  be  struck  between  the  competing  public
    interest and an individual's interests in applying the  proportionality
    test.  The grounds contend that if the judge had done so, he would have
    reached a different decision.

 8. On 18 May 2020, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Keane)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis:

         "It was incumbent upon the judge to take into account all  relevant
         considerations when assessing the proportionality of  the  decision
         under appeal.  It is arguable that the judge did not  do  so.   Had
         the judge done so it is arguable that the judge might have  arrived
         at different finding in respect of the  issue  of  proportionality.
         The application for permission is granted".

 9. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, on 26  June  2020  the  UT  issued
    directions to the parties expressing the provisional view that it  will
    be appropriate  to  determine  the  issue  of  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law and whether its decision should be set  aside
    without a hearing.  Submissions were invited from the parties  on  both
    the substantive issues in the appeal and also on the issue  of  whether
    the appeal could be determined without a hearing.

10. In response to those directions, the respondent replied on 7 June  2020
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.  Although  the  respondent  did
    not object to the  appeal  being  determined  without  a  hearing,  the
    response notes that the issue of an error of law "can be dealt with" by
    an oral hearing albeit one remotely.

11. The appellant did not reply to those directions.  As a consequence, the
    UT issued further directions on  3  August  2020,  directing  that  the
    appellant respond to the earlier directions.  As a consequence,  on  16
    August 2020, submissions were made on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   In
    those submissions, it is contended that the judge did  err  in  law  in
    reaching his assessment of proportionality by failing  to  give  proper
    weight to the delay in resolving the appellant's  application  made  in
    2015 and reliance is placed  upon the  appellant's  long  residence  of
    more  than  ten  years  and  his   educational   qualifications.    The
    submissions do not seek an oral hearing.

12. In the light of the parties' submissions,  and  having  regard  to  the
    interests of justice and the overriding objective  of  determining  the
    appeal justly and fairly and the nature of the legal issues  raised,  I
    am satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to  determine  this
    appeal without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as  amended)  and  para  4  of  the
    Amended General Pilot Practice Directions: Contingency Arrangements  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal  (14  September  2020)
    issued by (then) Vice Senior President and (now)  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals, the Rt. Hon. Sir Keith Lindblom.

The Judge's Decision

13. Before Judge Skehan, the appellant relied exclusively upon his  private
    life established in the UK since he arrived on 5 October 2007.  He  did
    not claim to have any family  life  in  the  UK.   The  appellant  gave
    evidence before the judge which he summarised at  para  4(i)-(viii)  of
    his determination as follows:

         "4.  ....

             (i)  The appellant states that he should be granted indefinite
                  leave to remain on the grounds of his long residence under
                  the Rules and requests that the respondent should exercise
                  its discretion in accepting his application.  Further  the
                  appellant says that he should be granted leave  to  remain
                  outside the Rules on the ground of his  compassionate  and
                  compelling circumstances.

             (ii) The appellant sets out  his  immigration  history.   This
                  corresponds with that set out within the  refusal  letter.
                  The appellant adds  that  on  13/08/2015  he  submitted  a
                  further leave to remain [application] in the UK using  the
                  form FLR(FP).  While  this  application  was  ongoing,  he
                  located a new sponsor, Clinical Trials Laboratory Services
                  Ltd showed willingness to sponsor the appellant and issued
                  him with a Certificate of Sponsorship.  On 07/06/2016  the
                  appellant amended his application to the Home  Office  for
                  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  requested  a
                  variation.  Thereafter there was a  substantial  delay  of
                  more than a year while  the  Home  Office  considered  his
                  application.   Several  reminders   were   sent   by   his
                  representative to the Home Office.

             (iii)    As time passed  without  a  response  from  the  Home
                  Office, the appellant put in  a  further  application  for
                  leave to remain on the basis of 10 years'  long  residency
                  in  the  UK.   The  appellant  had  completed  10   years'
                  residency in the UK on 15/09/2017.   [I  interpolate  that
                  the correct date is 05/10/2017].  The  appellant  made  an
                  indefinite leave to remain application that was refused by
                  the respondent on 07/02/2018.  The appellant  applied  for
                  judicial review and the upper tribunal concluded that  the
                  appellant did not have lawful residence  from  the  period
                  since 29/07/2015.

             (iv) The appellant says that  his  application  has  not  been
                  given compassionate consideration.  The respondent  has  a
                  discretionary policy to exercise  discretion  and  discard
                  breaks that were not  in  the  appellant's  control.   The
                  appellant noted that the  Home  Office  policy  identifies
                  medical reasons as potential exceptional circumstances  in
                  which it would disregard breaks.

             (v)  The appellant had the benefit of legal advice.   He  says
                  that the Immigration Rules are very difficult to construe.
                   He has been severely disadvantaged  by  the  respondent's
                  delay.

             (vi) The appellant has built up a strong personal life in  the
                  UK.  He has lived here for more than 12  years,  he  is  a
                  good citizen, he speaks English and abides by the law.  He
                  is fully integrated into his community.   He  has  a  wide
                  circle of friends and will be devastated if he  is  forced
                  to return to India.

             (vii)    The appellant  was  awarded  a  Masters  in  Business
                  Administration  in  November   2011   and   the   original
                  certificate was provided in the  course  of  the  tribunal
                  hearing.  The appellant's family including his parents and
                  siblings reside in India.  The appellant conceded that  on
                  a practical basis there would be no significant  obstacles
                  facing him should he be required to move  to  India.   Had
                  the respondent dealt with this matter correctly and  in  a
                  timely fashion he would have had the opportunity to  build
                  his career in the UK as a management consultant.  It would
                  not be easy for him starting again in India.

             (viii)   There is no reason for the respondent to require  his
                  removal.  He is of good character [and]  well  settled  in
                  the UK.  There are opportunities for him  in  the  UK  and
                  should  his  application  be  granted  he  would  have  an
                  employer here.  The appellant said that he did not wish to
                  return to India because he could not face anyone in  India
                  and felt that his removal would belittle his  achievements
                  in the UK".

14. At paras 6 and 7, the judge set out the submissions  made  respectively
    on behalf of the respondent  and  appellant.   In  para  7,  the  judge
    specifically  dealt  with  the  appellant's  contention  that  residual
    discretion outside the Rules should have been exercised in his  favour.
    The judge said this:

         "There is a residual discretion to grant leave outside  the  Rules.
         Each decision is to be considered on its own particular  facts  and
         circumstances. [Reference  is  then  made  to  the  decision  in  R
         (Shaikh)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  2586  (Admin).]    Discretion   is
         acknowledged as likely to be sparingly exercised by  the  Secretary
         of State.  It is found that the facts of Shaikh that the  Secretary
         of State should have considered the exercise of its discretion.  In
         the appellant's case it has been found previously that  his  lawful
         residence in the UK ceased in 2015.  The  appellant  cannot  comply
         with the Immigration Rules and no  exceptional  circumstances  have
         been raised.  In the circumstances, the appellant has not shown  on
         a balance of probabilities that the circumstances are such that the
         Secretary of State should  have  considered  the  exercise  of  its
         discretion".

15. Then at para 8(i)-(v), the judge applied the five steps in R (Razgar) v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  First, the judge accepted that the appellant  had
    built up a "substantial private life" in the UK over twelve years.   He
    had, however, heard no evidence in relation  to  the  appellant  having
    family life in the UK.  Secondly, the judge found that the  appellant's
    removal would interfere with that private  life.   Thirdly,  the  judge
    found that the interference was in  accordance  with  the  law  as  the
    appellant could not establish that the decision was not  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules.   In  particular,  the  appellant  had  not
    established ten years' lawful residence as his leave had expired on  29
    July 2015 - which was some seven years and nine months after he arrived
    in the UK.  Fourthly, the judge found that the interference was  for  a
    legitimate  aim,  namely  the  maintenance  of  effective   immigration
    control.  Finally, at para 8(v) the  judge  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    proportionality as follows:

         "This is the main question to be considered in an Article 8  claim.
         While I  have concluded that the appellant has shown  that  he  has
         private  life  in  the  UK,  this  must  be  weighed  against   the
         respondent's legitimate aim in  maintaining  effective  immigration
         control.   The  appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  his   good
         character  and  citizenship   is   accepted   on   a   balance   of
         probabilities.  I have sympathy for the appellant's  situation  and
         the Immigration Rules are difficult to navigate.  I make no adverse
         credibility findings against the appellant, he has  been  open  and
         obviously honest with the tribunal.  The appellant  speaks  English
         fluently.  It is accepted  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the
         appellant to relocate to India.  However, the appellant is a single
         healthy male who is educated to a high standard.  The appellant has
         family and friends in India and will be able to avail [himself]  of
         support.  There is no reason why the appellant cannot continue  his
         professional career within India using the qualifications  obtained
         in the UK.  The respondent's delay in dealing with the  appellant's
         previous applications is  lamentable  but  not  the  cause  of  the
         claimant's predicament [ ].   Taking  all  the  circumstances  into
         account and conducting a careful  balancing  exercise,  I  conclude
         that the appellant's circumstances do not fall  within  the  narrow
         class of claims  where  the  interference  cannot  be  said  to  be
         proportionate to the respondent's legitimate aim".

16. The judge, therefore, dismissed the appellant's appeal.

Discussion

17. The appellant's claim rested exclusively upon an interference with  his
    private life in the UK formed since his arrival on 5 October 2007.  The
    appellant could not establish that he met any of the Immigration Rules.
     It does not appear to have been contended that he met the  requirement
    in para 276ADE(1)(vi) that there were "very significant  obstacles"  to
    his integration in India.  He could not  establish  ten  years'  lawful
    continuous residence under para 276B of the Rules as he had  only  been
    lawfully in the UK between his arrival on 5 October 2007  and  when  he
    subsequently became appeal rights exhausted on 29 July 2015 - that is a
    period of some seven years and nine months.

18. As the appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    public interest in effective  immigration  control  was  engaged  (see,
    s.117B(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended). In applying the  test  of  'proportionality'  the  judge  was
    required to balance the public interest against  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant's private life if he were removed: striking a "fair  balance"
    (see R(Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at  [20]  per  Lord  Bingham;  and
    Agyarko at [60] per Lord Reed).    The appellant's  claim  outside  the
    Rules could only succeed if the public interest was outweighed  because
    there would be "unjustifiably harsh consequences" to the  appellant  if
    he were removed (see Agyarko at [60] per Lord Reed).

19. The judge was required to consider all material matters.  The judge set
    out the appellant's case at some length, as have I above, at paras 4(i)-
    (viii).  The judge recognised the appellant had built up, as he put  it
    in para 8(i), a "substantial private life" in the UK over a twelve-year
    period.  The  judge  noted  the  appellant's  educational  achievements
    including an MBA which he had acquired  in  November  2011.   That  was
    undoubtedly a factor which the judge was entitled to take into  account
    which would assist the appellant in obtaining employment on  return  to
    India.  The appellant also had family and friends in India and,  it  is
    not suggested, that the judge was wrong to find in para  8(v)  that  he
    could obtain support on return if needed.

20. The grounds rely upon the judge's finding that there  was  "lamentable"
    delay in the respondent dealing with the appellant's application  under
    Art 8 made on 14  August  2015.   That  application  was  only  finally
    determined on 7 February 2018.  But, it is  important  to  notice  that
    between those dates the appellant twice varied his application:  first,
    on 7 June 2016 to an application under Tier 2 as a skilled worker;  and
    secondly, on 15 September 2017 as an application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain based upon long residence.

21. The relevance of delay was referred to by Lord Reed in Agyarko at  [52]
    as follows:

         "It is also necessary to bear in  mind  that  the  cogency  of  the
         public interest in the  removal  of  a  person  living  in  the  UK
         unlawfully is liable to diminish, or, looking at  the  matter  from
         the opposite perspective, the weight  to  be  given  to  precarious
         family life is liable to increase - if there is a protracted  delay
         in the enforcement of immigration control".

22. Lord Reed referred to the decision of the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo)
    v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.  In EB (Kosovo), Lord Bingham  identified  three
    ways in which delay could be relevant in an Art 8 claim.  He said  this
    at [14]-[16]:

         "14. It does not, however, follow that delay in the decision-making
             process is necessarily irrelevant to  the  decision.  It  may,
             depending on the facts, be relevant in any one of three  ways.
             First, the applicant  may  during  the  period  of  any  delay
             develop closer personal and social ties and  establish  deeper
             roots in the community than he could have shown  earlier.  The
             longer the period of the delay, the likelier  this  is  to  be
             true. To the extent that it is  true,  the  applicant's  claim
             under article  8  will  necessarily  be  strengthened.  It  is
             unnecessary to  elaborate  this  point  since  the  respondent
             accepts it.

          1. Delay may be relevant in  a  second,  less  obvious,  way.  An
             immigrant without leave to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
             precarious situation, liable to be removed at  any  time.  Any
             relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely  to
             be, initially, tentative, being entered into under the  shadow
             of severance by administrative order. This is  the  more  true
             where the other party to the  relationship  is  aware  of  the
             applicant's precarious position.  This  has  been  treated  as
             relevant to the quality of the relationship. Thus in R  (Ajoh)
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  EWCA  Civ
             655, para 11, it was noted that "It was reasonable  to  expect
             that both [the applicant] and her husband would  be  aware  of
             her  precarious  immigration  status".   This   reflects   the
             Strasbourg  court's  listing  of  factors  relevant   to   the
             proportionality of removing an immigrant convicted  of  crime:
             "whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he
             or she entered into  a  family  relationship"  see  Boultif  v
             Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR  50,  para  48;  Mokrani  v  France
             (2003) 40 EHRR 123, para 30. A relationship  so  entered  into
             may well be imbued with a sense of impermanence. But if months
             pass without a decision  to  remove  being  made,  and  months
             become years, and year succeeds year, it  is  to  be  expected
             that this sense of impermanence will fade and the  expectation
             will grow that if the authorities had intended to  remove  the
             applicant they would have taken steps to do  so.  This  result
             depends on no legal doctrine but on an understanding  of  how,
             in  some  cases,  minds  may  work  and  it  may  affect   the
             proportionality of removal.

          1. Delay  may  be  relevant,  thirdly,  in  reducing  the  weight
             otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of firm and  fair
             immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result of
             a   dysfunctional   system   which    yields    unpredictable,
             inconsistent and unfair outcomes.  In  the  present  case  the
             appellant's cousin, who entered the country  and  applied  for
             asylum at the same time and whose position is not said  to  be
             materially different, was granted exceptional leave to remain,
             during the two-year period which it  took  the  respondent  to
             correct its  erroneous  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant's
             application on grounds of non-compliance. In the  case  of  JL
             (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court of Appeal at the same  time
             as the present case, there was a somewhat similar  pattern  of
             facts. JL escaped from Sierra Leone with her half  brother  in
             1999, and claimed asylum. In 2000 her  claim  was  refused  on
             grounds of non-compliance. As in  the  appellant's  case  this
             decision was erroneous, as the respondent recognised  eighteen
             months later. In February 2006 the half  brother  was  granted
             humanitarian protection. She was not. A  system  so  operating
             cannot be said to be  "predictable,  consistent  and  fair  as
             between one applicant and another" or as yielding "consistency
             of treatment between one aspiring immigrant and  another".  To
             the extent that this is shown to be so, it may have a  bearing
             on  the  proportionality  of  removal,  or  of  requiring   an
             applicant to  apply  from  out  of  country.  As  Carnwath  LJ
             observed  in  Akaeke  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department [2005] EWCA Civ 947, [2005] INLR 575, para 25:

                  "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on  the  part
                  of the Secretary of State is capable of being  a  relevant
                  factor,  then  the  weight  to  be  given  to  it  in  the
                  particular case was a matter for the tribunal.""

23. That is the majority view in EB(Kosovo) because Lords Scott  and  Hope,
    and Lady Hale agreed with  these  observations  of  Lord  Bingham  even
    though Lord Brown, whilst accepting the first two ways  in  which  Lord
    Bingham said delay could be relevant, did not accept the third way (see
    [42]).

24. I do not see how any 'delay' in this case was not  appropriately  taken
    into account by the judge.  Clearly,  the  judge  correctly  took  into
    account that the time spent in the UK (including any delay in resolving
    the appellant's application made in August 2015 assisted  to  establish
    the "substantial private life" which the appellant had  built  up  over
    the twelve year period.

25. I do not accept the submission that  as  a  result  of  any  delay  the
    appellant acquired any legitimate expectation that he would be  allowed
    to remain in the UK or lost out, somehow, in obtaining employment.  The
    appellant had no legitimate expectation of remaining under Art  8  when
    he made his application on 14 August 2015 and he had no such legitimate
    expectation at any point prior to the decision on 7 February 2018  that
    he could remain on that basis.  Likewise, simply because he had made an
    application as a Tier 2 skilled worker on 7 June 2016 gave rise  to  no
    legitimate expectation that he could be successful.   It  is,  perhaps,
    worth  noting  that  the  'delay'  in  resolving  his  initial  Art   8
    application allowed the appellant to vary his  application  on  7  June
    2016, presumably to a basis upon which he now wished to remain  in  the
    UK.  Likewise, he had no legitimate expectation  when  his  application
    was varied on  15  September  2017  of  remaining  in  the  UK,  on  an
    indefinite leave basis  or  otherwise,  based  upon  his  claimed  long
    residence in the UK.  The period of time he had been lawfully in the UK
    simply could not meet the requirements of para 276B as he had not  been
    in the UK for a continuous period of lawful residence of ten years.

26. Likewise, the delay, though described by  the  judge  as  "lamentable",
    does not in my judgment fall  within  Lord  Bingham's  third  category,
    reflected later by Lord Reed in Agyarko, that any delay was relevant to
    the weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  as  it  showed  a
    "dysfunctional system  which  yields  unpredictable,  inconsistent  and
    unfair outcomes".

27. It would be wrong, in any event, simply to look at the period  of  time
    between the appellant's initial (unvaried)  application  on  14  August
    2015 and the decision made on 7 February 2018 as the  appellant  varied
    his application on two occasions on 7 June 2016 and 15 September  2017.
    The initial period up to the first application was some ten months; the
    period between the first variation and  second  variation  was  fifteen
    months; and the final period between the second variation and  decision
    on that application was  five  months.   None  of  these  period  taken
    individually (or indeed) cumulatively were, in my judgment, such as  to
    affect in any material way the strength of his Art 8 claim. Any 'delay'
    did  not  fall  properly  to  be  characterised  as   demonstrating   a
    "dysfunctional system".

28. The judge was clearly aware of the delay which he specifically referred
    to in para 8(v) and he took that factor into account so far as  it  was
    relevant to carrying out the 'fair balance' under Art 8.2.

29.  Before  the  judge,  the  appellant  relied  upon   the   respondent's
    discretionary policy to grant leave outside the Rules.  It is not clear
    whether that policy was specifically referred to the judge.   The  case
    of Shaikh, to which the judge was referred,  appears  to  be  concerned
    with a discretionary policy in a wholly different context,  namely  the
    context of invalid applications.  However, it is important to note that
    the appellant's appeal was limited to grounds based upon Art 8  of  the
    ECHR.  The failure to apply a policy could not in itself be a ground of
    appeal.  That could only arise, prior to the amendments  to  s.84  (and
    s.86) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, when one of the grounds of appeal  was  that  the
    decision was "not in accordance with the law" (see e.g. Charles  (human
    rights appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 89  (IAC)).   That  is  no  longer  a
    ground of appeal.  In the context of an Art 8 appeal under the  present
    appeal provisions, a policy such as that relied upon by  the  appellant
    effectively is subsumed within the issue of proportionality and whether
    or  not  the  public  interest  is   outweighed   because   there   are
    unjustifiably harsh consequences to the  individual  if  removed.   The
    terms  of  any  relevant  policy  have  not,  however,  been  expressly
    identified by the appellant.

30. Here, the judge was undoubtedly reasonably and rationally  entitled  to
    conclude that the public interest in maintaining effective  immigration
    control was not outweighed by the appellant's circumstances,  including
    any period of delay in  resolving  his  2015  application.   The  judge
    found, and these conclusions are not challenged, that the appellant had
    family and friends in India and his  qualifications  in  the  UK  would
    assist him in his professional career in India.  At no  point  did  the
    appellant have any legitimate expectation that he could remain  in  the
    UK without complying with the Immigration Rules whether as an  employee
    or otherwise.  The appellant accepted in  his  evidence  that,  in  the
    words of the judge, as "a practical basis there would be no significant
    obstacles facing him should he be required to move to  India".   Having
    taken into account all  relevant  matters,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge's finding (and conclusion in relation to Art 8.2) that the public
    interest outweighed any impact upon the appellant was both  a  rational
    and reasonable conclusion to which the judge was fully entitled to make
    on the basis of all the evidence.

31. For these  reasons,  therefore,  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of an error of law.  That
    decision stands.

33. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              5 October 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Skehan made no fee award as he had dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.
The appellant's appeal having now been dismissed in the Upper Tribunal,  the
decision to make no fee award stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              5 October 2020

