
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17982/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Civil Justice Centre (Remote     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing)                             |                                     |
|Heard On: 10th September 2020        |On 14th September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     FAU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Chirico, Counsel instructed by Riverway Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Zimbabwe  who  faces  'automatic'
    deportation from the United Kingdom, a country in which  he  has  lived
    since 2002, because he is a foreign criminal.  In 2016 he was convicted
    by a jury of sexual activity with a person with a mental disorder.  The
    circumstances of the offence were that the victim  was  a  young  woman
    with significant learning disabilities whom  the  Appellant,  her  care
    worker,  caused  to  believe  that  they  were  in  a  genuine   loving
    relationship.  The evidence was that this young  woman,  so  vulnerable
    that  she  needed  constant  protection,  performed  oral  sex  on  the
    Appellant in a public park. The psychological damage she sustained as a
    result of the Appellant's behaviour caused her to set fire to  herself.
    The trial judge found that the Appellant had planned  the  offence  and
    groomed his victim; the  offending  constituted  a  serious  breach  of
    trust. He sentenced him to 6 years imprisonment.

 2. Under the terms of the statutory scheme it is conducive to  the  public
    good that the Appellant be deported:  s32(4)  Borders  Act  2007.   The
    length  of  his  sentence  is  such  that  he  cannot  hope  to  resist
    deportation on the ground  that  either  of  the  'exceptions'  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions contained  at  s117C  of  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 apply.  The only way that the Appellant
    can successfully resist deportation is by demonstrating that there  are
    "very compelling circumstances over and  above"  those  exceptions,  or
    their equivalence.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard and dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge MA Khan in a decision dated the  20th  January  2020.    In  this
    appeal against that decision the simple ground advanced by  Counsel  Mr
    Chirico, and in granting permission considered arguable by  Mr  Justice
    Lane, was that the Judge wholly failed to apply that one relevant  test
    in his disposal of the appeal.

 4. In her Rule 24 response the Secretary of State (through the offices  of
    Senior Presenting Officer Mr Tufan) described this decision  as  having
    "structural failings". When pressed Mr Diwnycz, who  appeared  for  the
    Respondent before me, accepted that one of these failings was the  fact
    that the Judge makes no findings on the central matter in  issue.  What
    the Judge did was to consider whether the 'exceptions' in s117C applied
    to the Appellant, and (uncontroversially) finding that  they  did  not,
    proceeded directly to dismissing the appeal.  Whilst it is true to  say
    that a sentence of this length, and a crime of this nature, weighs very
    heavily in favour of deportation, parliament has made  clear  that  the
    'automatic' deportation provisions are in fact no such thing:  all  the
    legislation does is create a presumption of deportation.  It  is  still
    incumbent upon decision makers to consider whether that presumption  is
    rebutted, in this instance by asking  itself  whether  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances.   That has not been done in this case.

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside, and remitted
    for hearing de novo by a judge other than Judge MA Khan.

    Anonymity Order

 6. The Appellant is a criminal who would not ordinarily  benefit  from  an
    order protecting his identity. The final decision in  the  appeal  will
    however involve consideration of evidence  about  his  minor  daughter.
    Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I am concerned that identification of the Appellant  could  lead
    to identification of his daughter.  I therefore consider it appropriate
    to make an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decision and Directions

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed for material error of
    law and it is set aside.

 8. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    following a fresh hearing before a Judge other than Judge MA Khan.

 9. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         10th September 2020
