
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17140/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30th August 2018                      |On 15th October 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                 MISS L M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 27th April 1957, is a citizen of  Jamaica.   The
    Appellant had made application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of her private and family  life.   The  Respondent
    had refused that application on 21st  June  2016.   The  Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Veloso sitting at Hatton Cross on 15th November 2017.  He
    had dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. Application for permission to appeal was made and that application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on  8th  March  2018.
    It was said that it was arguable that the judge had only looked at  the
    question of physical dependency and had not dealt with the question  of
    emotional  dependency.   Directions  had  been  issued  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to firstly consider whether or not an error of  law  had  been
    made in that  case.   The  matter  had  therefore  come  before  me  in
    accordance with those Directions on 7th June 2018.  At that hearing  Mr
    Tarlow on behalf of the Home Office conceded that  there  had  been  no
    assessment made of emotional dependency and conceded therefore  that  a
    material error of law had been made and that the decision needed to  be
    re-made.  I provided a written decision on 19th  June  2018  reflecting
    the concession made on behalf of  the  Respondent  and  directing  that
    there should be a fresh hearing in the Upper Tribunal.  Directions  for
    the rehearing of the case were also issued on 19th June 2018.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 3. The Respondent's documents remain the same as they had been before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant's documents were re-served by cover  of  a  letter  dated
    23rd August 2018 and contained those documents listed at pages 1 to 108
    on the index sheet to the bundle.

The Proceedings - Evidence

 5. The matter proceeded by way of submissions.  The Respondent relied upon
    the refusal letter.

 6. In submissions on behalf of the Appellant I was  specifically  referred
    to the Appellant's  witness  statement  at  page  101  to  103  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  In particular, I was referred to paragraphs 6 to 9
    of that statement where the Appellant described the assistance and help
    that she  gave  her  sister  and  brother-in-law  since  2012  who  had
    illnesses.  It was also submitted in accordance with paragraph 8 of the
    witness statement that the Appellant had her own mental health problems
    since 2014.  It was said that the Appellant's sister and brother-in-law
    were dependent upon her and they in turn assisted  the  Appellant.   It
    was submitted there was family life in this case and that a removal  of
    the Appellant to Jamaica would be disproportionate.

 7. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the  evidence  and
    submissions raised.



Decision and Reasons

 8. In this case the burden of proof lies on the Appellant and the standard
    of proof for both immigration and human rights issues is a  balance  of
    probabilities.

 9. The Appellant was born in 1957 and is now 61 years old.  She first came
    to the UK in 1999 and the evidence indicates that  she  has  overstayed
    since that time.  I also find that the evidence demonstrates on balance
    the Appellant has remained in the UK throughout the period from 1999 to
    the present and has not returned to Jamaica at any stage.  Accordingly,
    she spent the first 42 years of her life living in Jamaica and the last
    nineteen in the UK without leave.

10. The totality of evidence demonstrates that additional to  that  lengthy
    period of residence in her home country the Appellant  has  during  her
    time in the UK maintained contact with individuals in Jamaica and has a
    31 year old daughter and sister in Jamaica.  There is  in  my  view  no
    evidence to indicate that culturally, linguistically or  in  any  other
    way the Appellant is now so estranged from Jamaican life that she would
    face  very  significant  obstacles  reintegrating  into  life  in  that
    country.  That is not to say she would not potentially  face  problems,
    at least short term, that may include  questions  over  employment  and
    housing.  However, the length  of  her  connection  with  Jamaica,  the
    position of close relatives there and within the UK, and  her  previous
    employment history does not raise the threshold of  difficulty  to  the
    level envisaged within paragraph 276ADE(vi).  I do not  find  that  she
    meets this or any other requirement under the Immigration Rules.

11. I have therefore considered her family and private life outside of  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8 of the ECHR.  I accept that  eighteen
    or nineteen years in the UK is a  not  insignificant  period  of  time,
    particularly given that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) does allow  for  leave
    to remain to a person who has lived continuously in the UK  for  twenty
    years.  That is not to conflate a period of eighteen or nineteen  years
    as  being  a  "near  miss"  and  allow  for  that  reason.   It  merely
    illustrates an obvious fact that eighteen or nineteen years' continuous
    residence in a country is a not insignificant factor.

12. There is no dispute that the Appellant has a sister and  brother-in-law
    in the UK and she has been living with them for  some  years.   I  have
    considered the witness statements presented in the Appellant's  bundle.
    In looking at Article 8 outside of the Rules I have considered the five
    stage test under Razgar.  I find that there  is  family  life  existing
    between the Appellant and her sister and brother-in-law.  Firstly,  the
    relationship between two siblings  is  naturally  a  potentially  close
    relationship.  They have been together for a significant period of time
    from when the Appellant was in her very early 40s until her current age
    of 61 years.  They have all lived together for a number of years.   The
    medical records demonstrate that the Appellant's sister is 77 years old
    and has ill health, as indicated within the medical  documents.   Given
    her age she cannot be described as a young lady or necessarily  someone
    who is going to get better in terms of her medical  problems.   I  also
    accept that the  Appellant's  brother-in-law,  Mr  Skeete,  has  health
    problems.  He is 84 years old, born  in  1933.   His  angina,  OPD  and
    chronic kidney disease are noted in his medical notes.

13. I have also noted the Appellant's intermittently  poor  mental  health,
    also contained within the Appellant's bundle.

14. I find on balance that the Appellant,  her  sister  and  brother-in-law
    present as three individuals, one in late middle age and  two  elderly,
    who have a natural biological close relationship, who live together and
    have done so for many years and who provide clear mental and  emotional
    support for each other in circumstances where because of their age  and
    infirmities there  is  no  suggestion  that  that  mutual  support  and
    dependency is likely to disappear or be diluted over time.  I find from
    all of the evidence that there is a strong and mutually beneficial bond
    between them such that there is a family life of some not insignificant
    strength and value.  It is of  course  possible  to  say  that  the  UK
    provides facilities such  as  care  workers,  social  workers  and  NHS
    provision that could take the place of a  family  member  such  as  the
    Appellant.  That is an argument that could be raised in each and  every
    case relating to any individual in the UK.  The issue  is  whether  the
    removal of the Appellant and the placing of the sister and  brother-in-
    law in the care of the system, without the Appellant, together with the
    removal of the Appellant from her family back to Jamaica,  would  be  a
    proportionate response in dealing with the facts as they now present.

15. I do not overlook that the interdependence and that family/private life
    has been built up  over  many  years,  merely  one  year  away  from  a
    potential valid application under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  I  further
    note that for almost all the time the Appellant has been in the UK, and
    certainly in latter years, the Home  Office  have  been  aware  of  her
    presence through either employment or prior applications that  she  has
    made but has not removed her from the UK.

16. I do of course have regard to Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  in  its
    entirety.  I do accept the Appellant's private life counts  for  little
    given her unlawful status.  Amongst other things that should underscore
    the fact that the Respondent has a duty to maintain the public interest
    in immigration control by removal where deemed appropriate rather  than
    allowing by default circumstances to reach such a  pitch  that  matters
    need to be reassessed.  When looking at all of the facts in this case I
    find that on balance the interdependency of the three  who  have  lived
    together and supported each other over a significant period of time  is
    such as to demonstrate a strong family tie or life and that removal  of
    one part of that triumvirate would be  disproportionate  both  for  the
    Appellant and her other two relatives who reside lawfully  in  the  UK.
    It would in my view present, by a small margin, a situation that  could
    be described as unjustifiably harsh and accordingly a  disproportionate
    removal.

Notice of Decision

17. I dismiss this appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    I allow this appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


