
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17037/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2020                       |On 23rd February 2021         |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD UMAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal, instructed by Khokhar Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  1  December  1983.  He
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dearden,
    promulgated on 15 January  2020,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on three grounds:


    (i)  the judge disregarded the Article 8 rights of the Appellant;
    (ii) the judge failed to properly consider that the failure to continue
         with IVF treatment would amount to an obstacle in  the  Appellant's
         family life pursuant to Article 8; and
    (iii)    the judge failed  to  consider  the  Sponsor's  mental  health
         issues.


3.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane  for  the
    reasons given in his decision of 29  July  2020.  In  summary,  it  was
    arguable  the  judge's  finding,  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK, was irrational  and
    the judge failed to conduct a Razgar analysis outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

4.   The Appellant came to the UK as a student on 25 June 2010 and  remained
    after his leave expired on 17 August 2011. In late  2013,  he  met  his
    British partner, the Sponsor. They entered into a nikah ceremony  on  5
    January 2014. The Sponsor  commenced  formal  divorce  proceedings  and
    received her decree absolute on 8 September 2014. The Appellant applied
    for leave to remain on 15 November 2016. This application  was  refused
    and certified as clearly unfounded on 7  March  2018.  Judicial  review
    proceedings were unsuccessful. On 15 June 2018, the Appellant submitted
    an application for leave to remain on private and family  life  grounds
    which was refused and is the subject of this appeal.


The judge's findings

5.   The judge heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor.  He
    accepted they had resided together since the nikah ceremony in  January
    2014 and were truly committed to each other. They enjoyed  family  life
    together. The Sponsor was in regular employment in a position  she  had
    held for approximately two years. She had extended family in the United
    Kingdom including her parents and siblings.  If  the  Sponsor  went  to
    Pakistan with the Appellant, she would have to terminate her employment
    and she would not see her extended family nearly as often. She had been
    to Pakistan three times on holiday.

6.   The judge found that the Sponsor had undergone  medical  treatment  for
    infertility and accepted that fertility treatment in Pakistan would  be
    unaffordable. The judge concluded at [30(4)]:


         "The Sponsor maintained that the current regime of treatment  could
         not be interrupted, but I find from the documentation that there is
         no ongoing infertility treatment because there has been no activity
         in that regard since 31st July 2019."

7.   The judge found that the  Sponsor  was  undergoing  treatment  for  low
    mood, poor sleep,  anxiety  and  depression  and  had  been  prescribed
    medication by her doctor.  She  was  waiting  for  cognitive  behaviour
    therapy and the Appellant's immigration  status  was  not  helping  her
    current condition.

8.   The judge considered section 117B of the 2002 Act  and  concluded  that
    little weight should be given  to  Appellant's  relationship  with  the
    Sponsor established when he was in the UK unlawfully. The Appellant had
    remained in the UK without leave for eight  years  and  throughout  the
    whole duration of his relationship. Further, little  weight  should  be
    given to his private life established when his immigration  status  was
    precarious. The judge properly directed himself on the requirements  of
    paragraphs EX.1, EX.2 and GEN 3.2 of the Immigration Rules.

9.   At [30(6)], the judge found that an inferior  quality  of  family  life
    could be enjoyed if the Appellant returned to Pakistan and the  Sponsor
    could continue to make regular journeys to  Pakistan  to  be  with  her
    partner.  The judge considered whether the Sponsor could go to Pakistan
    with the Appellant and concluded:


         "She had been on  three  previous  occasions  on  holiday  and  was
         familiar  with  the  culture.  She  would  have  to  terminate  her
         employment but could gain employment in Pakistan even though she is
         female because she has experience of work in  the  United  Kingdom.
         She would find it difficult leaving behind her parents and siblings
         especially because she is suffering from  anxiety  and  depression.
         However, given her age she is capable of leading a fulfilling  life
         without necessarily having regular face to face  contact  with  her
         immediate family. It would of course be a wrench for the Sponsor to
         leave her family behind in the United Kingdom  but  none  of  these
         factors in my conclusion amount to anything which is insurmountable
         or would result in exceptional circumstances or unjustifiably harsh
         consequences. It may be very inconvenient for the Sponsor were  the
         Appellant to return to Pakistan but that in itself is not enough. I
         do not conclude  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  are  currently
         undergoing treatment for infertility, but even if they  were,  with
         the  prospects  of  success  being  indeterminate,  to  potentially
         deprive someone of their ability to give birth, in  my  conclusion,
         is insufficient  to  put  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
         obligations under Article 8."

10.      At [30(7)], the judge found: "It is indicated  that  the  Sponsor's
    ex-husband's family  are  from  the  same  area  as  the  Appellant  in
    Rawalpindi. The Appellant expresses a view that if returned to Pakistan
    they would continue to harass her. Even if this were true the remedy is
    of course to move to a different area of the vast nation of Pakistan".

11.  At [31],  the  judge  concluded:  "I  have  weighed  all  the  evidence
    together cumulatively and in the round. Whilst it would be inconvenient
    and a nuisance  for  the  Appellant  to  be  removed  to  Pakistan  the
    difficulties which would follow do not in my conclusion come within GEN
    3.2 and EX.1, especially when one bears in  mind  the  requirements  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act. Whilst I accept that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor  have   family   life   together   when   one   considers   the
    proportionality  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision,   when
    balancing the desire of the Appellant to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    against the desire of the United Kingdom government to have an  orderly
    system of immigration control in the economic wellbeing of the country,
    I conclude that the balance comes down in favour of  the  Secretary  of
    State."


Appellant's submissions

12.  In her skeleton argument dated 21 October 2020, Ms Popal submitted  the
    Sponsor wished to rely on further hospital  appointment  letters  which
    related to her ongoing fertility treatment.  This  evidence  post-dated
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The letter was dated 8 June
    2020 and this was the first opportunity the Appellant  had  to  produce
    this evidence before the Tribunal. The evidence was important and  went
    to a material finding made by the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Popal applied
    under Rule 15(2) to admit this evidence.

13.  The following cases were referred to in the skeleton argument:

     (i) Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440;
    (ii) SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387;
    (iii)    R (on the application of Agyarko and  Ikuga)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11;
    (iv) Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 803;
    (ii) Akinyemi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 236;
    (iii)    MM and Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 10;
    (iv) Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27


    (v)  Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] UKSC 60;
    (vi) Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.

14.  It was submitted the judge should have conducted a  balancing  exercise
    giving proper weight to the relevant factors: Agyarko and  SS  (Congo).
    It was submitted there would be very significant difficulties to family
    life continuing in Pakistan because the Sponsor would lose her job, her
    home and contact with her family. This would  be  especially  difficult
    given her depression and anxiety. Both these points  were  accepted  by
    the judge.

15.  Further, the Sponsor is at risk  of  harassment  and  potential  honour
    based violence at the hands of her father-in-law who still  resides  in
    Pakistan, in the same area as the  Appellant's  family:  CPIN  February
    2020 at 1.2.1, 2.4.24, 6.3.1 and 6.5.7.  Honour based violence  at  the
    hands of in-laws is common in Pakistan. Despite, the  evidence  in  the
    witness statements of the Appellant and Sponsor (at [13] and [23])  the
    judge made  only  brief  findings  and  concluded  the  risk  could  be
    alleviated by simply relocating elsewhere in Pakistan.

16.  It was submitted the judge failed to carry  out  any  consideration  of
    the likely situation faced by the Appellant and the Sponsor if required
    to relocate to Pakistan. They would have no jobs or a home and  limited
    means.  In  those  circumstances,  they  would  turn  to   family   for
    accommodation  until  such  a  time  as  they   were   able   to   live
    independently.  Based on  the  analysis  provided  by  the  judge,  the
    Appellant and Sponsor could not rely on the generosity of family due to
    the risk from her former in-laws. The judge  failed  to  consider  this
    factor and the Sponsor's vulnerabilities as a former victim of domestic
    abuse at the hands of her ex-husband.  An abuse survivor with prevalent
    mental health difficulties would face greater difficulties if  required
    to leave her home, her family, her friends,  her  job  and  move  to  a
    country to which she has no ties, except for heritage,  and  which  she
    has only visited on three occasions. The Sponsor would  face  questions
    within the community in Pakistan as to her divorce and  would  find  it
    difficult to reintegrate as a divorced woman who has remarried.

17.  In addition, the Sponsor would be unable to complete the cycle  of  NHS
    IVF treatment, to which she is entitled in the UK, if her  husband  was
    in Pakistan. Both parties needed to be present and fully engaged in the
    process. The Sponsor was currently undergoing  more  tests  before  the
    cycle could begin again. Emotionally, psychologically and physically it
    was important for her to have the  support  and  participation  of  the
    Appellant in the ongoing process to ensure the best chance of  success.
    If the Appellant returned to  Pakistan  to  seek  entry  clearance  the
    Appellant and Sponsor would face the stress  and  emotional  impact  of
    being separated at a time when they are trying for a baby with the help
    of IVF and further delay in conception would follow. The Appellant  and
    Sponsor could not afford fertility treatment in Pakistan.

18.  The judge accepted the Sponsor had undergone  fertility  treatment  but
    rejected her claim to be on a waiting list on the basis  the  Appellant
    had not had any further  appointments  since  31  July  2019.   It  was
    submitted this finding was irrational. It  was  common  knowledge  that
    waiting times in the NHS were extensive. It was not extraordinary  that
    the Sponsor had not had an appointment in five months. The  judge  gave
    no reasons for rejecting the  Sponsor's  account  that  she  was  on  a
    waiting list. The Respondent was not represented  at  the  hearing  and
    there was no cross-examination.  It was never put to the  Sponsor  that
    she was lying or mistaken in fact. The  further  evidence  demonstrated
    the Appellant had an appointment with a consultant gynaecologist  on  8
    June 2020. It was not simply a question of the Sponsor wanting to  give
    birth in the UK. The judge accepted that fertility treatment  would  be
    completely unaffordable to the Appellant and Sponsor in Pakistan.  They
    would be deprived of ever having a family.


19.  It was submitted that even if there were no  insurmountable  obstacles,
    the factors advanced were relevant to  the  assessment  of  Article  8:
    Agyarko at [28] to [30] and EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41. It will  rarely
    be proportionate to uphold an order for removal of a spouse if there is
    a close and genuine bond with the other spouse and that  spouse  cannot
    reasonably be expected to follow the removed spouse to the  country  of
    removal. The judge failed to carry out a meaningful balancing  exercise
    as outlined by the grant of permission by Judge Keane.

20.  It was submitted that, on the totality of the evidence and in light  of
    the Sponsor's mental health, the removal of the Appellant or  requiring
    the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  to  relocate  to  Pakistan   would   have
    consequences of such gravity so as to engage the operation  of  Article
    8. The level of  interference  required  is  not  especially  high:  AG
    (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    801. The Appellant's removal would result in a further deterioration of
    the Sponsor's health and an increased risk of jeopardising her physical
    and moral integrity.

21.  In  oral  submissions,  Ms  Popal  referred  to  Agyarko  at  [51]  and
    submitted Chikwamba was still good law. The  Sponsor  was  working  and
    could meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.  If  an
    application for entry clearance was made it would succeed. Ms Popal was
    not sure whether this point was raised before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but submitted that the judge failed to consider it and  ought  to  have
    done so. She submitted there were several problems with  the  decision.
    The judge had referred to the Respondent as the Entry Clearance Officer
    which was  totally  irrelevant.  It  was  clear  from  Agyarko  that  a
    balancing exercise had to be conducted and the judge had to look at all
    the information in the round. The judge had made factual findings which
    were not open to him and he failed to take into account material facts.
    Had the judge done so, a different balance could have been struck.

22.  Ms Popal submitted it was not open to the judge to find that there  was
    no ongoing fertility  treatment.  The  Appellant  was  still  receiving
    treatment and she  was  due  to  have  an  operation  in  January.  The
    Respondent was not represented at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Sponsor's evidence was not challenged.  If  the  judge
    had doubts about that evidence, he should have  put  those  doubts  and
    matters to the Sponsor before making any negative credibility findings.
    The judge never put these matters to the Sponsor. If  he  had  accepted
    there was ongoing treatment  this  factor  in  addition  to  the  other
    factors would have shifted the balance in favour of the Appellant.

23.  Ms Popal submitted the case of Agyarko was different on its facts.  The
    Sponsor was entitled to access IVF treatment  and  she  was  a  British
    citizen. The judge had side-stepped the  sensitive  factual  matrix  in
    this  case,  fleetingly  referring  to  harassment  from  relatives  at
    [30(7)]. The judge had failed to consider material facts.  It  was  not
    appropriate for the Appellant and Sponsor to relocate because they  had
    limited finances and would have no jobs in Pakistan. The  best  way  to
    find a job would be to stay with family members. The  judge's  findings
    were inconsistent.

24.  Ms Popal quoted from the CPIN and submitted that the judge  had  failed
    to look at the Sponsor's vulnerability. There was no  consideration  of
    the fact that the Sponsor was a former victim of domestic violence. The
    judge had  not  conducted  a  balancing  exercise  in  accordance  with
    Agyarko.  The Sponsor would  have  great  difficulty  in  moving  to  a
    country where she has no ties. The Sponsor is a British citizen and the
    language barrier would affect her ability to get a job. The  fact  that
    she was a former divorced woman would also lead to difficulties.

25.  The Sponsor was entitled to IVF treatment in  the  UK.  It  was  not  a
    question of where she gave birth, it was about not being able to have a
    family. The decision to remove the Appellant  would  have  lifechanging
    consequences which the judge had failed to consider.  The judge  failed
    to refer to Razgar at [29]. He did not deal with the inability to  have
    a child and dealt inadequately with the Sponsor's mental health.

26.  Ms Popal relied on the grant of permission and  submitted  the  judge's
    findings were irrational and on the particular facts of this  case  the
    refusal of leave to remain was disproportionate. The  judge  failed  to
    consider what had led to the Sponsor's depression  and  anxiety.  There
    was no reference to her being a survivor of domestic violence. She  was
    young and vulnerable and it was disproportionate to require her  to  go
    back to the area where her former in-laws lived.


Respondent's submissions

27.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the Appellant's submissions were  far-reaching
    and Ms Popal was seeking to  re-argue  her  case.  She  had  relied  on
    several new points  which  were  not  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    permission had not  been  granted  on  those  points.  The  Appellant's
    repeated criticisms were unfair. The arguments put forward by Ms  Popal
    had not been made before the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Appellant  was
    represented and the judge did not err in law in failing to consider  an
    argument which had not been made. The grounds of permission  to  appeal
    did not rely on a failure  to  consider  Razgar.  Ms  Popal  had  over-
    extended the challenge argued orally which was not made in the  grounds
    of application.

28.  In any event, the judge dealt with Razgar in substance and carried  out
    a lawful proportionality assessment.  He  considered  paragraphs  EX.1,
    EX.2 and GEN 3.2. The first four questions of Razgar  were  clear  from
    the facts and were not in dispute. The issue was whether the  Appellant
    had established his case. The judge's findings were  not  contradictory
    and there was no adverse credibility finding. On the facts, the test of
    insurmountable obstacles was not met. The evidence before the judge did
    not establish the assertion made. The absence of a  presenting  officer
    was irrelevant and it was not appropriate for the judge  to  enter  the
    arena. The judge did not accept that the  evidence  presented  met  the
    threshold. The Appellant's point in relation to failing to put  matters
    to the Sponsor was misconceived.

29.  Mr Jarvis  submitted  the  new  evidence  in  respect  of  ongoing  IVF
    treatment did not alter the situation because the judge found,  in  the
    alternative, that the inability to access IVF  was  not  sufficient  to
    meet the threshold. The Supreme Court in Agyarko and Ikuga at [43]  was
    satisfied that this did not amount to  insurmountable  obstacles  which
    was a particularly demanding  threshold.  Further,  a  British  citizen
    relying on interruption of employment and fertility treatment  did  not
    meet the exceptional circumstances test: Agyarko EWCA at [40], [45] and
    [50] and UKSC at [73]. There was no ambiguity. The new point raised  by
    Ms Popal, that the Sponsor was a British female who would be  prevented
    from having a child, was not sufficient to distinguish this  case  from
    Agyarko and Ikuga. The distinction was artificial and the Supreme Court
    rejected the argument relied on by the Appellant in this case.

30.  In addressing Ms Popal's submission that the judge failed  to  consider
    the Sponsor was a survivor of domestic violence, Mr Jarvis submitted it
    was not clear that this was the basis  upon  which  the  case  was  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The burden was on the Appellant to show
    that this point was made and ignored. Ms Popal was making a new case in
    her argument today upon which permission  had  not  been  granted.  The
    judge did what he could with information before him  and  the  way  the
    case was put.

31.  Mr Jarvis relied on his Rule 24 response dated 13 October 2020 and  the
    case of R (Kaur) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1423.  He  submitted  Chikwamba
    could only be successfully applied in extreme cases, i.e. an  applicant
    was certain to be granted leave to enter, if an  application  was  made
    from outside the UK, to show that  there  was  no  public  interest  in
    removal. The Chikwamba principle required a fact-specific assessment in
    each case and only applied  in  a  very  clear  case  which  would  not
    necessarily result in a grant of leave to  remain.  Even  if  Chikwamba
    applied  in  this  case,  it  may  only  lead  to  a   disproportionate
    conclusion. The understanding of  this  decision  had  changed  and  it
    rarely had an impact. It was not an obvious point and, if it  had  been
    argued, there was no chance of success. Since 2008  there  had  been  a
    major revolution in the Secretary of State's policy. There  was  now  a
    test under the Immigration Rules of insurmountable obstacles. Chikwamba
    could not have made a material difference. In  this  case  the  parties
    simply had to apply in the queue with everyone else.  This  had  to  be
    weighed against the long period of unlawful residence.

32.  Mr Jarvis submitted there was clear authority that  IVF  treatment  was
    insufficient to meet the threshold of insurmountable obstacles and  the
    Upper Tribunal was not able to conclude  otherwise.  The  irrationality
    point could not succeed following the Supreme  Court's  conclusions  in
    Agyarko and Ikuga. There had  to  be  other  circumstances  other  than
    employment and infertility. The only other element was the question  of
    vulnerability which was not raised before the First-tier Tribunal or in
    the grounds of appeal.

33.  Mr Jarvis submitted that exceptional circumstances were  put  into  the
    Immigration Rules in 2017. Agyarko did not assist the Appellant. If the
    Appellant could not succeed under paragraph GEN 3.2 he had nowhere else
    to go. If there were insurmountable obstacles then the refusal of leave
    may be disproportionate. The Appellant  had  to  show  that  the  other
    factors were exceptional and he had not done so in this case.


Appellant's response

34.  Ms Popal submitted that the Sponsor's vulnerability  was  mentioned  in
    evidence and was not recorded in the decision. Ms Popal's  instructions
    were that the Sponsor had reiterated her vulnerability in  examination-
    in-chief. In any event, vulnerability  was  apparent  on  the  evidence
    before the judge. It was illogical that it must be  expressly  put.  It
    was obvious that an 18 year old who had stayed with a violent  man  for
    several years would be vulnerable and it was harsh for the judge not to
    consider it. This was a consideration which should have been taken into
    account in the balancing exercise. This case was  not  bound  to  fail.
    There were facts which were not considered and factual  findings  which
    were not open to the judge. It was not open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that there was no ongoing infertility treatment.

35.  Ms Popal submitted it was apparent from  the  case  of  Kaur  that  the
    issue was fact sensitive. Even if Chikwamba was not argued,  the  judge
    should have considered it. The Immigration Rules were  not  a  complete
    code and the judge had not considered Razgar expressly  or  implicitly.
    The decision was poor and there  was  no  anxious  scrutiny  which  was
    demonstrated by the judge's reference to the Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    The legal application of the test of insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    factual matrix showed that there were holes in the  decision  at  every
    stage. It was unfair for a decision of this quality to stand. The judge
    failed to take into account relevant evidence given in  examination-in-
    chief and there was a clear absence of the test in Razgar.  The  errors
    of law were material.


Conclusions and reasons

36.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable  the
    judge had made irrational findings and he failed to conduct a  "Razgar"
    analysis. The grounds submit that the inability to access IVF treatment
    and  the  Sponsor's  mental  health  issues  demonstrated  there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  the  UK
    and/or exceptional circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest. Many of the points raised by Ms Popal were not relied  on  in
    the grounds of appeal  and  were  not  the  subject  of  the  grant  of
    permission. I agree with Mr Jarvis that Ms Popal  was  seeking  to  re-
    argue the appeal by relying on points which were not raised before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.  In  addressing  the   submissions   upon   which
    permission  to  appeal  was  granted  I  have  considered  the  further
    arguments advanced before me. My reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
    arguments are set out below.

Irrationality

37.  The judge found (at [30(4)]) that  there  was  no  ongoing  infertility
    treatment because there had been "no activity in that regard since  the
    31 July 2019." The Sponsor was of the view that she was  on  a  waiting
    list, but there was no documentary evidence to show that was  the  case
    or to show that she had a further appointment. It is not appropriate to
    rely on evidence which  post-dated  the  decision  to  argue  that  the
    judge's conclusion was irrational. The judge's finding that  there  was
    no ongoing infertility treatment was one which was open to him  on  the
    evidence before him. The Appellant was represented at the  hearing  and
    there was no obligation on the judge to put matters to the witness.

38.  In any event, this finding was not material to the decision to  dismiss
    the  Appellant's  appeal.  The  judge  considered  the  case   in   the
    alternative, stating that  even  if  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were
    currently undergoing treatment for infertility, this was not sufficient
    to put the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under Article 8.
    This finding was consistent with the Supreme Court decision of  Agyarko
    and Ikuga. I am not persuaded that the decision can be distinguished on
    its facts as submitted by Ms Popal. The fact that  the  Sponsor  was  a
    British citizen was not a decisive factor.

39.  In Agyarko and Ikuga, the Supreme Court held at [73]:


         "In  relation  to  this  matter,  this  court  has  no  basis   for
         interfering with the decision of the specialist judge of the  Upper
         Tribunal,  affirmed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal.  So  far  as   the
         application under the Rules  was  concerned,  the  judge  correctly
         identified that Ms Ikuga would have to satisfy the  "insurmountable
         obstacles" test in paragraph EX.1(b),  and  explained  convincingly
         why she could not do so on the basis of the information  which  she
         had placed before the Secretary of State: see the  summary  of  his
         reasoning at para 32 above, and the summary of the  material  which
         Page 28 Ms Ikuga had provided, at paras 26-28 and 30 above. Nothing
         in the discussion of that test in this judgment places in  question
         his conclusion, with which the Court of  Appeal  agreed,  that  the
         test could not possibly be met on  the  basis  put  forward  on  Ms
         Ikuga's behalf: in summary,  that  her  partner  was  in  full-time
         employment in the UK, and she was undergoing  fertility  treatment.
         So far as leave to remain was sought outside the  Rules,  there  is
         similarly nothing in this judgment which undermines his conclusion,
         with which the Court of Appeal agreed, that Ms Ikuga  had  not  put
         forward anything which might constitute "exceptional circumstances"
         as defined in the Instructions, that is to say, unjustifiably harsh
         consequences for the  individual  such  that  the  refusal  of  the
         application would not be proportionate."

40.  It is apparent from the decision that the judge took into  account  the
    Sponsor's anxiety and depression. Ms Popal submitted the  judge  failed
    to consider the  Sponsor's  vulnerability,  as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence, on relocating to Pakistan and to consider what had led to the
    Sponsor's anxiety and depression.  The  Sponsor  referred  to  domestic
    abuse in her previous marriage in her witness statement,  but  it  does
    not appear that this was relied on in submissions.

41.  The GP letter of 30 May 2019, referred to  by  the  judge  at  [30(4)],
    stated that the Sponsor had a difficult time in her first marriage  due
    to domestic violence. It confirmed the Sponsor  was  taking  medication
    and stated that her mental  health  was  affected  by  the  Appellant's
    immigration status. The judge's  failure  to  refer  to  the  Sponsor's
    vulnerability as a former victim of domestic abuse was not material  to
    his finding that there were no insurmountable obstacles or  exceptional
    circumstances. The Sponsor would continue to have the  support  of  the
    Appellant in Pakistan. The judge considered the medical evidence and it
    was not argued that the Sponsor would be unable to access treatment for
    low mood, poor sleep, anxiety and depression in Pakistan.

42.  The grounds do not challenge the judge's finding at  [30(7)]  that  the
    Sponsor could avoid harassment from her ex-husband's family  by  moving
    to different area in  Pakistan.  I  am  not  persuaded  by  Ms  Popal's
    submission that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in Pakistan because the Appellant   would  not  be  able  to
    return to his home area and the couple would not be  able  to  relocate
    given their lack  of  finances  and  lack  of  family  support  outside
    Rawalpindi. The  Appellant  gave  evidence  that  he  was  employed  in
    Pakistan prior to coming to the  UK  and  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the  Appellant  could  gain  employment  on  return.  The
    inability to live with relatives in Pakistan was insufficient  to  meet
    the insurmountable obstacles test.

43.  I am satisfied the judge  took  into  account  the  Sponsor's  previous
    marriage and divorce, and the potential harassment should she return to
    the Appellant's home area in Rawalpindi. The judge considered the  lack
    of fertility treatment and the effect on the  Sponsor's  mental  health
    should  she  return  to  Pakistan  with  the   Appellant.   There   was
    insufficient evidence before the judge to show that the Appellant would
    not have access to treatment for her anxiety and depression.

44.  I find that the judge took into account all relevant circumstances  and
    his findings were consistent. He properly directed himself in  law  and
    his conclusion that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing outside the UK was open to him on the  evidence  before
    him. The judge gave adequate reasons for coming to that  conclusion  at
    [30(6)].

Razgar

45.   At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant's
    representative accepted the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules because he was an overstayer (see  [29]).  The  judge
    was invited to deal with the appeal under Article 8 and  in  particular
    to examine EX.1 and GEN 3.2. The judge did so. The case was not put  on
    the basis that if the Appellant made an application for entry clearance
    it would succeed. The point was not obvious and the judge did  not  err
    in law in failing to consider an argument which was not advanced by the
    Appellant's representative.

46.  In any event, the weight to be attached  to  the  public  interest  was
    significant given the Appellant has remained in the UK  unlawfully  for
    eight years and, during that time, has established a relationship  with
    the Sponsor. There was no challenge, in the grounds of appeal,  to  the
    judge's finding at  [30(6)(1)]  that  the  Appellant  could  return  to
    Pakistan whilst the Sponsor remained in the UK. The evidence before the
    judge was insufficient to establish unjustifiably harsh consequences if
    the Appellant returned to Pakistan to obtain entry clearance. The delay
    or inability to obtain fertility treatment was not sufficient:  Agyarko
    and Ikuga.

47.  The failure to refer to Razgar was not material. It was  apparent  from
    the decision that the judge had answered the first  four  questions  in
    the affirmative. The only remaining issue was proportionality which the
    judge considered at [31].  The  judge  weighed  all  the  evidence  and
    concluded the balance came down in favour of  the  Respondent.  On  the
    facts, there were no exceptional circumstances and the judge had struck
    a fair balance. Reference  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    material and did not indicate a lack of anxious scrutiny.  The  judge's
    finding that the refusal of leave to remain was proportionate was  open
    to him on the evidence before him and  he  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    coming to that conclusion.

48.  I find that there was no error of law in the decision dated 15  January
    2020 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 5 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 5 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email


