
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/17781/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2018                         | On 12 February 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                       Master Ikenna Osamudiamen Agim
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ti, Solicitor, Kesar & Co Solicitors (Bromley)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Nigeria born on  4  December
    1999 and currently 18 years old.  The appellant appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer  dated
    20 June 2016 to refuse entry clearance to allow the appellant to  enter
    the UK to join his mother, Rita Egwabor (the sponsor).  The  historical
    background to this case is that the sponsor arrived in the UK  in  2005
    and is now a British citizen.  The appellant first  applied  for  entry
    clearance in January 2014 and was refused.  His appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was dismissed by Judge Boyes in a decision promulgated on
    14 May 2015.  It was his further application for entry  clearance  made
    in 2016, refused on 20 June 2016, which is the subject of this appeal.

 2. Whilst the respondent accepted that the appellant was the  son  of  the
    sponsor, the  respondent  noted  that  at  the  time  of  the  previous
    application the appellant was living in the care  of  his  grandmother,
    who passed away in August 2014.  It was accepted that circumstances had
    now changed.  However, it was not accepted by the respondent  that  the
    sponsor had sole responsibility for the upbringing  of  the  appellant,
    and the respondent asserted that the sponsor also did not have adequate
    means to maintain and accommodate the  appellant  without  recourse  to
    public funds.  The respondent also considered Article 8, ECHR  but  was
    not satisfied that there were any exceptional circumstances.

 3. In a decision promulgated, on 7 August 2017, Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Siddall dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.   The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  from  the   Upper
    Tribunal, on the following grounds:

 a) Error as to finding in previous appeal on sole responsibility;

 b) Failure to consider material evidence;

 c) Error relating to tracing of appellant's father;

 d) Error in application of  Devaseelan (Second Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka* [2002] UKAIT 00702;

 e) Error in relation to Section 117B.

    Error of Law Discussion

 4. The key issue in this case is that of sole responsibility.  Judge Boyes
    was not satisfied that the sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    appellant as  at  the  date  of  decision  in  the  first  application.
    Firstly, he was not satisfied that the appellant's father had abdicated
    responsibility for his upbringing as claimed and that  no  confirmation
    had been received from him to confirm that he had no involvement in his
    son's upbringing and the judge was not satisfied that the  sponsor  had
    no knowledge of where the appellant's father was, or even if  this  was
    true, that she was unable to make enquiries to establish where  he  is,
    particularly as she was in a relationship with him  before  she  became
    pregnant and she knew where some of  his  family  members  lived.   The
    judge went on to find, however, that it was more likely than  not  that
    at the date of decision  the  sponsor  shared  responsibility  for  the
    appellant's care with her mother (at [49]).  In addition, at  [51]  the
    judge considered it:

         "more likely that his maternal  grandmother  shared  responsibility
         for his care with the sponsor.  I am therefore  not  satisfied  the
         sponsor had sole responsibility for him at the  date  of  decision.
         For all of the above reasons the appellant has not shown  that  his
         mother had sole responsibility for him at  the  date  of  decision,
         rather than shared responsibility with his father  and/or  maternal
         grandmother".

 5. It was not disputed that the appellant's grandmother is  now  deceased.
    The  appellant  also  provided  additional  evidence,  for  the  second
    hearing, from the appellant's school which all  showed  that  the  only
    contact was with the appellant's mother.  There  was  also  independent
    confirmation from the sponsor's partner,  which  was  not  specifically
    disputed that, as at 24 July 2017  the  appellant's  father  had  never
    appeared since the sponsor's partner had  known  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant's partner had never heard anything that suggested that he had
    taken any interest in the appellant since the appellant  went  to  live
    with his grandmother.  In addition, Mr Patrick Egwabor, the  individual
    with whom the appellant is currently staying confirmed, in an affidavit
    dated 21 October 2016, that "I do not know Ikenna's father and  I  have
    never seen him in my life and to the best of my knowledge  Ikenna  have
    not had any contact with his father or family".  There  was  a  further
    letter from Imonegame Gabriel Osigweksa (JP)  from  the  Order  of  the
    Knights of Saint Mulumba, Nigeria dated  21  October  2016,  confirming
    that  the  appellant  had  attended  church  frequently  and  that  the
    individual he was staying with was a member of the church and that:  "I
    do not know Ikenna's father, neither have I seen him."  The letter also
    confirmed that the appellant started living  with  Mr  Patrick  Egwabor
    after the death of his grandmother.  There was also fresh evidence from
    the appellant's school.

 6. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal took into consideration  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  "appellant's
    background and upbringing is as presented to the respondent and to  the
    Tribunal" and considered that it was in the appellant's best  interests
    (at paragraph 68 of Judge  Boyes'  decision)  that  "there  is  greater
    clarity provided regarding  the  details  of  his  upbringing  and  his
    father's involvement in his life before  any  further  entry  clearance
    application is made".

 7. Mr Ti submitted that the further information and evidence before  Judge
    Siddall, in relation to independent confirmation of who  the  appellant
    had lived with and what contact there was  with  his  father  (all  the
    documentary evidence suggested none) was  the  appellant's  attempt  to
    provide that clarity.

 8. The fact that the evidence that was provided to the Tribunal was not in
    the form suggested by the previous First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    excuse the First-tier Tribunal from considering whether, following  the
    guidance in relation to Devaseelan,  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be displaced.   The Tribunal fell into error in failing
    to give adequate reasons or indeed any reasons at all, as to why he did
    not accept, if that was the case, the additional  new  evidence  before
    the Tribunal from a number of different sources that there was, at  the
    date of the second First-tier Tribunal hearing,  no  contact  with  the
    appellant's father and that he had in effect abandoned his son.

 9. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal fell into error in its application
    of Devaseelan, in failing to adequately  engage  with  the  finding  of
    Judge Boyes that sole responsibility at that stage was more  likely  to
    be  shared  between  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's   grandmother.
    Although he had doubts about the evidence in relation to the father  he
    ultimately reached the conclusion that at that date responsibility  was
    shared between the grandmother and the appellant's mother.  Given  that
    finding, and the death of the appellant's grandmother, it was incumbent
    on the First-tier Tribunal to make a  finding  as  to  how  that  death
    affected the issue of sole responsibility and to give reasons  why,  in
    light of Judge Boyes' findings, the appellant's grandmother's death did
    not necessitate a finding of sole responsibility passing to his mother.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and  I
    set it aside.

    Remaking the Decision

11. Mr Ti relied on his skeleton argument and  indicated  that  no  further
    oral evidence was required.  In addition, Mr Ti  relied  on  a  further
    bundle of documents submitted under cover of a letter of December  2017
    which included, but was not limited to, a  letter  from  the  appellant
    dated 13 November 2017, and an affidavit from Mr Egwabor Patrick  dated
    20 November 2017.  This indicated that following  a  request  from  the
    sponsor, the appellant and Mr Egwabor on 8 October  2017,  following  a
    request of 7 October, went  to  try  and  track  down  the  appellant's
    father.  The affidavit details the efforts, which included confirmation
    that the appellant's father had moved away in 2003 after the  death  of
    his parents but that details  were  passed  on  to  the  appellant  and
    Patrick Egwabor of the appellant's father's cousin.   Mr  Egwabor  then
    obtained an affidavit from a Ms Isioma Agim, who indicated that she was
    a first  cousin  of  the  appellant's  father,  Mr  Agimma  Agim.   The
    affidavit stated that, consistent with the affidavit  from  Mr  Patrick
    Egwabor, that Mr Agimma's father passed away in February 2002  and  his
    mother in 2003  and  that  in  2005  she  received  evidence  that  the
    appellant's father, Mr Agimma, took ill and died on 6 August 2004  when
    crossing from Morocco to Spain.  Although the cousin indicated that she
    went to the registry to register his death in  2006  she  was  informed
    that it could not be registered since he had died outside Nigeria.

12. I take into account that the starting point is  Devaseelan.   Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Boyes was that he was not  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor was telling the  truth  in  relation  to  the  appellant  being
    kidnapped  by  his  father's  family  and   Judge   Boyes   highlighted
    inconsistencies in the sponsor's evidence to him.  Judge Boyes was  not
    satisfied of the following:

 a) The history of who has been involved with the appellant's upbringing;

 b) Who has been responsible for his care throughout the  entirety  of  his
    upbringing;

 c) What involvement his father has had with his upbringing;

 d) What contact the appellant has had with the appellant's  father  during
    his childhood; and

 e) What contact the sponsor has had with his father during his childhood.

13. Although Judge Boyes, for the reasons he gave, was not  satisfied  that
    the appellant's father had abdicated responsibility for his upbringing,
    considering the  totality  of  the  evidence,  including  the  evidence
    produced from independent sources in Nigeria in the church, a  JP,  the
    school and now the additional evidence from  the  appellant's  father's
    cousin and the information she had  and  that  he  passed  away,  I  am
    satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the appellant has  had  no
    contact with his father for the majority of his childhood.

14. In reaching this finding I have taken  into  consideration  that  Judge
    Boyes had the benefit of hearing from the sponsor, who was  not  called
    before me.  However, I am satisfied that this has to be  considered  in
    light of the new evidence as follows:

 a) The affidavit from Patrick Egwabor, with whom the appellant  has  lived
    since August 2014, stating that  he  has  never  seen  the  appellant's
    father and to the best of his knowledge the appellant  has  no  contact
    with his father and that the sponsor makes all the important  decisions
    relating to the appellant;

 b) A letter from the appellant's church, the Order of the Knights of Saint
    Mulumba, signed by a Justice of the Peace, stating that  he  knows  the
    appellant and his grandmother since 2005 and the appellant  lives  with
    Patrick Egwabor and that he has never seen the appellant's father;

 c) The witness statement from Mr Lawrence Ehiemua, the sponsor's  partner,
    stating that to the best of his knowledge the  appellant's  father  has
    not appeared since he, Mr Ehiemua, has known the sponsor in  2005.   Mr
    Ehiemua adopted his statement before  Judge  Siddall  and  it  was  not
    challenged before me that neither the respondent nor Judge Siddall took
    any issues with this statement;

 d) Letter from the appellant's school stating that the  sponsor  has  been
    responsible for making decisions concerning him including paying fees;

 e) The appellant's school records, all of which solely name the sponsor as
    the appellant's parent;

 f) The witness statement of the appellant stating that he had   no  memory
    of his father;

 g) The witness statement of the sponsor stating that neither she  nor  the
    appellant had had any contact with the  appellant's  father  since  the
    appellant went to live with his maternal grandmother in 2005;

 h) The additional affidavit from Patrick Egwabor dated  20  November  2017
    setting out efforts to track down the appellant's father;

 i) The appellant's letter dated 13 November 2017 indicating  that  he  had
    discovered that his father had died in 2004;

 j) The affidavit of Isioma Agim dated 20 November 2017.

15. I have taken into consideration that I have not had the opportunity  to
    examine any of these witnesses and have therefore given the appropriate
    weight to this documentary evidence.  However, I have  also  considered
    that if the appellant's case, that there has been no contact  with  his
    father, were not accepted I would have to reach the conclusion that the
    appellant and the sponsor have fabricated all  of  the  above  evidence
    from a number of different independent sources.  I do not find this  to
    be the case.

16. Even if I am wrong in the above I am satisfied that given the death  of
    the appellant's grandmother in 2014, which is  not  disputed,  all  the
    evidence  points  to  the   appellant's   sponsor   having   had   sole
    responsibility since 2014.

    The Law

17. The burden of proof is with the appellant to establish the facts  on  a
    balance  of  probabilities.   By  virtue  of  Section  85(4)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, the Tribunal may consider  any
    matter which it thinks relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
    including a matter arising after the date of the decision.  However, it
    may not consider a new matter without the respondent's consent.  It was
    not submitted by either party that there were any  new  matters  before
    me.

18. The only appeal before me is, consistent with the Immigration Act 2014,
    (which amended the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002), under
    Section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
    amended (refusal of human rights claim) is on the grounds  provided  by
    Section 84(2), that the decision is unlawful under  Section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

19. I have considered the relevant case  law  including  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, Singh &
    Khalid v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
    74, and Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

20. When considering the appellant's human rights appeal  I  must  consider
    the decision through the lens of the relevant Immigration  Rules.   The
    relevant Immigration Rules which I must consider at  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision are set out at paragraph 397 of  the  Immigration
    Rules including as follows:

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

             ...

                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom ... and has had sole responsibility  for  the
                      child's upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                      the UK ...  and  there  are  serious  and  compelling
                      family or other considerations which  make  exclusion
                      of the child undesirable  and  suitable  arrangements
                      have been made for the child's care; and

             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                  is not a civil partner, and has not formed an  independent
                  family unit; and

             (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the  parent,
                  parents or relative the child is seeking to  join  without
                  recourse  to  public  funds  in  accommodation  which  the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to  join,
                  own or occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
                  parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
                  recourse to public funds; and

             ..."

21. In relation to the maintenance  and  accommodation  grounds  there  was
    considerable evidence before me (which Mr Avery  did  not  dispute)  in
    relation to the sponsor's accommodation comprising of a three bedroomed
    house.  There was also evidence in relation to the sponsor's income and
    that of Mr Ehiemua, who, it was not disputed,  contributes  financially
    to the family.  Whilst this income cannot  be  taken  into  account  in
    terms of maintaining the appellant he clearly provides funds in support
    of his own children, thus releasing the sponsor's funds to support  the
    appellant.

22. It was not disputed by Mr Avery, who made very limited  submissions  on
    the substantive appeal, that the appellant could meet  the  maintenance
    and accommodation provisions of paragraph 297.  I am satisfied  on  the
    basis of the evidence before me that he can.  In addition, at the  date
    of the entry clearance decision the  appellant  was  under  18.   I  am
    satisfied therefore, given that I find that the appellant's mother  met
    the sole responsibility requirement, that  the  appellant  met  all  of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules at the date of the  respondent's
    decision.

23. Although neither party raised the matter I indicated that it was  clear
    that the appellant, as of the month before the Upper Tribunal  hearing,
    had reached the age of 18 and I allowed both  representatives  to  make
    further submissions on this matter.  However, other than the  appellant
    reaching the age of 18 there was no evidence before me to suggest  that
    his circumstances had materially changed and I  do  not  consider  this
    fact relevant to the substance of the decision under appeal.  I  accept
    that he continues to be dependent financially and  emotionally  on  his
    mother in the UK, who still makes all arrangements in relation  to  his
    accommodation, education and upkeep ( see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31).

24. I have applied the five stage test in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   I  am
    satisfied that family life exists and that the decision to refuse entry
    clearance given the low threshold may interfere with that family  life.
    I  have  taken  into  consideration  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are
    satisfied in this case, so arguably the decision is not  in  accordance
    with the law.  However,  I  have  gone  on  to  consider  whether  that
    interference is proportionate.

25. In  so  doing  I  have  considered  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which  sets  out  the  public  interest
    considerations applicable  in  all  cases  under  Article  8.   I  have
    reminded myself that the maintenance of effective immigration  controls
    is in the public interest.  It is also  in  the  public  interest  that
    persons seeking to enter the UK are able to speak English.  It was  not
    disputed before me that the appellant satisfies  this  requirement  and
    that he is financially independent, given the evidence produced of  the
    finances available to his mother.  I am therefore satisfied that  there
    is no weight to be given to the public interest on these factors.

26. In  considering  proportionality  I  have  applied  the  balance  sheet
    approach recommended in Hesham Ali.  The appellant is now an adult  and
    that therefore the considerations under best interests of the child  no
    longer  apply.   However,  I  have   taken   into   consideration   the
    considerable documentary evidence before me which  all  points  to  the
    appellant being in a vulnerable situation following the  death  of  his
    grandmother.  I am satisfied that strong family ties continue to  exist
    between the appellant and his mother and his half-siblings in  the  UK,
    albeit that he has never met his half-siblings.  I have considered that
    the appellant is still very young and, in my findings, has no family in
    Nigeria other than his cousin, who has given reasons in  the  affidavit
    provided, (again, which Mr Avery did not substantively challenge)  that
    she  cannot  be  responsible  for  his  care.   I   have   taken   into
    consideration that the appellant remains under the care of  Mr  Egwabor
    in  Nigeria.   I  am  satisfied,  taking  into  consideration  all  the
    evidence,  that  the  respondent's  decision  is   a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's family  life  with  his  mother,  the
    sponsor, and his half-siblings in the UK.

    Summary and Conclusion

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  I remake the decision, allowing the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.

Signed                                  Date:  7 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought or is made.

Signed                                  Date:  7 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
