
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/17782/2016
                                                               hu/17784/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 August 2018                    |On 02 October 2018                    |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                       AMANPREET [k] (first appellant)
                       gurpreet [s] (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Lourdes, instructed by Farani Taylor, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, Mr Gurpreet [S] and Mrs Amanpreet [K], are citizens  of
    India.  By a decision promulgated 10 May 2018, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in-law such that the decision fell  to  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for reaching that finding were as follows:

         "1.  I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its
         decision falls to be set  aside.   My  reasons  for  reaching  that
         decision are as follows.  First, I find that the judge  has  failed
         to apply the law clearly and accurately.  At [18], the judge  found
         that the child IK would not attain seven years of residence in  the
         United Kingdom until 10 November 2016, that is after  the  date  of
         the decision which is the subject of the appeal.  The child had, of
         course, attained seven years' residence by the date of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal hearing (3 April 2017).  The judge held that  he  was
         "obliged only to consider the situation at the date of the decision
         and on the evidence that was before  the  decision  maker  at  that
         time".  He found that there was:

             "A strong indication that [IK] might now meet the requirements
             of paragraph 276ADE.  No application has  been  made  in  that
             application.  The appellants are free to make  an  application
             now that circumstances appear to have changed.  That will give
             the respondent an opportunity to consider family circumstances
             within the relevant Immigration Rules."

         2.   The judge's approach is problematic.  Under Section 85 of  the
         2002 Act (as amended) it was open to the judge to take  account  of
         circumstances as at the date of the hearing, when  considering  the
         appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Indeed, having decided  that  he
         should consider Article 8, the judge found  at  [46]  that  he  was
         "satisfied on the  evidence  before  me  today  that  the  proposed
         removal may be an interference  by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of the applicants' right to respect for ... family  life".
         Furthermore, there was no obligation upon an appellant  to  make  a
         further application during the course of the  appeal  process.   At
         [18] (see above) the judge appears have  penalised  the  appellants
         for failing to take steps which  they  were  not  obliged  to  take
         whilst, in the human  rights  appeal,  refusing  from  taking  into
         account factors weighing in favour of the appellants at the date of
         hearing.

         3.   Secondly, the judge's approach appears to have  led  him  into
         error in his  assessment  of  Section  117  of  the  2002  Act  (as
         amended).  Given that, by  the  date  of  the  hearing,  IK  was  a
         "qualifying child" having  attained  seven  years'  residence,  the
         judge should have considered Section 117B(6):

             '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.'

         4.   The judge considered Section  117  at  [32]  but  he  made  no
         specific reference either there or elsewhere in the decision to the
         application of Section 117B(6)  to  the  particular  facts  in  the
         appeal.

         5.   Thirdly, as the grounds of appeal point out, the judge appears
         to have ignored the provisions of MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         705.  At [45], the Court of Appeal found that "... where the  seven
         year Rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some  weight  leaning  in
         favour of leave to remain being granted".  The  judge  should  have
         considered Section 117B(6) as part of  his  analysis  of  the  best
         interests of IK pursuant to section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009.

         6.   In the light of my observations set out above, I find that the
         judge's decision is flawed.  I set it aside.  The decision  can  be
         re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  I direct that there  be  a  resumed
         hearing in the Upper Tribunal before myself on a date to  be  fixed
         at Bradford.  Should either party seek to rely upon fresh evidence,
         that evidence should be served on the other party  and  filed  with
         the Upper Tribunal no less than  ten  days  prior  to  the  resumed
         hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         7.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 10 April 2017 is set aside.  Findings of fact are not preserved.
          The decision will be re-made at or  following  a  resumed  hearing
         before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane at Bradford on a date to be  fixed
         (two hours).

         8.   No anonymity direction is made."

 2. I heard evidence from  Amanpreet  [K],  the  first  appellant,  at  the
    resumed hearing at Bradford on 30 August 2018.  She gave  her  evidence
    in Punjabi with the assistance of an interpreter.  She said she had no-
    one living in India now.  Her husband had sold his business there to  a
    partner.  The appellant and her family are supported by her sister  and
    also friends.  The child (I K) cannot read or  speak  Punjabi  and  has
    been now living in the United Kingdom for four  years.   The  appellant
    said that, should she be forced to return  to  India,  her  life  there
    would be "dull and faded."  I  also  heard  evidence  from  the  second
    appellant, Gurpreet [S].   He  adopted  his  written  evidence  as  his
    evidence-in-chief.  He told me that all his  family  members  were  now
    living in the United Kingdom.

 3. Mr McVeety, for the Secretary of State, did not  seek  to  support  the
    decision of the respondent dated 10  September  2015  to  refuse  these
    appellants further leave to remain.  He said that it was  difficult  to
    see why the public interest, given the particular circumstances of this
    case, should require the removal of the appellants and their child, IK.
     In the light of Mr McVeety's comments and the evidence adduced in  the
    Upper Tribunal and First-tier Tribunal, I find that the  appeal  should
    be allowed on human rights grounds (Article  8  ECHR).  I  accept  that
    family life cannot reasonably be continued in  India,  the  ties  (both
    familial and economic) between the  appellants  and  their  country  of
    nationality having been effectively severed during the time  which  the
    family has resided in the United Kingdom. In any event,  the  child  IK
    has now been living in this country for nearly 9 years.

Notice of Decision

 4. The appeals of the appellants against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State dated 10 September 2015  are  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
