
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17820/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2021                  |On 4 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Brown


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1999 and is a citizen of Gambia. He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State refusing his human rights application following the making  of
    a deportation order. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moxon) allowed  the
    appeal. The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge records [4] that the facts were agreed.  Those  facts  (which
    include the appellant's criminal conduct for which he was sentenced  in
    May 2018 to 40 months' imprisonment and that the appellant had  been  a
    victim of trafficking in the United Kingdom)  are helpfully  summarised
    by the judge at [4 (a-x)]. The judge concluded [24] that this  'is  one
    of the few and  exceptional  cases  where  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those specified in Section  117C  [of  the
    2002 Act] that outweigh the public interest in the deportation  of  the
    appellant.' The judge proceeded to give his reasons  for  that  finding
    which include the fact that the  appellant,  as  shown  by  becoming  a
    victim of trafficking, was vulnerable  to  manipulation;  that  he  had
    shown remorse for his single act of criminal offending; that  his  risk
    of re-offending following treatment for his mental health problems  was
    now assessed as medium.

 3. There are several grounds of appeal.  First,  the  Secretary  of  State
    asserts that the  judge  erred  by  accepting,  without  examining  the
    author's credentials, social worker evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    rehabilitated following  his  criminal  offending  and  also  that  the
    appellant enjoys family life with his mother and step father capable of
    attracting the protection provided by Article 8 ECHR . At  the  initial
    hearing, Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  told
    me that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not,  in  the
    respondent's opinion, perverse; she accepted that, on the agreed  facts
    (see [2] above), it had been possible for  the  appellant  to  succeed.
    Rather, the Secretary of State's complaint was that the judge had given
    inappropriate weight to particular  factors  in  his  analysis  of  the
    relevant evidence.  In the light of that submission, I  find  that  the
    first challenge is without merit. It was open to  the  judge  to  place
    weight on the social worker's evidence without  considering  in  detail
    her 'credentials'. In any event, the grounds do not indicate  what,  if
    anything, in those credentials should have led to the judge  to  attach
    less weight to her evidence.  Further,  as  regards  family  life,  the
    Secretary of State appears to accept that it was open to the  judge  on
    the facts to find that family life existed between the adult  appellant
    and his adult family members and I cannot see  anything  wrong  in  his
    analysis of the evidence or application of the relevant  case  law  (in
    particular, see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, which the judge  cites  at
    [11]).

 4. The second ground challenges the judge's application  of  the  relevant
    jurisprudence in his consideration  of  the  weight  attaching  to  the
    public  interest  concerned  with  the  application's  deportation,  in
    particular Akinyemi [2019] EWCA Civ 2098. However, whilst the judge has
    correctly sought to extract the legal  principles  from  the  case  law
    which may be relevant in the instant appeal, the grounds criticise  him
    for failing to distinguish Akinyemi on the facts.  Comparisons  of  the
    facts of cases before the Court of Appeal and First-tier  Tribunal  are
    rarely helpful and a failure to undertake such comparisons is  unlikely
    to amount to an error of law. I am satisfied that the judge has applied
    the relevant case law correctly.

 5. The third ground of appeal focuses upon the judge's findings  at  [24].
    The judge found that the appellant  was  'vulnerable  to  manipulation'
    and, whilst his mental health problems had been  addressed  during  his
    time in the United Kingdom, the judge  found  that  the  medication  he
    requires would not be available  in  Gambia.  The  Secretary  of  State
    complains that the judge had no evidence before him to  show  that  the
    traffickers who had  targeted  the  appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom
    operate in Gambia ('not connected with Gambia  whatsoever')  and  would
    present a threat to the appellant there. This submission misunderstands
    the judge's finding. The judge did not find that the appellant would be
    at risk of being targeted by the same  traffickers  as  in  the  United
    Kingdom but rather that the appellant's vulnerability, which  had  been
    demonstrated by the fact that he had fallen victim  to  traffickers  at
    all, would be likely to expose him to a risk of  similar  treatment  in
    Gambia. It is true that the judge does  not  refer  to  any  background
    material detailing trafficking in Gambia but, equally, the Secretary of
    State does not seek to argue that such activity does not  occur  there.
    Further, the characterisation by the judge of  the  appellant's  family
    contacts with Gambia ('some family but  nobody  to  support  him')  was
    available to him on the evidence.

 6. Finally, I do not accept, as the Secretary of State  argues,  that  the
    judge 'played down' the public interest. Throughout his  decision,  the
    judge has remained mindful of the public interest  concerned  with  the
    deportation of the appellant. His conclusion that,  on  the  particular
    facts in the appeal, the appellant did cross the significant  threshold
    of showing that there exist  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above the factors referred to in section 177C  was,  as  Mrs  Pettersen
    acknowledged, open to him. Another judge may, on the same  facts,  have
    concluded otherwise but that is not the point. The judge has reached an
    outcome which both parties accept was available to him on the evidence.
    In reaching that outcome, he has not had regard to  irrelevant  matters
    whilst  he  has  evaluated  all  relevant  evidence.   He   has   given
    appropriate weight to the public interest and the  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's offending and he has accurately applied relevant case  law.
    In the circumstances, I can identify no good reason to  interfere  with
    his decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 24 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
