
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17041/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                           |On 12 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                             mr md julhash uddin
                       (anonymity direction NOT Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse of S H Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Uddin against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in which his human rights appeal was dismissed by  the  judge,
    the human rights decision having been made on 29 June 2016.

2.   Essentially there are three strands to the  challenge  to  the  judge's
    decision.  The first is in relation to the judge's acceptance that  the
    appellant's leave was curtailed properly on 30 October 2014  to  expire
    on 1 November 2014 and that obviously had significance to the  question
    of how long he had been in the United Kingdom with leave.   The  second
    issue was with regard to a document verification report in  respect  of
    which the respondent's conclusion was that he had submitted false  bank
    statements and a solvency letter and the third issue is with regard  to
    Article 8 in particular the judge's dealing with the best interests  of
    the appellant's two children in particular his  son  who  suffers  from
    autism.

3.   The first matter because it in a sense leads the other to is the  issue
    of the curtailment.  The judge addressed this issue with regard to  the
    provisions of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000 as
    amended by the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Amendment  Order
    of 2013 with regard to service.  What had happened was that the  notice
    of curtailment had been sent by recorded delivery, it was  returned  to
    the respondent by the post office and it was in effect  served  to  the
    file.  But it is clear that documentation it seems in this  regard  was
    sent to the Tribunal subsequent to the hearing but does not  appear  to
    have reached the judge.  I note  that  the  decision  containing  these
    submissions and a copy of the decision in Mahmood and  a  copy  of  the
    2003 Regulations were sent on 11 September  2017  which  is  some  time
    before the judge's decision was promulgated and it  was  obviously  not
    brought to his attention as he  proceeded  to  address  the  matter  in
    relation to the 2000 Regulations.

4.   I think it is common ground that in  fact  the  2003  Regulations  were
    applicable in this case and the crucial difference between the two sets
    of Regulations is that service of notice to  the  representative  under
    Regulation 7(2)(c) is  a  prerequisite  to  effective  service  of  the
    curtailment notice.  That was not done in this case.

5.   Ms Aboni on behalf of the respondent very properly accepts  that  there
    is no evidence that that was shown to have been the case and I think it
    is clear the argument is clearly set out in the letter of 11  September
    2017 and as argued by Mr Woodhouse today that  that  was  the  relevant
    provision in this case because leave was effectively brought to an  end
    by the curtailment notice rather than leaving a period of  leave  still
    extant.  That was the relevant provision and therefore it would  appear
    that curtailment notice was not properly  served  and  that  has  clear
    implications for the duration of leave that the appellant  had  had  in
    the United Kingdom and there would have to be a rehearing on that basis
    alone.

6.   As regards the document verification report Mr Woodhouse  raised  today
    an issue in relation to that which is that on the face of it, it refers
    to contact with the bank on 5 December 2012 which is inconsistent  with
    the date of the application made by Mr Uddin  in  2013.   Ms  Aboni  on
    behalf of the respondent  argued  that  it  is  a  typographical  error
    bearing in mind that the date of the written confirmation  is  December
    2013 and subsequent attached emails from that time.  That may very well
    be right but since the matter is going to go back for rehearing  anyway
    there is an opportunity to investigate that exists in the  interim  and
    no doubt will form part of submissions before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on that occasion.

7.   The third issue is that of Article 8 which  I  think  Mr  Woodhouse  is
    right again would have to be reconsidered in any event.  I do have some
    concerns about the brevity of  the  judge's  evaluation  of  the  point
    particularly in the absence of any mention of the best interests of the
    children.  The assessment really is very brief.

8.   The only point I would make in relation  to  that  in  respect  of  the
    grounds is that it is stated that the judge said that Article 8 was not
    engaged.  I do not think  that  is  right.   The  judge  accepted  that
    Article 8 was in play but that becomes academic in light  of  the  fact
    that the matter is going to be remitted and I think it is a case  where
    the extent of the remittal is such that the decision would  effectively
    have to be fully remade and therefore the matter will be remitted for a
    full hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

