
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17090/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 9 September 2020              |On the 28 September 2020             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                            Mr MD ASHRAFUL ISLAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Biggs, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Khosla) promulgated  on
    13  February  2020.   By  its  decision,  the  Tribunal   allowed   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision, dated,  2
    October 2019 to refuse his human rights claim. The First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity order and Counsel did not seek to advance any
    grounds as to why such an order would be necessary.

 1. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department as the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Islam  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The hearing took place on 9 September  2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable,  and  both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could   be
    determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court  at
    Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video. There were  no
    issues regarding sound, and  no  substantial  technical  problems  were
    encountered during the hearing and I am satisfied both  advocates  were
    able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

 3. I am grateful to Ms  Pettersen  and  Mr  Biggs  for  their  clear  oral
    submissions.

Background:

 4. The appellant's immigration history is summarised in  the  decision  of
    the FtTJ at paragraphs 2-17.   I  also  have  copies  of  some  of  the
    documentary evidence relating  to  various  applications  made  in  the
    appellant's bundle. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.  He
    entered the UK as a Tier 4 General migrant in early 2010  and  made  an
    application to extend his stay in the UK under the Tier 1  entrepreneur
    arrangements. This was refused on 3 May 2013 with a  right  of  appeal.
    The appellant lodged an appeal against the decision  but  withdrew  the
    appeal  on  12  March  2014.  He  thereafter  lodged   an   out-of-time
    application as a  Tier  4  general  migrant  which  was  refused  on  9
    September 2014 without a right of  appeal.  The  papers  refer  to  the
    respondent having made a decision to remove the appellant from  the  UK
    on 16 November 2014 on the grounds that he had relied upon a fraudulent
    English language certificate.

 5. On 27 November 2014, the appellant lodged judicial  review  proceedings
    against the decision. The following history is taken from the statement
    of reasons at page 348 AB.

 6. On the 14 January 2016, the Upper Tribunal refused  permission  on  the
    basis that the appellant had filed grounds out of time nd that  he  had
    an out of country right of appeal against the removal decision. The  UT
    certified the case as " totally without merit".  The  appellant  sought
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, but this was refused on  2
    February 2016.

 7. On 27 December 2016, the appellant lodged a claim for asylum. This  was
    refused on 15 June 2017 with a right of appeal. The appellant lodged an
    appeal against the decision  which  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 11 August 2017.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which was granted.  The  application  for  permission  to
    appeal went before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis on 23 January 2018
    who, by decision dated 19th February  2018  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 9. In the interim, the appellant  had  notified  the  respondent  that  he
    wished to voluntarily depart the UK taking advantage of the respondents
    assisted voluntary return scheme.

10. On 19th February 2018, being the same day his appeal was  dismissed  by
    the Upper Tribunal, he notified the respondent that he no  longer  wish
    to return to Bangladesh that wish to appeal the decision  on  his  most
    recent Tier 4 application citing the decision in Ahsan.

11. On the 27 March 2018 he applied to the Upper Tribunal to reinstate  the
    JR proceedings.

12. On the 23 April 2018, an application for permission  was  made  to  the
    Court of Appeal to re-open the proceedings  and  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal made on 14 January 2016.

13. On 15 August 2018, the application was stayed pending the hearing of  a
    number of linked cases to consider the issue of re-opening cases on the
    basis of a change in the common law. This was subsequently settled, and
    the hearing listed was vacated on the 6 November 2018.

14. On 17 January 2019, a consent order was sealed by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    agreeing for the withdrawal of the re-instatement  application  on  the
    basis that the respondent had made an offer of settlement.

15. The FtTJ states  at  paragraph  7  that  it  was  then  said  that  the
    appellant's judicial review claim was conceded. There is  an  order  of
    the Court of Appeal confirming that the appellant's judicial review had
    been compromised. It is set out at page 347 AB.

16. The consent order makes reference to "the appellant having proposed  to
    make or reiterate the human rights submission/claim that was  submitted
    to the respondent on 27 December 2016 challenging his removal from  the
    United Kingdom on the basis that  it  would  breach  his  rights  under
    article 8 of the  ECHR  and  to  provide  further  representations  and
    evidence upon which he wishes to rely within 28  days  of  the  consent
    order". The respondent agreed that he would use his best endeavours  to
    decide any such human rights claim within three months thereafter.

17. At paragraph 3 of the consent order the following is stated:-

         "3.  The respondent agreeing that in the event that the  First-tier
         Tribunal finds in an appeal from the refusal of such  human  rights
         claim that the appellant did not cheat:

          a) the respondent will take reasonable steps to put the appellant
             into the position he would have been had the allegation  under
             section 10 removal decision based upon it, not been made; and

          b) should a further application for leave repeat all or  part  of
             the course that the appellant was studying when his leave  was
             curtailed (or  undertake  a  similar  course  at  a  different
             institution),  and  should  that  additional  time  raise  any
             possible issue with regard to  academic  progression,   (where
             the five year or otherwise), the  respondent  will  take  into
             account all the circumstances of the case, and  in  particular
             in deciding his application will act reasonably to ensure that
             as far as practicable, the appellant is not  disadvantaged  by
             an earlier wrong finding of deception."

18. As a result of the  respondent's  concession  in  the  judicial  review
    matter, a decision was taken by the respondent in the appellant's human
    rights claim.

19. The decision letter is dated 2 October 2019. It refers to the appellant
    having made a human rights application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis  of  his  private  life  established  since
    entering the United Kingdom. The decision letter began by  setting  out
    the appellant's immigration history which  I  have  summarised  in  the
    preceding paragraphs. The decision letter made reference to there being
    no reference made about a partner, parent, or dependent children in the
    United Kingdom under the  family  life  rules  under  Appendix  FM  and
    therefore his claim was only considered under the private life route.

20. When considering a private life rules under paragraph  276ADE  (1)  the
    respondent stated that his application fell for refusal on  grounds  of
    suitability set out in section S-LTR of Appendix FM. In particular  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of S-LTR 4.2 and therefore  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1).

21. The reasons given in the decision letter stated that the appellant,  in
    support of his Tier 4 (General) student  application  submitted  on  18
    March 2013 (2014?)  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational
    Testing Service ("ETS"). He stated that he had attended London  College
    of Media and Technology on 21 August 2012 and  undertook  the  speaking
    component of the ETS TOEIC English language test.

22. The decision letter went on to state:

         "ETS has a record of your speaking test. Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests. ETS undertook a check of your test and confirmed to
         the SSHD that there was significant evidence to conclude that  your
         certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of  a  proxy  test
         taker. Your scores from the test taken on 21  August  2012,  London
         College of Media and Technology have now been cancelled by ETS.

         On the basis of  the  information  provided  to  her  by  ETS,  the
         Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  your   certificate   was
         fraudulently  obtained  and  that  you  use   deception   in   your
         application. In fraudulently obtaining a TOEIC certificate  in  the
         manner outlined above,  you  willingly  participated  in  what  was
         clearly an organised and serious attempt, given the  complicity  of
         the test centre itself, to  defraud  the  secretary  of  state  and
         others. In doing so you displayed  a  flagrant  disregard  for  the
         public interest, according to which migrants are required to have a
         certain level of English-language ability in  order  to  facilitate
         social  integration  and  cohesion,  as  well  as  to  reduce   the
         likelihood of them being a burden on the taxpayer.

         Accordingly,  I   am   satisfied   that   you   have   made   false
         representations in a previous application for leave  to  remain  in
         United Kingdom. Your application is therefore refused at  paragraph
         276 ADE(1) (i) with reference  to  S-LTR  4.2  of  the  Immigration
         rules."

23. The decision letter also noted that as he had been found unsuitable  he
    could therefore not meet the rules  on  eligibility  grounds.  However,
    notwithstanding the above, consideration was given to  his  eligibility
    under Paragraph 276 ADE (1) on the basis of his private  life.  It  was
    noted that he was a national of Bangladesh having  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a Tier 4 student Visa  valid  from  January  2010  until  31
    December 2012. The respondent considered that it was reasonable for him
    to leave the United Kingdom because he had not held any legal leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom since 31 December 2012 and  therefore  the
    private life  established  has,  for  the  most  part,  been  illegally
    obtained. In addition, having entered as a student this was not a  path
    to  settlement  and  thus  could  have  no  reasonable  expectation  of
    acquiring further leave following the expiration of the  student  visa.
    The decision letter went on to  state  that  there  would  be  no  very
    significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into  Bangladesh  having
    entered the United Kingdom aged 28 years old, having spent all  of  his
    life up to that point in Bangladesh, including all  his  childhood  and
    formative years. He had not claimed to have an immediate family in  the
    UK and it was not accepted that he had no ties to Bangladesh given  the
    length of time he resided there.

24. The respondent went on consider whether  there  were  any  "exceptional
    circumstances" which would give rise to a grant of leave outside of the
    rules but for the reasons given in the decision concluded that  it  was
    reasonable to expect him  to  return  to  Pakistan.  Consequently,  his
    application was refused.

25. The appellant appealed that decision and it came before the FtT  (Judge
    Khosla) on 13 December 2019. In a decision promulgated on  13  February
    2020, the FtTJ allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds. In summary, the
    FtTJ considered the evidence  advanced  on  behalf  the  respondent  to
    demonstrate that the appellant had use deception, but for  the  reasons
    set out at  paragraph  [63]  -[68]  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the evidential burden on her by reference
    to the generic evidence and also the specific individual evidence  that
    related to this appellant. The judge also went on to make a  number  of
    adverse findings in relation to the appellant. In particular, the  FtTJ
    found that the appellant's evidence concerning  his  application  as  a
    Tier 1 entrepreneur was "most unsatisfactory" and that he had not  been
    entirely truthful about his motivations for sitting the TOEIC  test  in
    relation to that (at [72]).  The judge also made a number  of  findings
    of  fact  concerning  the  appellant's  English-language   ability   at
    paragraphs [77]- [81] and that he concluded at [82] that the  appellant
    spoken English was below the level which would have been  expected  him
    to meet the English language  requirement  to  extend  his  stay  under
    either the Tier 1 arrangements of the Tier 4 general arrangements.   At
    [83] he found that at least one of the reasons  did  not  complete  his
    course was that he was unable to keep up with his studies  due  to  his
    poor English. The consequence of this was that at  [85]  he  would  not
    have succeeded in his Tier 4 application. At [88] the judge  considered
    the consent order but found that the appellant had not  had  his  leave
    curtailed and that he had been an overstayer having made an out of time
    application for leave to remain and had not embarked on any course.

26. The FtTJ found that the appellant enjoyed a private life in the UK  and
    accepted there would be an interference with  the  appellant's  private
    life, but in the light of his conclusion that the respondent  not  made
    out the allegation of fraud against  the  appellant,  the  decision  to
    refuse his application based as it was, on the unproved  allegation  of
    fraud, was not in accordance with the  law  (at  [91]).   He  therefore
    concluded that in the light of his  finding  at  [91]  the  appellant's
    removal was also not in accordance with the law. He  therefore  allowed
    the appeal on article 8 grounds but added the observation it [99]  that
    whilst the case against  the  appellant  was  unproven,  and  that  the
    appellant would not have been in a different position  because  of  the
    allegation (that is Tier 4 general application  would  have  fallen  to
    refused due to his inability to communicate in English), that it  would
    be a matter for the  respondent  "what  she  decides  to  do  with  the
    appellants matter in the light of my disposal  of  the  appeal  in  his
    favour but that she may wish to take note of my findings". He therefore
    allowed the appeal under article 8 on the basis  of  the  decision  was
    unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998.

27. Permission to appeal was issued on behalf of the Secretary of State and
    on 21 May 2020 permission was granted by FTJ Fisher. There was no cross-
    appeal on behalf of the appellant.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

28. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions, inter alia, indicating that it  was  provisionally  of  the
    view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face  to
    face hearing and that this could take place  via  Skype.  Both  parties
    have indicated that they were content for the  hearing  to  proceed  by
    this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable  oral
    submissions to be given by each of the parties.

29. Ms Pettersen relied upon the written grounds of appeal. There  were  no
    further written submissions.

30. No written submissions were filed on behalf of Mr Islam in the form  of
    a Rule 24 response. However, at the end  of  his  oral  submissions  Mr
    Biggs provided a copy of his  speaking  note  (sent  by  email  to  the
    Tribunal and to Ms Pettersen).

31.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful for
    their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

32. The written grounds submit that the FtTJ made a  material  misdirection
    in law by failing to adequately correctly to assess the burden of proof
    in line with the case of SM and Qadir (ETS-Evidence -Burden  of  Proof)
    [2016] and that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  why  he
    considered the respondent's  evidence  was  insufficient  to  meet  the
    burden required.

33. It is further submitted that the FtTJ "misinterpreted the evidence" and
    at  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  respondent  showed  that  the
    appellant's English language test had been invalidated.

34. The grounds rely upon the report relied  upon  which  referred  to  the
    evidence of Prof French  and  had  the  FtTJ  property  considered  the
    respondent's evidence it would have been clear that deception had  been
    demonstrated to the standard balance of probabilities.

35. The grounds refer to the material findings of the judge  at  paragraphs
    83 - 85 (that referred to his assessment of the evidence as to  why  he
    had not completed his course at Icon College, that he  had  found  that
    the appellants written English is poor and that his spoken English  was
    very poor and that even if he had taken a bona fides test, he would not
    have passed the test for the language requirement. The  grounds  submit
    that " it is respectfully submitted that the test is  not  whether  the
    appellant  speaks  English  poorly,  but  whether  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, the appellant employed deception. The witness  statement
    and the spreadsheet provided the necessary evidence to demonstrate that
    he did employed deception."

36. The grounds challenge the findings made at [67] which referred  to  the
    evidence submitted on behalf of the respondent and his conclusion  that
    the respondent had not discharged the initial  evidential  burden.  The
    grounds submit "there may be reasons why person  it  was  not  able  to
    speak English to the required level would nonetheless cause or permit a
    proxy candidate to undertake a ETS test on their behalf,  or  otherwise
    to cheat" (citing the decision in MA (Nigeria)).

37. It was submitted that the appellant's difficulties within this language
    did not mean that the appellant personally took the test but  that  the
    programme shows students standing  next  terminals  while  proxy  test-
    takers took the test for them and the methods used "would not  preclude
    candidates and having travelled the test centre and having knowledge of
    procedures and content of the test itself, even though they not take it
    personally.

38. The grounds then refer to the conclusion made by the judge that "he was
    unable to say one way or the other that the appellant cheated given the
    lack of evidence specific to the appellant  and  the  appellant's  less
    than  satisfactory evidence" but that the judge then stated  at  [99  -
    100] that whilst he found the case against the appellant unproven,  the
    appellant would not have been in a different position  because  of  the
    allegation because his tier  4  general  application  would  have  been
    refused due to his inability to communicate in English to the requisite
    standard. The judge stated "it will be a matter for the respondent what
    she decides to do with the appellant matter in the light of my disposal
    of his appeal in his favour, but she may wish to  take  a  note  of  my
    findings in particular paragraph 88 of my decision  and  reasons."  The
    grounds submit that the judge erred in law by failing to give  adequate
    reasons for holding that this appellant had a poor command  of  English
    would therefore  have  no  reason  to  secure  a  test  certificate  by
    deception.

39. The grounds state "the  judge  is  being  ambiguous  by  allowing  this
    appeal, despite not being satisfied at  the  level  of  evidence  being
    provided by the appellant, then asking the respondent to grant a period
    of leave?"

40. In summary it is submitted that the evidential burden was met and  that
    the evidential burden fell upon the  appellant  to  offer  an  innocent
    explanation, he has not done so. The judge had not appreciated that the
    evidential burden was met and that had the  judge  properly  considered
    the evidence deception, the tribunal would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion.

41. The grounds then turn to the human rights claim  and  states  that  the
    judge was "overly generous" in his considerations  as  to  his  private
    life because the appellant had was a citizen of  Bangladesh  who  lived
    there until adult hood, was in good health and  has  family  in  India,
    lingual (sic) and cultural ties to Bangladesh. Whilst the grounds  then
    refer to him being  in  a  relationship  with  a  British  citizen,  Ms
    Pettersen indicated that that was in error.

42. In her oral submissions, she submitted that the FtTJ's finding that his
    level of English was not to the requisite standard and  considered  his
    account of taking the test and the appellant's evidence that it was not
    his voice on the records all went against his overall  credibility  and
    this was relevant to the FtTJ's finding that the Secretary of State had
    not made a prima facie case of deception.

43. She submitted that the judge had referred to the APPG report  and  that
    the criticisms were not addressed in the witness  statements  submitted
    on behalf of the respondent from  Mr  Vaghela  (dated  December  2019).
    However, it was irrelevant because the witness  statement  referred  to
    the lookup tool and therefore the onus was on the appellant to  provide
    a credible or legitimate explanation for the circumstances relating  to
    the test.

44. Mr Biggs, Counsel on behalf  of  the  appellant  had  not  submitted  a
    written Rule 24 response prior to the hearing but at the conclusion  of
    his  oral  submissions  sent  by  email  a  "speaking  note".  This  is
    replicated below.

45. There are no errors of law as pleaded in the grounds of appeal.

          1) There is no particularised "misdirection"  of  law  (error  of
             law), and in the light of the FTTJ's  careful  review  of  the
             relevant legal principles and authorities at paras. 19-32.

          2)  In  the  light  of  the  unchallenged  (and  unchallengeable)
             findings of the FTTJ as to the background to the  respondent's
             "specific evidence" and it is clear  flaws,  at  paras.  63-68
             (also note  the  submission  at  para.  50-51  and  58,  which
             submissions the FTTJ seems to have  accepted)  the  judge  was
             correct (or perhaps it was open  to  him)  to  find  that  the
             respondent  had  failed  to  provide  the  required   "cogent"
             evidence to discharge the evidential burden in respect of  the
             allegation of dishonesty.

          3) There is nothing in the point that  the  FTTJ  held  that  the
             decision appealed against was not in accordance with the  law.
             As a result of the respondent's reliance in that  decision  on
             the unestablished allegation of TOEIC cheating, it was clearly
             vitiated by a material public law error. As such removing  the
             appellant pursuant to the decision would breach article 8,  so
             that the ground of appeal available  under  s.84(2)  NIAA  was
             satisfied and the appeal fell to be allowed, applying  s.85-86
             of the NIAA: an unlawful decision cannot be justified pursuant
             to article 8 (2), (Lord Bingham's 3rd of the  five-stage  test
             at Razgar at para. [17] asks  simply  whether  a  decision  is
             lawful under domestic law: a decision which is  a  nullity  by
             virtue of a material public  law  error  is  not  lawful,  see
             Anisminic v. Foreign Compensation Commission [1969] 2 AC 147).



             There is no authority for  the  suggestion  in  the  grant  of
             permission to appeal by the  FTT  that  a  decision  taken  in
             "pursuit of the  legislative  framework"  is  lawful  for  the
             purposes of Razgar step 3, and the suggestion is wrong.

             For the avoidance of doubt, s.84 and s.85(4) of the NIAA makes
             clear that the  FTT  can  consider  the  unlawfulness  of  the
             decision appealed against:

                  "On an appeal under section 82(1) ... against  a  decision
                  the Tribunal may consider ... any matter which  it  thinks
                  relevant to the substance of the decision, including ... a
                  matter arising after the date of the decision."

             Charles (human rights appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 00089  (IAC),
             correctly understood, does not hold that the FTT cannot  allow
             an appeal on  the  basis  the  decision  appealed  against  is
             unlawful and so cannot satisfy Razgar  stage  3  (see  Charles
             paras. [46]ff), otherwise it would be wrongly decided on  this
             point.

46. Any error of law re disposal of the appeal is immaterial.

          1) Even if the FTTJ was not entitled to  rely  upon  the  finding
             that the decision appealed against was not lawful in  allowing
             the appeal, in the  light  of  the  FTTJ's  finding  that  the
             respondent had  failed  to  prove  TOEIC  fraud  it  would  be
             disproportionate to  remove  the  appellant  pursuant  to  the
             decision appealed against, because there would  be  no  public
             interest capable of justifying removal in the light of (or any
             of) the following: (a) the respondent's duty set out in  Ahsan
             at para. [120], (b) the terms  of  the  consent  order  (which
             applied in the light of the FTT's finding re TOEIC),  and  (c)
             (perhaps most clearly) the respondent's policy,  (see  Charles
             supra at paras. [59]-[60]ff).

47. In his oral submissions, he submitted that when looking at the detailed
    reasons at paragraph 63 - 68 of  the  decision,  the  judge  had  given
    adequate and  sustainable  reasons  for  the  view  that  the  specific
    evidence relied upon by the respondent was inadequate to discharge  the
    evidential burden. The judge's reasoning  within  those  paragraphs  is
    informed by the submissions made at paragraphs 50 - 51 and at paragraph
    58. He submitted that the point made is that  the  respondent  had  not
    provided evidence linking the voice recording obtained to the appellant
    himself and that this was something the APPG report  and  the  lack  of
    continuity considered which the judge was aware of.  Whilst  the  judge
    did not look expressly at the continuity issue, he accepted that  there
    was a problem with the continuity because there is a  recognition  that
    the  evidence  fell  short  both  generally  and  in  relation  to  the
    appellant.

48. Mr Biggs submitted that the "key point"  were  that  the  findings  and
    analysis at paragraph 63 - 68 are unchallenged in the grounds and  that
    the key argument made on behalf of the respondent is at the  judge  was
    wrong to conclude  that  the  evidential  burden  was  not  discharged.
    However, looking at the grounds of appeal, the only  argument  made  is
    that the legal  authorities  stated  that  the  specific  evidence  was
    sufficient to discharge the evidential burden.  However,  there  is  no
    rule of law that in every case  that  the  evidential  burden  will  be
    discharged by looking at  the  lookup  tool.  He  submitted  that  when
    looking at the judge's reasoning and findings  it  was  appropriate  to
    conclude that the respondent could not  discharge  the  burden  on  the
    evidence provided. The authorities  stated  that  the  respondent  must
    produce "cogent evidence" and here the judge  was  not  satisfied  that
    cogent evidence had been provided.

49. He submitted that it was clear that the judge reviewed the  authorities
    and was  aware  of  the  correct  approach  (see  paragraph  26  citing
    MA(Nigeria) and was aware that any deficiencies in  the  continuity  of
    the evidence could be overcome in light of the appellant's evidence but
    the judge analysed the evidence and that he was  fully  aware  that  he
    should refer to all  the  evidence  but  was  not  persuaded  that  any
    inference from the appellant's poor English that he was  not  satisfied
    that he was a cheat and that was a decision plainly open to him.

50. In respect of the conclusion reached by the judge that it was  "not  in
    accordance with the law", Mr Biggs submitted that the judge had made  a
    conclusion that was open to him. The grounds of  appeal  based  on  his
    human rights and the decision had to be contrary to section 6 of the HR
    Act and that the decision to refuse human rights claim was on the basis
    that his removal would breach article 8. However if  the  decision  for
    the basis of his removal is flawed, here being based on  the  assertion
    that he is a cheat, and is not supported  by  any  evidence,  then  the
    decision is unlawful and therefore applying the third test  in  Razgar,
    the decision appealed is unlawful and is in breach of article 8.

51. Mr Biggs then amplified his submission.  He  stated  that  because  the
    TOEIC allegation was central to the decision appealed against, and this
    decision was found to be unlawful therefore  the  entire  decision  was
    unlawful. If the error is a material public law error than  the  entire
    decision is a nullity because the respondent accepted  in  the  consent
    order and also in the policy that if a person was found  not  to  be  a
    cheat, they will be given leave to remain.  He submitted  that  looking
    at the decision in Razgar at stage III requires a lawful decision  here
    there was a public law error which vitiated the decision and  therefore
    was unlawful.

52. When asked about the  terms  of  the  consent  order  he  referred  the
    Tribunal to the decision in Ahsan at paragraph 120, and  that  it  made
    reference to the obligation on the respondent to consider unwinding the
    "historic injustice".  As to the FtTJ's finding that he would not  have
    succeeded under tier 4, Mr Biggs submitted that there was an obligation
    and public law duty on the Home Office to consider  whether  any  there
    was any historic injustice and what steps would be appropriate.  Whilst
    Underhill LJ at paragraph 120 did not use the term "historic injustice"
    it was plain that the Home Office had an obligation to think about  any
    injustice and whether there was one which could be "unwinded".

53. Mr Biggs in his submissions referred to the respondent's current policy
    (as set out in his speaking note replicated above). He  submitted  that
    all three versions include the passage at page 9 which makes  reference
    to 60 days leave outside of the rules when application to be  made  and
    as a matter of policy that would be made in the  appellant's  case.  He
    submitted that the Home  Office  had  an  obligation  to  look  at  the
    decision made by the FtTJ via the consent order. He accepted  that  the
    consent order was an inter-partes agreement to settle  proceedings  and
    would not be binding on the tribunal per se is recognised by the  judge
    at [87] but this was relevant to the evaluation of proportionality.

54. He submitted that if the Home Office then decided  to  grant  leave  or
    review his circumstances then that was dispositive  of  the  article  8
    appeal.

55. Ms Pettersen in her reply stated that if the evidential burden had  not
    been met and the FtTJ was not in error in finding that  the  evidential
    burden could not be met, the appellant's case  would  fall  within  the
    relevant policy.

56. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

Discussion:

57.  I  have  carefully  considered  the  written  grounds  and  the   oral
    submissions of Ms Petterson and Mr Biggs.

58. The question whether the decision contains a material error of  law  is
    not whether another Judge could have reached  the  opposite  conclusion
    but whether this Judge reached a conclusion by appropriately  directing
    himself as to the relevant law and assessing the evidence on a rational
    and lawful basis.

59. Dealing with the first  ground  relied  upon  by  the  respondent,  the
    written grounds submit that the FtTJ made a  material  misdirection  in
    law by failing to adequately correctly  assess the burden of  proof  in
    line with the case of SM and  Qadir  (ETS-Evidence  -Burden  of  Proof)
    [2016]. The grounds state  that  despite  reference  to  the  case  and
    acknowledging the evidence provided from the respondent at paragraph 67
    of the decision, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  why  he
    considered the respondent's  evidence  was  insufficient  to  meet  the
    burden required and therefore, the judge erred in law.

60. It is submitted that the decision in SM and Qadir (as cited)  makes  it
    clear that the generic evidence combined with evidence particular to an
    appellant does discharge the evidential burden of proving that a  TOEIC
    certificate had been procured by dishonesty. It is  asserted  that  the
    FtTJ "misinterpreted the evidence" and the properly read,  the  witness
    statements and the spreadsheet  extract  showed  that  the  appellant's
    English language test had been invalidated because of evidence of fraud
    in the test taken by the appellant.

61. I have carefully considered the decision of the FtTJ in  the  light  of
    those submissions and the evidence that was before the Tribunal.

62. The first issue identified by the FtTJ was whether the  respondent  had
    established that there was evidence, specific to this appellant,  which
    was sufficient to found a suspicion that the appellant had  cheated  in
    his test (at [63]);

63. At paragraphs 19- 26, the judge properly directed himself to  the  case
    law and the burden and standard of proof in relation to  the  deception
    issue. The legal burden of proving that the  applicant  used  deception
    lies on the Secretary of State ( at[23]) and  also that it is  for  the
    respondent to prove a prima facie case of deception for  the  appellant
    to answer ( " the evidential burden") ( see the reference made  to  the
    decision in  Shehzad paragraph 3 at [22])  .  Thus,  the  Secretary  of
    State must first adduce sufficient  evidence  to  raise  the  issue  of
    fraud.

64. At paragraphs 24-26 the  FtTJ  addressed  the  relevant  case  law  and
    contrary to the grounds expressly directed himself to the decisions  of
    SM & Qadir and MA (ETS- TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016]  UKUT  450  along
    with the other relevant jurisprudence.

65. In the decision of SM & Qadir [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1167  the  three-stage
    approach was summarised. That involves considering, first, whether  the
    Secretary of State has met the burden on her  of  identifying  evidence
    that the TOEIC certificate was obtained by  deception;  second  whether
    the claimant satisfies the evidential  burden  on  her  of  raising  an
    innocent explanation for the suggested deception;  and  third,  if  so,
    whether the Secretary of State can meet the legal burden of showing, on
    the balance of probabilities, that deception in fact took place.

66. At paragraph [25] the FtTJ addressed the decision in The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and whether
    the "evidence, together with evidence that the test of  the  individual
    under consideration has been  assessed  as  "invalid"  rather  than  as
    "questionable" because of the problems the  test  centre,  suffices  to
    satisfy the evidential burden of showing dishonesty that  lies  on  the
    Secretary of State and to impose an evidential burden on the individual
    to raise  an  innocent  explanation  "  (paragraph  19)  and  later  at
    paragraph 31 " in circumstances  where  the  generic  evidence  is  not
    accompanied   by   evidence   showing   that   the   individual   under
    considerations test was categorised as "invalid".... The  Secretary  of
    State faces a difficulty in respect of the  evidential  burden  at  the
    initial stage." The FtTJ then addressed the decision in MA (Nigeria) at
    paragraphs 25-26.

67. Whilst the respondent's grounds assert that the  FtTJ  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for reaching the conclusion that  the  respondent  had
    not discharged the evidential burden, I am satisfied that on  any  fair
    reading of the decision the FtTJ addressed  the  evidence  advanced  on
    behalf of  the  respondent  in  his  decision  and  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable  reasons  for  reaching  his   conclusion.   The   relevant
    paragraphs of the FtTJ's decision are at [64] -[68] where he  sets  out
    his analysis of the evidence before reaching his  conclusion  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the evidential burden.  At paragraph [64]
    the FtTJ made reference to the "generic evidence" relied  upon  by  the
    respondent which pointed to widespread cheating across  a  considerable
    number of TOEIC test centres observing that it was not the  appellant's
    case that the TOEIC test had not been subject to  widespread  cheating.
    He then turned his consideration to the evidence before  the  Tribunal.
    This had been  summarised  at  [33].  He  began  his  consideration  by
    considering  the  report   of   the   All-Party   Parliamentary   Group
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "APPG  report").  The  analysis  and
    conclusions of that report was that the evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent  in  individual  cases  was  weak  and  that  the   internal
    procedures adopted by ETS to determine whether  cheating  had  in  fact
    taken place were not robust. He cited paragraph 2.3 of that  report  in
    full and at [66] he set out his analysis as follows:

         "66.  The  report  is  nothing  short  of  damning  of   both   the
         investigations undertaken by ETS and the respondent's  reliance  on
         the results of those investigations to underpin decisions to revoke
         visas. What is clear from the evidence given to the APPG is at  the
         respondent closed their eyes to information which  pointed  to  the
         unreliability of both ETS' and her own analysis, and has  continued
         to  do  so  even  in  the  face  of  expert  evidence  pointing  to
         significant problems with that analysis."

68. The FtTJ then turned to the evidence relied upon by the  respondent  to
    discharge the  evidential  burden  which  related  to  this  particular
    appellant. He stated at [66];

         "what is particularly striking is that rather than acknowledge  the
         fact that the lookup tool stated that the appellant  was  a  United
         Kingdom national and could be seen as reflecting  the  concerns  of
         the APPG, Mr Dingley had sought to explain  this  away  by  stating
         that his instructions are that this was a mistake."

69. When making an assessment of the evidence relied upon by the respondent
    to discharge the evidential burden, the judge took  into  account  that
    the only documentation that the respondent had put before the  tribunal
    was "the erroneous lookup tool information" which he had referred to at
    paragraph  [66].  He  identified  that  not  only  did   the   document
    erroneously refer to the appellant as a United Kingdom national  (which
    the judge took to mean a British national) it told  him  nothing  about
    the appellant's test from which he could draw  any  conclusions  as  to
    whether or not the appellant cheated. It was  reasonably  open  to  the
    judge to reject the submission made by  the  presenting  officer  which
    sought to explain away the content of the lookup tool on the basis that
    his instructions were that it was "a mistake". As  Mr  Biggs  submitted
    this could not properly be considered as evidence.  He  considered  the
    witness statement of Mr Vaghela which  had  been  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent but found that that  witness  statement  did  no  more  than
    simply "cross refer to the generic  evidence  of  the  appellant".  The
    judge found that the statement was made on 4 December 2019 but that  it
    failed to address the APPG's report which had been in circulation since
    July 2019. He therefore found that Mr Vaghela's evidence added  nothing
    to the "generic evidence".

70. Whilst Ms  Pettersen  in  her  oral  submissions  argued  that  it  was
    irrelevant that the witness statement of Mr  Vaghela did not  refer  to
    the APPG report because the witness statement referred  to  the  lookup
    tool, the judge gave reasons as to why  the  lookup  tool  had  obvious
    errors in its content.

71. As to the issue of the voice files, I accept the submission made by  Mr
    Biggs  that in light of the submissions made at paragraphs 50 - 51  and
    paragraph 58 which refers  to  the  absence  of  evidence  linking  the
    appellant to the voice files, which the FtTJ appears to have  accepted,
    it was therefore open to the judge to reach the conclusion  that  there
    were deficiencies and it was sustainable decision to therefore conclude
    on the whole that  the evidential burden had not discharged.

72. I cannot accept the submission made on behalf of  the  respondent  that
    the judge "misinterpreted the  evidence"  that  had  been  advanced  on
    behalf of the respondent. It was reasonably open to the judge to  reach
    the conclusion that the individual evidence relied upon in  respect  of
    the appellant which comprised of the lookup tool was not evidence  upon
    which he could place any weight in the light of that document referring
    to the appellant as a "United Kingdom national". It was  also  open  to
    him to find that the lookup tool told him nothing about the appellant's
    test from which he could draw any conclusions.

73. The Tribunal has not been directed to any evidence that  the  FtTJ  had
    failed to refer to nor has there been any challenge made to the Judge's
    analysis of the APPG report. That report post- dates the  decisions  in
    SM and Qadir and MA (Nigeria). It also post-dates the  report  of  Prof
    French set out as item 6 of the respondent's bundle. The evidence given
    by Prof French before the APPG was at his estimate of the rate of false
    positives is less than 1% but this was qualified because it depended on
    the result from ETS to the Home Office being correct. The  APPG  report
    concluded that there was a significant doubt as to  the  usefulness  of
    the statistic so every relied  upon  by  the  respondent.  The  experts
    before the APPG all agreed that there  had  been  a  worrying  lack  of
    scrutiny of the evidence supplied by ETS (set out at paragraph 2.3  and
    cited by the FtTJ. In the light of that evidence   and  by  considering
    his analysis of the evidence, I accept the submission made by Mr  Biggs
    in behalf of the appellant that the judge was entitled to find that the
    respondent has not discharged the evidential burden to prove  that  the
    TOEIC certificate was procured by dishonesty.

74. The written grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  are
    not clearly drafted and much of those grounds appear to be directed  to
    the  first  ground  which  is  whether  the  FtTJ  gave  adequate   and
    sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion that the respondent had
    not discharge the  evidential  burden.  In  summary  there  were  three
    features, deficiencies and general problems of the evidence set out  in
    the APPG report, specific deficiencies  in  the  lookup  tool  and  the
    absence of evidence linking to the appellant to  the  test  recordings.
    Thus, I am satisfied that when taken together the conclusion reached by
    the FtTJ was sufficient to demonstrate that the evidential  burden  had
    not been discharged.

75. As Mr Biggs submits the other principal ground that  is  identified  in
    the written grounds and relied upon by Ms  Pettersen  argues  that  the
    FtTJ erred in law by concluding the decision  was  "not  in  accordance
    with the law."

76. Ms Pettersen directed the Tribunal to  paragraph [87] where  the  judge
    stated "I am simply unable to say one way or  the  other  that  he  did
    (cheat) given the lack of evidence before me specific to the  appellant
    and the appellant's less than  satisfactory  evidence".  She  submitted
    that the primary difficulty is that the FtTJ unlawfully stated at  [91]
    that the decision was "not in accordance with the law" which was not  a
    finding open to him.  She  submitted  that  under  the  present  appeal
    regime, this was not an outcome open to him and the judge was making an
    inference that it should go back for reconsideration.

77. She submitted that the judge clearly  found  that  he  could  not  meet
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) and gave reasons for this and at  [98]  made  the
    same conclusion that the decision was "not in accordance with the law".
    She submitted that his findings and conclusions were "muddled" and that
    even  if  the  ETS  evidence  did  not  discharge  the  burden  on  the
    respondent, the judge was against the  appellant  in  relation  to  the
    rules and therefore is not clear why the case succeeded  under  Article
    8.

78. As to whether there was any inconsistency in the judge's  approach  and
    his findings  as  to  whether  the  appellant  had  cheated,  Mr  Biggs
    submitted that at [87] the judge agreed with the submission that he had
    made that if he had found that the respondent  did  not  discharge  the
    burden on her to prove deception  (i.e.  that  the  appellant  cheated)
    there is effectively "no case to  answer".  Therefore,  the  judge  had
    stated that there was no sufficient evidence  to  raise  the  issue  of
    deception.

79. He submitted also that the issue of cheating did not arise  because  of
    the legal analysis. At [91] the judge stated that  the  respondent  had
    not made out the allegation of fraud against  the  appellant  and  that
    meant that the decision to refuse his application which was based on an
    unproved allegation of fraud was "not in accordance with the law". That
    was consistent with his finding at paragraph  87  that  the  evidential
    burden had not been discharged. There was therefore no legal error.

80. I have considered the submissions and in particular whether  there  was
    any lack of consistency in the FtTJ's  reasoning  or  as  Ms  Pettersen
    submits any conclusions that were "muddled."

81. As with any judicial decision, the decision of this FtTJ should be read
    as a whole. Upon doing  so  it  is  plain  in  my  judgement  that  the
    overriding finding or conclusion reached by  the  judge  was  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the evidential burden upon her.  This  is
    plain from his conclusion at [68] and [87] where again he  referred  to
    the "respondent has not discharged the burden on her to prove that  the
    appellant cheated". This is also underscored by his final conclusion at
    [91] where he stated ".. My finding that the respondent  has  not  made
    out the allegation of  fraud  against  the  appellant  means  that  the
    decision to refuse application, being based, as it was, on the unproved
    allegation of fraud, was not in accordance with the  law."  Whilst  the
    use of the phrase  "that does not mean that I find  the  appellant  did
    not cheat" and reference  to  the  case  against  the  appellant  being
    "unproven", may be unfortunate, it does not undermine the core decision
    reached which can be clearly discerned from his decision as a whole. On
    any view of the factual findings made by the judge,  he  plainly  found
    the appellant to have been an unsatisfactory witness  in  a  number  of
    aspects but this did not demonstrate that the evidential  burden  which
    lay on the Secretary of State had not been discharged.

82. I have set out in the preceding paragraphs the submissions made  by  Mr
    Biggs and in  particular  his  submission  that  as  a  result  of  the
    respondent's reliance in that decision on the unestablished  allegation
    of TOEIC cheating, it was clearly vitiated by  a  material  public  law
    error. As such removing the appellant pursuant to  the  decision  would
    breach article  8,  and  that  this  an  unlawful  decision  cannot  be
    justified pursuant to article 8 (2), (Lord Bingham's 3rd of  the  five-
    stage test at Razgar).

83. In the alternative, he submitted even if the FtTJ was not  entitled  to
    rely upon the finding that the decision appealed against was not lawful
    in allowing the appeal, in the light of the  FtTJ's  finding  that  the
    respondent had failed to prove TOEIC fraud it would be disproportionate
    to remove the appellant pursuant  to  the  decision  appealed  against,
    because there would be no public interest capable of justifying removal
    in the light of (or any of) the following: (a)  the  respondent's  duty
    set out in Ahsan at para. [120], (b) the terms  of  the  consent  order
    (which applied in the light of the FTT's finding re TOEIC), and (c) the
    respondent's policy.

84. When looking at the legal framework,  I do not think  it  necessary  to
    consider the first submission made by Mr Biggs as I  consider that  the
    FtTJ did not allow the appeal on the basis that the decision  was  "not
    in accordance with the law". He allowed the appeal because he found the
    decision was in breach of article 8 of the Human Rights Convention (The
    only  ground  of  appeal  available  to  the  appellant  is  that   the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998). Whilst he made reference to the decision as "not  in  accordance
    with the law"  ( at [91]), when seen in the context of his  decision  I
    take it that he meant that because the respondent  had  not  discharged
    the burden of proof that the appellant had  used  deception,  that  the
    appellant's removal was not lawful  in  the  sense  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove  someone  when  the  integral  part  of  the
    decision (i.e. that he had engaged in  deception)  fell  at  the  first
    stage given that the evidential burden had not been met and thus  there
    would be no public  interest  in  his  removal.  That  is  set  out  at
    paragraph [98]. In my view, the judge allowed the appeal on  article  8
    grounds on the  basis  that  it  was  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant  by  considering  this  issue  through  the  prism   of   the
    respondent's policy which was  in  essence  reflected  in  the  consent
    order.

85. In his submissions, Mr Biggs directed the Tribunal to paragraph 120  of
    Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 which reads,

         "The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if on a human
         rights appeal an appellant were found not to  have  cheated,  which
         inevitably means that the section 10 decision had been  wrong,  the
         Secretary of State would  be  obliged  to  deal  with  him  or  her
         thereafter so far as possible as if that error had not  been  made,
         i.e. as if their leave to remain had not  been  invalidated.  In  a
         straightforward case, for example, she  could  and  should  make  a
         fresh grant of leave to remain equivalent to that  which  had  been
         invalidated. She could also, and other things being  equal  should,
         exercise any relevant future discretion, if necessary "outside  the
         Rules", on the basis that the appellant had in fact  had  leave  to
         remain in the relevant period notwithstanding  that  formally  that
         leave remained invalidated. (I accept that how to exercise  such  a
         discretion would not  always  be  easy,  since  it  is  not  always
         possible to reconstruct the world as it would have been;  but  that
         problem would arise even if the decision were quashed  on  judicial
         review.) If it  were  clear  that  in  those  ways  the  successful
         appellant could be put in substantially the same position as if the
         section 10 decision had been  quashed,  I  can  see  no  reason  in
         principle why that should not be taken  into  account  in  deciding
         whether a human  rights  appeal  would  constitute  an  appropriate
         alternative remedy. To pick up a particular point relied on  by  Mr
         Biggs, I do not regard the fact that a person  commits  a  criminal
         offence by remaining in the UK  from  (apparently)  the  moment  of
         service of a  section  10  notice  as  constituting  a  substantial
         detriment such that he is absolutely entitled to seek to  have  the
         notice quashed, at least in circumstances where there has  been  no
         prosecution. (It is also irrelevant that  the  appellant  may  have
         suffered collateral consequences from the section  10  decision  on
         the basis that his or her  leave  has  been  invalidated,  such  as
         losing their job; past damage of that kind cannot  alas  cannot  be
         remedied by either kind of proceeding.)"

86. Both the decisions in  Ahsan  and  Khan  [[2018]  EWCA  Civ  1684]  are
    primarily concerned with the availability and  nature  of  a  right  of
    appeal in which the respondent's allegation of proxy test taking  could
    be fairly considered on the merits.  The  decision  in  Ahsan  involved
    direct challenges to decisions  to  remove  taken  under  s.10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, as it  was  prior  to  the  amendments
    wrought by the  Immigration  Act  2014.   The  decision  in  Khan,  was
    concerned with the appeals regime introduced  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014, involved direct challenges to curtailment decisions in respect of
    which there were no rights of appeal. A compromise was reached  by  the
    parties in Khan in which the appellants would make human rights  claims
    and, if they were successful in a subsequent human rights appeal on the
    basis that they did not cheat, save in the absence of a new factor, the
    respondent would rescind her curtailment decisions and  afford  them  a
    reasonable opportunity to secure further  leave  to  remain  [23].  The
    Court of Appeal set out the Secretary of State's  written  position  at
    [36] and [37]. Paragraph [37] reads,

         "Further, at para. 8 of the note, it was stated:

             "Nonetheless, for the avoidance of doubt,  the  SSHD  confirms
             that:

                  (i)  For those individuals whose leave was curtailed,  and
                      where that leave would still have time to run  as  at
                      the date of an FTT determination that  there  was  no
                      deception, subject to any further appeal to  the  UT,
                      the curtailment decision would be withdrawn  and  the
                      effect ... would be that leave would continue and the
                      individuals would not be disadvantaged in any  future
                      application they chose to make;

                  (ii) For those whose leave has been curtailed,  and  where
                      the leave would in any event have expired without any
                      further application being made, the  Respondent  will
                      provide a further opportunity for the individuals  to
                      obtain leave with the safeguards in  paragraph  (iii)
                      below.

             For those whose leave had expired, and who had made an in time
             application for further leave to remain which was  refused  on
             ETS grounds, the effect of an FTT determination that there was
             no deception would be that the refusal would be withdrawn. The
             applicant  in  question  would  still  have   an   outstanding
             application for  leave  to  remain  and  the  Respondent  will
             provide them with a reasonable opportunity to make any further
             changes to their application which would be considered on  the
             basis of  them  not  having  employed  any  deception  in  the
             obtaining of their TOEIC certificate, and they would in no way
             be disadvantaged in any future application they chose to make.

                  (iii)    In all cases, the  Respondent  confirms  that  in
                      making any future  decision  he  will  not  hold  any
                      previous  gap  in  leave  caused  by  any   erroneous
                      decision in relation  to  ETS  against  the  relevant
                      applicant, and will have to take into account all the
                      circumstances of each case.

             However, the Respondent does  not  accept  that  it  would  be
             appropriate for the Court now to bind him as to  the  approach
             that he would take towards still further applications  in  the
             future, for example by stating that each applicant has already
             accrued a  certain  period  of  lawful  leave.  The  potential
             factual  permutations  of  the  cases  that  may  need  to  be
             considered are many and various. In some cases,  for  example,
             it will be apparent that, whilst on the facts as presented  at
             the appeal an appellant's human rights claim is successful, he
             would not have been able to obtain leave  at  previous  dates.
             Again, this issue will have to be dealt with on a case by case
             basis." (Bold in original)"

87. Neither of the decisions are comparable to the factual matrix  of  this
    particular appellant in view of the other findings  made  by  the  FtTJ
    (which have not been challenged  by  the  appellant)  and  specifically
    those at [88] and [99]. Nor do the decisions set out how a human rights
    application should be decided in the event of a  finding,  such  as  in
    this appeal, that the respondent has not discharged the burden and thus
    deception has not been proven. However, I would accept  the  submission
    made by Mr Biggs supported by his reliance on paragraph 120  of  Ahsan,
    that in the light of any judicial finding made,  the  respondent  would
    provide that person with a further opportunity to make any  application
    or to be put in the position they would have been.

88. This was reflected in the case of this appellant in the  consent  order
    reached between the parties at paragraph 3. Whilst the consent order is
    not binding upon the Tribunal, and that this was recognised by the FtTJ
    at [87], Mr Biggs places reliance upon the respondent's policy.

89. The policy is set out at Educational Testing  Service  (ETS):  casework
    instructions, Version 3.0 (published 28 August 2020), page 9:

         "If the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds but  a  finding
         is made by the Tribunal that the appellant did not obtain the TOEIC
         certificate by deception, you will need  to  give  effect  to  that
         finding by granting sixty days leave outside the rules. This is  to
         enable the appellant to make any application they want to  make  or
         to leave the UK."

90. Whilst this is not the policy in force at the date of the decision,  it
    appears to be agreed that the relevant  paragraph  set  out  above  was
    similarly set out in the earlier policy.  Ms  Petterson  in  her  reply
    acknowledged that if the Tribunal found that  the  respondent  had  not
    discharged the evidential burden (first stage) then the appellant would
    fall within the policy and that 60 days  leave  would  be  granted   in
    order for the appellant to make any  application. In  my judgement this
    is reflected in the overall decision reached  by  the  judge  where  he
    allowed the appeal on article  8  grounds  and  in  the  light  of  his
    conclusion at [100]  where he stated :" it will  be  a  matter  of  the
    respondent what she decides to do with the appellant's  matter  in  the
    light of my disposal of his appeal in his favour, but she may  wish  to
    take note of my findings, in particular at paragraph 88 of my  decision
    and reasons".

91. As the respondent has indicated that she would  consider  the  findings
    made by a FtTJ in an appeal such as  this  relating  to  the  issue  of
    deception, it must also be right that the Secretary of State will  also
    take into consideration any other findings that have been made. In this
    case, the judge made a number of adverse findings of  fact  which  have
    not been subject of challenge  in  these  proceedings.   As  the  judge
    stated, it will be a matter for the respondent.

92. Consequently, for those reasons I am not satisfied that the decision of
    the FtTJ demonstrates any error on a point of  law  and  therefore  the
    decision to allow the appeal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtTJ shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or his family members.  This direction applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated   23 September 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

