
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: HU/17436/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2019                    |On 16 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                JUSTINA ODOM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
                    MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Doyle,
    promulgated on 26 March 2018.

 2. The grant of permission  was  not  restricted,  but  it  was  based  in
    particular on ground 3, headed "error in relation  to  private  life  /
    best interests of the children", which challenges [30] of the decision:

         "After considering all of the evidence I still do not  know  enough
         about the appellant's home, her  habits  and  activities  of  daily
         living,  her  significant  friendships,  any  integration  into  UK
         society, or any contribution to our local community.  There  is  no
         reliable evidence of the component parts of private life within the
         meaning of article 8 of the 1950 Convention before.  The  appellant
         fails to establish that she has  created  article  8  private  life
         within the UK."

 3. Ground 3 says that:

      i) even if the FtT was right about the  appellant  not  having  family
         life with her daughter and grandchildren, those relationships  were
         part of her private life;

     ii)  [30] is not adequately supported by the evidence, which  disclosed
         significant relationships among the appellant, her daughter and her
         grandchildren; and

    iii) the FtT failed to consider the best interest of the children and to
         undertake a proportionality assessment.

 4. The judge granting permission thought those matters arguable,  even  on
    the judge's own findings at [10 (a) - (j)].

 5. On those findings, the appellant's life is overwhelmingly based  around
    her daughter and grandchildren.

 6. Mr Winter referred to the opinion of Lady Wise in MSA [2018]  CSOH  92,
    2018 SLT 1313, in which a certification decision of the respondent  was
    reduced on judicial review, at paragraph 16:

         "It may be convenient first to consider the characterisation of the
         petitioner's claim as one of private life or family life. While the
         petitioner initially complained about the decision maker's  alleged
         failure to acknowledge that the petitioner had  established  family
         life in this country, it was ultimately accepted that  it  did  not
         matter that the claim had been characterised as one of Private Life
         rather than Family Life. In Pun (Nepal) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2106
         the Court of Appeal, under reference to AA v United Kingdom  [2012]
         Imm AR 1, accepted that any debate about whether someone has family
         life rather than private life in this context is  academic  because
         "...the factors to be examined in order to  assess  proportionality
         are the same regardless of whether family life or private  life  is
         engaged". Accordingly, what is important in  the  present  case  is
         whether the Secretary of State has identified and taken account  of
         the relevant factors, not what label has been placed upon  them.  I
         accept Mr Caskie's submission that the approach must be to consider
         the facts carefully and then decide what weight should be given  to
         a relationship falling within  a  category  normally  protected  by
         article 8 ECHR . While there must be something compelling to  allow
         an article 8 claim  outside  the  Rules,  I  agree  also  with  the
         submission that, as the petitioner could never place herself in one
         of the categories afforded protection by the Rules,  it  cannot  be
         regarded as an adverse factor in assessing her article 8 claim that
         she does not qualify within them. It is not in doubt, as  a  matter
         of law, that grandparents with whom a child has lived in family can
         engage the rights protected by article 8 - Bronda v Italy (1988) 33
         EHRR 4 and Principal Reporter v K [2011] 1 WLR 18 at paragraph  38.
         The sharp issue is whether, the petitioner's grandson  having  been
         identified by the decision  maker  as  a  relevant  child  for  the
         purpose of her article 8 claim outside the Rules, there was then  a
         material error in failing to consider that child's particular needs
         and best interests."

 7. Mr Winter referred also to the opinion of Lord  Beckett  in  VY  [2016]
    CSOH 139, to similar effect.

 8. Mr Govan was unable to resist that line of submission.

 9. The FtT judge fell into the trap of  taking  it  that  the  appellant's
    relationships with her  daughter  and  grandchildren,  and  their  best
    interests, were irrelevant once he turned to private life.  Ground 3 is
    well founded.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.  It  was  agreed
    that there was no dispute about the primary facts.

11. Mr Govan submitted, somewhat faintly, that the  finding  of  no  family
    life  should  not  be  disturbed.   However,  I  thought  it  would  be
    artificial and unworkable to try to  divide  the  decision  into  parts
    affected and unaffected by legal error.

12. It is unnecessary to look further into grounds 1 and 2.

13. The hearing proceeded to submissions about remaking the decision.

14. The children were born in 2003, 2005 and 2008.  Their parents separated
    in 2009.  Their father lives in Ghana and has had little  contact  with
    them since the separation.  The appellant has  provided  support  since
    she came to the UK as a visitor  in  2005.   She  has  lived  with  her
    daughter and grandchildren (all citizens of the UK) in Edinburgh  since
    2009.  Her daughter is enabled to work.  The appellant  plays  a  major
    part in the children's care, such as taking the youngest  to  and  from
    school, and cooking the family meal.

15. The bond between the appellant and her daughter may not exceed the norm
    between adult  relatives,  but  given  the  closeness  of  their  lives
    together, it is a strong example of such a bond.

16. It is obviously in the children's best interests to continue to benefit
    from the appellant's love and care, rather than  being  separated  from
    her through removal to Ghana,  which  would  reduce  their  contact  to
    occasional visits, at most.

17.  Even  close  involvement  of  grandparents  in  the  lives  of   their
    grandchildren may not fall  within  article  8  protection,  where  the
    grandchildren have the care of both  parents,  or  even  of  one.   The
    paradigm case where family life is constituted between grandparent  and
    grandchild is where the grandparent has been compelled (on  the  demise
    of both parents, or for some other drastic reason) to take on the  role
    of a primary carer.  This appellant has not entirely assumed  the  role
    of a parent, and does not have legal responsibility as such, but she at
    least comes close.

18. The respondent's decision on exceptional circumstances is based in part
    on the appellant's daughter not being unable to provide for herself and
    her children without the appellant.  That is true, but  not  enough  to
    justify removal; and the appellant's role does make a big difference.

19. I find the appellant's role closer to a parental one  than  that  of  a
    relative only in the second degree.   On  the  evidence,  the  unit  of
    grandmother, daughter and grandchildren qualifies for protection within
    article 8 under the heading of family life.

20. It is not in dispute that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave the UK.  As I have found the  relationships  in  this
    case to cross the borderline into parental  territory,  it  follows  in
    term of section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act that the public interest  does
    not require the removal of the appellant.

21. The availability of  an  alternative  legal  route  is  illustrated  by
    Rhuppiah  [2018]  UKSC  58  at  paragraphs  49,  50  and  58.   Section
    117A(2)(a) provides a limited degree of flexibility  from  the  results
    indicated by section 117B(5).  If this  case  were  to  be  limited  to
    private life, its particularly strong features, set out above, are such
    that departure from those results would be justified.

22. The appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      8 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




