
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17940/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2018                    |On 18 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     21 August 2017 - Mr T Melvyn, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer
                    22 December 2017 and 20 August 2018 - Mr S Kotas, Senior
                    Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Cronin, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg Peirce
                    & Partners Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make
    this order because this case turns on the welfare of a child which
    could be compromised by publicity.

 2. This case first came before me to determine if there had been an error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I found that there
    was and notice of that decision was sent to the parties.  A copy of
    that notice is appended hereto.  By reason of some inexplicable
    administrative error it was sent a second time.  Nothing turns on that
    but it inconvenienced and confused people and I apologise for that.

 3. I repeat part of that decision because it explains what follows and I
    see no benefit in requiring anyone seeking to understand my decision to
    have to begin by reading the Appendix. I found that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law before the Supreme Court gave its decision in
    KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53. No doubt I would have expressed myself
    differently with the benefit of that learning but, given my findings, I
    saw no need for further submissions.

 4. I said in my "Reasons for Finding an Error of Law" the following:

         "2   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the
         respondent, hereinafter 'the claimant', against the decision of the
         Secretary of State on 13 July 2016 refusing him leave to remain on
         human rights grounds.

         3    The claimant is a national of Jamaica.  He was born in October
         1989 but has lived in the United Kingdom since April 2002.  He has
         a criminal record.  In September 2004 he was convicted of battery.
         In November 2005 he was again convicted of battery.  In June 2007
         he was convicted of robbery before the Crown Court sitting at
         Basildon.  For that matter he was sentenced to detention for
         eighteen months and the Secretary of State resolved to make a
         deportation order.  In January 2010 he was convicted of causing
         criminal damage.  In September 2010 he was convicted of using
         threatening and abusive and insulting words and behaviour with
         intent to cause fear or provoke violence.  On the same occasion he
         was convicted of two counts of criminal damage and being in breach
         of a conditional discharge.  He was sent to a Young Offenders
         Institution for eight weeks in total.  In February 2011 he was
         fined for disorderly behaviour.  In July 2011 he was warned that
         his behaviour had been noticed by the Secretary of State and she
         was considering his deportation.  In December 2011 before the Crown
         Court at Basildon he was convicted of assault occasioning actual
         bodily harm and possessing class B controlled drugs.  The offence
         was committed during the operational period of a suspended sentence
         and he was sentenced to a total of fourteen months' imprisonment.
         This was reduced to ten months on appeal.

         4    In short, the claimant is a man who had shown himself to be
         irresponsible and incapable of behaving even when he knew he was
         subject to sanctions by the court and the Secretary of State was
         considering deportation.  His offences are numerous and serious and
         include robbery.

         5    It is also right to record that the claimant has had
         considerable difficulties in his own life.  His father was a
         violent man who beat the claimant and the claimant's mother and
         murdered the claimant's mother, for which offence he was sent to
         prison and spent some of the sentence in Broadmoor.  It is a
         feature of the case that the claimant is on extremely uneasy terms
         with his father, who has been deported to Jamaica.

         6    Although Ms Cronin went to considerable lengths to persuade me
         that any error was entirely technical I have no hesitation in
         concluding that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law materially.
         The appellant has established a relationship with a woman who has
         significant problems.  Her IQ, if I may observe this respectfully,
         is identified as very low and Ms Cronin did not feel able to call
         her to give evidence in the First-tier Tribunal.  She has a child.
         The claimant and the child's mother do not live together but there
         is evidence that the claimant plays a significant part in the life
         of the child (I make it clear that I use the phrase 'significant
         part' as a general description and this is not intended to be a
         complete finding about the nature of the relationship).

         7    The difficulty with the decision is that the First-tier
         Tribunal unequivocally took notice of the decision in MAB (para
         399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC).  The Upper Tribunal
         had decided that the words 'unduly harsh' did not require any kind
         of balancing exercise.  The problem with this decision is that it
         is wrong.  The Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450
         was quite clear that the words 'unduly harsh' had to be looked at
         in the context of all the circumstances of the case including the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history. I cannot avoid finding
         that the First-tier Tribunal applied an incorrect legal test.

         10   Although I have no hesitation in coming to this conclusion I
         found it much more difficult to consider the best way forward.
         Obviously I wanted to deal with the case without a further hearing
         if that was a proper thing to do.  That must be in everyone's
         interests. I have found it very difficult to identify clear
         findings that can be used as a basis for re-determining the case.
         As the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal complain, there
         are many general phrases in which it is made clear that certain
         strands of evidence are 'accepted' but I have not been able to
         narrow those down into clear findings that can be used as a basis
         to re-determine the appeal.  It follows that I am driven to the
         conclusion that the appeal has to be heard again.

         11   Given its history, I have decided to retain the appeal in the
         Upper Tribunal and list it before me."

 5. I then gave directions and subsequently there was a hearing.

 6. I heard evidence from the claimant and I consider that below.

 7. However I also hard from Christine Brown who is an independent social
    worker.  She has qualifications of BSc (Hons), CQSW, PGDip Social Work,
    MA Social Work Studies.  After hearing the evidence and considering the
    case as a whole, I found Ms Brown a competent and honest expert who
    expressed her considered professional opinion.

 8. I find it helpful to begin by considering her evidence as it sets out
    the background to the circumstances of the claimant, his former partner
    and their child.

 9. I begin with her report dated 25 May 2016.

10. She explained that she met the claimant with his partner, JM, to
    interview them and also observe how they interacted.  The appellant's
    child, "EJP", is a daughter who was born in June 2014.  Ms Brown was
    told that the claimant met his partner in 2010.  She was then aged 19
    and he was aged 21.  Ms Brown considered documentary evidence
    concerning the claimant's partner, JM and pr�cised that in her own
    report.  JM's IQ is recorded in the range of "63 - 73". It was
    described as "extremely low to borderline".  The consequence is she
    will "require higher levels of support in many areas of her life".  Ms
    Brown then looked at the reports concerning the claimant and drew
    attention to many positive signs that he had learnt from his experience
    and was benefiting from advice.  She considered and clearly endorsed
    views of other experts that the claimant and his former partner
    intended to re-establish cohabitation if he was allowed to settle in
    the United Kingdom and that would be good for their relationship and
    good for the child. Ms Brown could not contemplate JM removing to
    Jamaica where she would have no support.  She also commented positively
    on the relationship between the claimant and his daughter.  I find
    paragraph 4.5 particularly relevant, where Ms Brown said:

         "As expressed earlier in this report, [JM] told me how difficult
         she had found motherhood to be, the changes that it had brought to
         her life and, also, to [the claimant].  [JM] said that it had been
         difficult of late as [the claimant] was now staying with his aunt,
         a decision that they had made together, but she remained very
         reliant upon him and [EM], at 20 months of age, is now very aware
         of her father.  This was evident from the moment I entered [JM's]
         home; [EM] ran excitedly towards her father, holding his knees and
         indicated that she wanted to be picked up by him, then smothered
         him with kisses."

11. Ms Brown commented on the child's need for the relationship with her
    father and drew attention to the enormous difficulties that had been
    experienced by the claimant, which had no doubt contributed to his
    criminality, because of his own horrible home circumstances.  She
    suggested that was an example of what happens when children do not have
    a good relationship with their parents and it is something about which
    I must reflect.

12. Whilst there is much that can be said to the claimant's detriment
    arising from his criminal behaviour the evidence of the independent
    social worker is that he was playing an important part in the life of
    his child and removing him would do harm.

13. It is also relevant that EM is "mixed race" (if I might be permitted a
    convenient but inaccurate phrase) and benefits from contact with her
    "black" parent.

14. There is an addendum to that report, dated 27 March 2017.

15. There Ms Brown said that the claimant continues to live with his aunt
    and JM and their daughter lives nearby.  The claimant and JM have some
    contact most days.  The claimant sees his daughter almost every day.

16. Their daughter, EM, was clearly growing up in a pleasing way.  She was
    described as "a delightful, inquisitive and outgoing little girl".

17. Ms Brown again saw and described appropriately tender interaction
    between the claimant and his daughter, which she interpreted as
    indicative of a strong relationship that was beneficial to the child.
    They discussed how the relationship might continue in the event of the
    claimant's removal.  JM indicated how it would be very unsettling for
    her.  Describing the claimant's partner, she said that: "[JM] is a shy
    and hesitant young woman, anxious of those she perceives to be in
    authority, and I understand too, fearful of being judged in some
    inadequate way."

18. Ms Brown explained that JM has no family but the claimant has an
    extended family that help support her.  She said at paragraph 4.3:

         "[JM] is a loving mother but she does not have the same resources
         on which to draw emotionally and practically that [the claimant] is
         currently able to access.  Unlike [the claimant] [JM] alone would,
         in my view, be reluctant to ask for support or help and would not
         willingly approach [the claimant's] family members.  This is not
         because [JM] is in any way shunned or ostracised by [the
         claimant's] family, on the contrary, they appear to be very
         welcoming of [JM] but [JM] is not open in her feelings and I feel
         anxious that she should remain close to them in order to avoid
         further pain and hurt in her life."

19. She continued:

         "Being so closed to one's feelings and reluctant to seek help from
         a third party would have implications for [EM] in time.  Should
         [the claimant] be removed, [JM] would be left to manage the
         emotional debris as well as practical issues left by his going
         which, in this instance, will be a desperately upset little girl
         for whom no amount of soothing words will give her the reassurance
         that she will want, that of her father returning to her and
         questioning those around her when he does not do so."

20. Ms Brown made further observations in the same vein.

21. In short, she did not think that EM's mother had the wherewithal to
    cope properly with the wrench of removal.  Ms Brown recognised that
    removing a parent is almost always a disturbing event in a child's
    life.  She suggested that "most children" "never really adjust fully to
    a thing so fundamental taking place in their lives" but noted that the
    child here is particularly bonded to her father and the mother has
    particular difficulties in managing without support.

22. Ms Christine Brown gave evidence.  She adopted her reports, including
    the addendum dated 27 March 2017. She believed that she had sufficient
    contact to form a proper professional judgment before expressing her
    opinion.

23. She confirmed that JM did not want to talk to her.  She was frightened
    that Ms Brown would judge JM to be a poor parent.  That was not
    something that she had to consider but she regarded JM's reluctance to
    engage with her as indicative of the difficulties JM might have in
    getting help.

24. She was satisfied that EM was "securely bonded" to the claimant.  She
    emphasised the important role the claimant has in the life of both JM
    and EM.  She said, by way of illustration, that because JM is
    illiterate she does not respond appropriately to messages from school.
    The claimant looks after her in that regard.

25. Ms Brown understood that JM had no meaningful contact with her family.
    She saw her own mother about once a year. She did not regard JM's
    mother as a source of support.

26. Ms Brown said that it was "very hard for the mother to intellectualise
    her children's needs".

27. She was cross-examined.  She confirmed that she was not aware of any
    safeguarding issues for the child.  She made the obvious observation
    that the claimant is supporting JM and EM.  She believed EM to have a
    good relationship with the claimant's family.

28. I asked her if, in her judgment, the mother would be able to cope
    without the claimant's presence.  She replied: "In a nutshell, no."

29. As indicated, Ms Cronin did not feel able to call JM and this
    necessarily reduces the weight I can give to her evidence but there is
    an unsigned statement in my papers.  I outline what she has to say.  I
    do not regard it as controversial.  It either says things that are
    likely to be right and innocuous or which are supported elsewhere.

30. JM explained that she became friendly with the claimant in 2010 but
    restrained from becoming deeply committed because of his uncertain
    status.  He was subject to the possibility of deportation.  She did not
    intend to get pregnant but was pleased when EM was born in June 2014.
    The claimant spent a lot of time with EM when she was tiny because he
    was not able to work.  Although pleased to be a mother she was
    surprised at how much work was involved and found EM challenging.  She
    did not know how she could cope on her own.  However, she could not go
    to Jamaica.  The change and uncertainty would be too much for her.

31. The claimant did give evidence.

32. His first statement for these proceedings is dated 28 March 2017.
    There, he explained that he was born in Jamaica October 1989 but came
    to the United Kingdom with his sister and brother when he was aged 12.
    By then, his father had murdered their mother.  He was given indefinite
    leave to remain.

33. He was candid about his criminal record but he last committed an
    offence in August 2011.

34. He spoke of his deep love of his mother and his frustration at the way
    his father treated her.  There was rejoicing when their father left
    them in Jamaica to go to the United Kingdom.  He did not know why his
    mother went to see her husband in the United Kingdom but she did and he
    murdered her.  He then went to live with an aunt.

35. He explained how he was greatly distressed by the whole experience
    although was careful to say he accepted responsibility for his criminal
    behaviour.  He also said how he valued some of the opportunities in
    prison that assisted him to reorder his life.  He paid tribute to his
    aunt and spoke of his appreciation of his sister and her family, his
    social worker and how he cared for his brother.

36. His story about his relationship with JM supported hers. He wanted to
    support her and their daughter.  He said in his statement that EM needs
    his support and JM was frightened to manage without him.

37. One of the many reasons he did not wish to return to Jamaica is that he
    did not want to come across his father, who had been removed there.

38. There is a further statement, dated 22 December 2017.

39. There, he explained his happiness at succeeding in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  He expressed his sense of shame and frustration that he
    could not play a more useful part in the life of his child and child's
    mother.

40. He gave details of their relationship.  He talked about the games they
    played together and the time they spent together and his reading
    stories to the child.  In short, he does things that a father could be
    expected to do with a happy little girl.

41. He repeated his concerns that JM would not manage.  He also was
    concerned how EM would manage.  She would not understand why he could
    only contact her by telephone or other similar means from Jamaica.  He
    reiterated his fear of his father and his appreciation of the support
    of his former youth worker.

42. He gave evidence to the court, adopting his statements.

43. He was cross-examined by Mr Kotas.  He said that since his case was
    last considered in 2013 his circumstances had changed by reason of his
    daughter being born and his father having been deported.

44. He continued to live with his aunt and regarded JM as his friend.  He
    was uncertain about whether he described her as a partner in 2015.

45. He said that JM's family did not offer her any useful help.  He was not
    sure how much she saw her relatives but it was not very often.

46. When he was not looking after his daughter she was in the care of her
    mother or a nursery.

47. He was re-examined.  The re-examination mainly concerned his
    relationship with Mr John McDonald, whose evidence I consider below.
    He accepted that his relatives provided some help with EM care and
    provided money but he told me, without reference to Ms Brown's report,
    that he did not expect JM to have the confidence to ask if he was not
    about.

48. I then heard from Mr John McDonald.  Mr McDonald had written a letter
    and an email and provided witness statements dated October 2012 and
    then March 2017.  I considered all of these things.  His first
    involvement with the claimant was because of his employment with
    Integrated Youth Support Services.  He was aware of the considerable
    difficulties the claimant faced as a young person.  It was his opinion,
    supported by reference to academic material, that the claimant's own
    difficult upbringing had contributed to his criminal behaviour.  He was
    aware of the relationship between the claimant and his partner, JM.
    Without in any way being sentimental about the claimant's professions
    towards good behaviour, he regarded him as work in progress and had
    seen great improvement.

49. The most recent witness statement repeated things that had been said
    about the claimant earlier.  He was aware of the good relationship
    between the claimant and his daughter and was also aware of JM's
    circumstances.  He referred to her "vulnerability" and her having
    "learning difficulties" and "limited family support".  He would expect
    it to be "very difficult" for her to parent EM on her own.  It was his
    view that the claimant was on course to reorder his life.

50. In his oral evidence before me, he confirmed that the claimant had
    changed.  He was aware of the report from Dr Bell but he had not seen
    it.  Neither had he actually seen the claimant with JM although we
    understood that he saw her several times a week.  He was not well-
    informed about contact between the claimant and his other relatives.

51. He was cross-examined.

52. He confirmed that the claimant was frustrated that he was not able to
    work.  He made it plain that although his initial involvement with the
    claimant was professional he continued to see him in his own time.  He
    was acting with the full knowledge and cooperation of his employers but
    the claimant was now too old for their care.

53. There is then a detailed witness statement from Icilda Henry, who is
    the aunt of the claimant.  She is providing him with accommodation.
    Much of the statement relates, uncontroversially, to his desperately
    unhappy family history.  She also spoke about his transformation in
    attitude following the birth of his daughter.  She expressed worries
    about how the claimant would cope in the event of return to Jamaica,
    particularly because of his fear of his father.

54. I have also considered and read the reports of Dr Bell, who is a
    consultant psychiatrist.  He has known the claimant for some time and
    is aware of his circumstances and the possibility of his being
    deported.  He was concerned of the possibility of suicide but did not
    regard that as a present risk although there was elevation with
    uncertainty on the prospect of return.

55. The witness statement of [KP], the claimant's sister, is particularly
    interesting.  She is younger than the claimant.  She was aware of their
    father murdering their mother and commented on how difficult it was to
    come to terms with what had happened.  She commented on a change in
    attitude on the part of the claimant after his last detention and his
    good work as a parent.

56. I have considered the witness statement of [DP], the claimant's
    brother.  He confirms the claimant's role as a parent and explained
    also how much he depended on the claimant.

57. I note that he is a young man intent on a university career and clearly
    has been able to survive the hardships of a difficult childhood like
    the claimant's but with a different outcome.

58. The appeal was listed for further hearing on 20 August 2018.  There was
    new material and the claimant was now getting better counselling.

59. That said, I agree with Mr Kotas's submission that there was little new
    material.  It seems that the claimant has been able to gain work and
    that is to his credit but is of limited value.

60. I have to remind myself that this is a human rights appeal which relies
    on an Article 8 balancing exercise.  This is illuminated by Part 5A of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

61. I confirm that I have read the evidence before me although I have not
    found it necessary to comment on all of it specifically.

62. I appreciate that in January 2009 the claimant appealed successfully
    against a decision to deport him and in December 2013 he appealed
    unsuccessfully a similar decision. These things are of little relevance
    to the decision in this appeal. The claimant's child was born in 2014
    and this is clearly a new fact of potentially great importance. Her
    birth occurred after his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier
    Tribunal and so clearly had not been considered.

63. However his failure to establish a human right remain based on his own
    professed fears of return, is, in the absence of new material, a
    pertinent reason to dismiss the appeal.

64. Based on a quick glance at the papers it would be easy to think that
    this appeal is entirely about the misfortunes in the life of the
    claimant.  He has had horrible experiences and deserves respect and
    sympathy.  However, he is in trouble because he has chosen to commit
    criminal offences on more than one occasion, including an offence of
    robbery, which is always viewed seriously by the courts.  He is the
    author of his own misfortune.  I accept that his sister was not as
    badly affected by their mother's murder as was the claimant and she was
    a bit younger but she has managed to organise her life so that she has
    been able to study law at university.  It is not the case that the
    claimant is the victim here.  He faces deportation now because he chose
    to commit crimes.

65. I satisfied that he is a "foreign criminal" within the definition in
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This is
    because he has been sent to custody for at least twelve months.  This
    is all that is necessary.  It is immaterial that that was some time ago
    and he has been in trouble since and received a lesser sentence.  The
    definition is straightforward and is satisfied by a sentence of
    eighteen months' detention.

66. I am therefore required to apply part 5A of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

67. This informs me that the deportation of foreign criminals is in the
    public interest and the more serious the offence committed the greater
    the public interest in deportation.

68. However, provided that the foreign criminal is not been sentenced to at
    least four years imprisonment, and the claimant has not, the public
    interest does not require deportation if the statutory exceptions 1 or
    2 apply (see section 117C(3)).

69. Ms Cronin relies on both of the exceptions applying.  She says that
    there would be very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration
    into the country to which he would be deported and the effects of
    removal would be unduly harsh.  The appellant was born in 1989 and
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002.  It has been accepted here that
    the claimant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
    of his life and so, by statute, there is a need for there to be "very
    significant obstacles" to integration into the country to which he
    would be deported.

70. I have reflected on these things.  This part of the claim is not made
    out.

71. I am very aware of the medical evidence of mental instability on the
    claimant's part and his horror at the thought of return. Although I
    have not found it necessary to consider the medical evidence in great
    detail in this Decisions, I accept that there is a well-founded medical
    opinion to be concerned about the effect of removal on the claimant.

72. Although Jamaica is a small country not every citizen necessarily meets
    every other citizen. The claimant would try to avoid his father rather
    than find him. However, although the claimant's distaste for his father
    is both palpable and understandable there is no basis for saying that
    there is any well-founded fear of his being at serious risk at the
    hands of his father.

73. Further the medical evidence falls short of establishing a claim to
    remain on human rights grounds.  The likelihood of serious harm by
    reason of return is not sufficiently great.

74. The claimant is employable and is justly proud of his improving
    education.  These are qualities that would assist him there.

75. He does not want to go to Jamaica but I do not accept that he could
    not.  There are not very significant obstacles to his integration.

76. Neither am I particularly interested in the claimant's efforts to
    rehabilitate himself when I conduct the required balancing exercise.

77. Mr MacDonald's continuing support for the claimant is clearly to his
    credit and his cautious optimism about the claimant's future conduct is
    supported by the claimant not having been convicted of further
    offences. However, for the purpose of the balancing exercise, expected
    future behaviour amounts to little, if anything, more than the absence
    of a further reason to dismiss his appeal. There is nothing in the
    apparent change of heart that comes close to being a "very compelling
    circumstance" within the rules which, following NA (Pakistan) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 207, should be
    "read in" to the Part 5A to give effect to the Rules. Deportation is
    about protecting the public and about reflecting public disapproval and
    future good behaviour does not answer the second limb of public
    concern.

78. I am much more concerned about the effect of deportation being unduly
    harsh. Section 117C(3) and (5) together provide that the public
    interest does not require deportation if the effect on the partner or
    child is unduly harsh.

79. Although the claimant is emotionally close to the child's mother I do
    not accept that she is a "partner" for the purposes of the Act. They
    are not married and do not cohabit. Even if JM is the claimant's
    partner her concerns are so interrelated with her daughter's concerns
    that they do not add anything that is not considered with the interest
    of EM.

80. I have no doubt that the best interests of the child EM are that her
    father remains in the United Kingdom and continues to provide care.
    That is not determinative but it is something that must be a primary
    consideration and it goes in the claimant's favour.

81. I have to consider carefully not only the evidence before me but the
    fact that it has been carefully prepared and presented to maximum
    effect by experienced lawyers.  Removing a father from a nuclear family
    is a horrible thing to do.  In many contexts, it would be seen as
    something that is deeply undesirable and contrary to public policy but
    it is sometimes necessary.  Imposing a sentence of imprisonment may
    well be the paradigm example of that.

82. Parliament has decided that the deportation of foreign criminals is in
    the public interest and I do not seek to ignore that direction of shirk
    my responsibility to uphold the law.

83. That said there are features of this case that concern me greatly.  In
    many ways it is regrettable that I was not able to hear from JM.  She
    would almost certainly have been a vulnerable witness and I hope the
    Tribunal in general would be able to show her proper consideration.
    However the decision was made not to call her and was made, I am sure,
    with great care by her experienced representative.

84. Certain things are supported by the independent evidence of a social
    worker. The evidence shows that JM is a well-intended mother but her
    abilities are limited.  That is not to her discredit.  Indeed, the
    evidence appears to be that she is doing rather well with considerable
    personal disadvantages although that is not something I have to
    determine in great detail.  Her IQ is very low.  No-one is quite sure
    of the significance of an IQ other than it being an accurate assessment
    of an ability to do IQ tests but I accept that there is a broad
    correlation between a person's IQ and that person's ability to cope in
    life.  The average IQ is 100.  JM is a long way below that.

85. I found it a particularly insightful part of the evidence when it was
    explained that JM cannot read notes from nursery and relies on someone
    else to do that for her.  I am also entirely satisfied that I have been
    told the truth about the role of the claimant.  It is not just his own
    evidence, which might have had to be treated with a degree of
    circumspection, or indeed written evidence of his partner.  It is the
    professional observation of the social worker and was supported to a
    limited extent by Mr MacDonald.  The fact is the claimant is making the
    family work.  If he was removed there would be a calamity unless he was
    replaced.

86. I also acknowledge the evidence that he would be difficult to replace
    because the claimant's partner does not trust Social Services.  I am
    not saying for a moment that such ill feelings are in any way justified
    but they are there.  She is frightened that she will lose control and,
    given her limitations, that is an understandable fear.

87. The child clearly has a close relationship with her father and it is
    going to hurt that child greatly if that relationship is broken and it
    is nonsense to pretend that it would be other than broken by his
    removal.  There is no serious suggestion of the partner trying to
    establish herself in Jamaica.  She does not have the wherewithal for
    that and it has never been anyone's case.

88. However the "unduly harsh" test necessarily implies that in determining
    that deportation is in the public interest, it is acknowledged that
    deportation will be harsh for a child. It would be wrong to allow the
    appeal because deportation would be harsh for EM.

89. I have decided that there is an additional element here that makes the
    expected harshness "undue". I am satisfied there is a real risk in this
    case of a complete family breakdown.  Not only would EM would lose the
    (almost) daily support of a father figure, she would be reliant
    entirely on a mother who cannot cope without some support and who, for
    the reasons explained above, cannot be expected to get the necessary
    support if the claimant was removed.

90. I do not know what would happen to EM and JM if the claimant was
    removed. I am satisfied that the likely outcome would be a collapse of
    EM's ability to cope. That would be unduly harsh and that is why I
    allow this appeal.

91. I add that this case is about as finely balanced as it could be and
    still be allowed but for all the reasons given I have decided to allow
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

92. This appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed. I set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. However I remake the decision and
    I allow the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    leave on human rights grounds.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 April 2019                  |


                                  APPENDIX
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 17940 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 August 2017                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  N--- P---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvyn, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Cronin, Counsel instructed by Birnberg Pierce
                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because the case touches on the welfare  of
       a child and woman who may be vulnerable  and  publicity  could  harm
       them. The  Applicant  also  fears  a  resident  in  his  country  of
       nationality and publicity could harm him. I  invite  submissions  on
       the need for this order when the case is heard again.

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,
       herein after "the Claimant" against the decision of the Secretary of
       State on 13 July 2016 refusing him leave to remain on  human  rights
       grounds.

    3. The appellant is a national of Jamaica.  He was born in October 1989
       but has lived in the United Kingdom since  April  2002.   He  has  a
       criminal record.  In September 2004 he was convicted of battery.  In
       November 2005 he was again convicted of battery.  In  June  2007  he
       was convicted of robbery before the Crown Court sitting at Basildon.
        For that matter he was sent to detention for  eighteen  months  and
       the Secretary of State resolved to make  a  deportation  order.   In
       January 2010 he  was  convicted  of  causing  criminal  damage.   In
       September 2010 he was convicted of using threatening and abusive and
       insulting words and behaviour with intent to cause fear  or  provoke
       violence.  On the same occasion he was convicted of  two  counts  of
       criminal damage and being in breach of a criminal discharge.  He was
       sent to a young offenders' institution for eight weeks in total.  In
       February 2011 he was fined for disorderly behaviour.  In  July  2011
       he was warned that his behaviour had been noticed by  the  Secretary
       of State and she was considering his deportation.  In December  2011
       before the Crown Court at  Basildon  he  was  convicted  of  assault
       occasioning actual bodily harm and  possessing  class  B  controlled
       drugs. The offence was committed during the operational period of  a
       suspended sentence and he was sent to a total  of  fourteen  months'
       imprisonment.  This was reduced to ten months on appeal.

    4. In short the  claimant  is  a  man  who  had  shown  himself  to  be
       irresponsible and incapable of behaving even when  he  knew  he  was
       subject to sanctions by the court and the  Secretary  of  State  was
       considering deportation.  His offences are numerous and serious  and
       include robbery.

    5. It is also right to record that the claimant  has  had  considerable
       difficulties in his own life.  His father was a violent man who beat
       the claimant and the claimant's mother and murdered  the  claimant's
       mother for which offence he was sent to prison and spent some of his
       sentence in Broadmoor.  It  is  a  feature  of  the  case  that  the
       appellant is on extremely uneasy terms with his father who has  been
       deported to Jamaica.

    6. Although Ms Cronin went to considerable lengths to persuade me  that
       any error was entirely technical I have no hesitation in  concluding
       that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law materially.  The appellant
       has established a relationship with  a  woman  who  has  significant
       problems.  Her IQ, if I may observe this respectfully, is identified
       as very low and Ms Cronin did not feel able  to  call  her  to  give
       evidence in the First-tier Tribunal.  She has a child.  The claimant
       and the child's mother do not live together but  there  is  evidence
       that the claimant plays a significant part in the life of the  child
       (I make it clear that I use  the  phrase  "significant  part"  as  a
       general description and this  is  not  intended  to  be  a  complete
       finding about the nature of the relationship).

    7. The difficulty with the decision is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       unequivocally took notice of the decision in MAB (para 339,  "unduly
       harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC).  The Upper Tribunal  had  decided
       that the words "unduly harsh" did not require any kind of  balancing
       exercise.  The problem with this decision is that it is wrong.   The
       Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450 was  quite  clear
       that the words "unduly harsh" had to be looked at in the context  of
       all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  including   the   criminal's
       immigration and criminal history.

    8. I cannot avoid finding  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  an
       incorrect legal test.

    9. Although I have no hesitation in coming to this conclusion  I  found
       it much more difficult to consider the best way forward.   Obviously
       I wanted to deal with the case without a further hearing if that was
       a proper thing to do.  That must be in everyone's interests.

   10. I have found it very difficult to identify clear findings  that  can
       be used as a basis for re-determining the case.  As the  grounds  of
       appeal to the First-tier Tribunal complain there  are  many  general
       phrases in which it is made clear that certain strands  of  evidence
       are "accepted" but I have not been able to narrow  these  down  into
       clear findings.  That can be used as a  basis  to  re-determine  the
       appeal.  It follows that I am driven  to  the  conclusion  that  the
       appeal has to be heard again.

   11. Given its history I have decide to retain the appeal  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal and list it before me.

   12. I estimate that the hearing will  need  3  hours.  If  either  party
       considers that to be an erroneous estimate  then  the  party  should
       notify the Tribunal forthwith.

   13. I find the Secretary of State's case is made out.  I set  aside  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I direct the case  be  heard
       again in the Upper Tribunal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 3 November 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |





