
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17248/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Video                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|(Skype for business)                          |                              |
|On 27 November 2020                           |On 31 December 2020           |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                         mrs amena khanam chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Corben, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell  promulgated  on  21  January  2020.   The
    appellant had an appeal on 20 December 2019 which she did  not  attend.
    That is the core of this case.  The challenge is that the judge  should
    have adjourned the case and that he erred in not doing so  in  that  to
    summarise the grounds he had  not  considered  the  issue  of  fairness
    properly.

 2. The appellant has been in the United Kingdom for a number of years.  On
    11 April 2019 she applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on
    the basis of human rights.  She has family here who  support  her,  she
    also has type 2 diabetes,  hypertension,  chronic  kidney  disease  and
    contrary to what Judge Buckwell considered was a sinus problem, she had
    sinus bradycardia which resulted in her  having  to  have  a  pacemaker
    inserted.

 3. In this case the appellant had not provided a bundle to the  judge.   I
    accept that the appellant had been acting in  person.   The  judge  had
    before him an unsigned  letter  dated  18  December  stating  that  the
    appellant had attended Newham Hospital on 17 December but it  does  not
    say that she was unable to  attend  the  hearing.   The  judge  in  his
    decision at paragraph 26 noted that although there had been no deadline
    imposed there had still been no bundle or documents provided in advance
    of the hearing date but noted that they should have been  submitted  as
    soon as they were available.  The judge also noted at paragraph 28 that
    the appellant had given an address in Croydon yet appears to have  been
    attending hospital and a  GP  in  Newham  E6  which  is  a  significant
    distance away.  Importantly the judge sets out what  he  considered  at
    paragraphs 29 to 32 addressing himself properly in  line  with  Nwaigwe
    and that the issue was one of fairness.

 4. Although the rule considered in Nwaigwe has changed McCloskey J (as  he
    then was) referred to SH (Afghanistan) noting  that  what  fairness  is
    required and what is involved in order to achieve fairness is  for  the
    decision of course as a matter of law. These principles are  applicable
    here.

 5. In this case the judge had limited information before him.  He had some
    medical evidence from the bundle of material that had been supplied  to
    the Secretary of State and it is evident that he was aware of  that  as
    can be seen from what he said at paragraph 38 and at paragraphs  40  to
    43.  There is no indication that he had reached a decision on the issue
    of adjournment without having considered that.

 6. Mr Corben for the appellant submits that fairness in this case required
    the judge to consider what the effect would be on the appellant  if  he
    were to proceed with the hearing.  To an extent I consider that that is
    right, but it is not a requirement  that  the  judge  should  speculate
    unduly as to what might or might not happen.  In this  case  the  judge
    was faced with the situation in which the appellant  had  not  provided
    evidence to show that she was unfit to attend the hearing nor  had  she
    provided any material in support of her appeal as  the  directions  had
    ordered.  The material provided shows that she was unwell but that  her
    illness was intermittent and as Mr Whitwell pointed  out  it  does  not
    appear to have stopped her travelling from Croydon to East Ham.

 7. It is clear that the judge addressed himself properly as  to  the  law.
    It cannot be said that there is any evidence that he did  not  bear  in
    mind addressing the issues or the material that was in  front  of  him.
    In this case it cannot be said that the judge was under a duty  on  the
    facts of this case to speculate as to what might or  might  not  happen
    were he to proceed.  In this case there  was  no  indication  that  the
    appellant was going to provide any material of a medical nature or that
    she was going to provide any additional evidence at all.  She  had  had
    the opportunity to do so, she had chosen not to provide  that  material
    in time for the court or for that  matter  for  the  Home  Office.  The
    requirements of fairness  do  not  require  a  judge  to  address  what
    evidence might  hypothetically  be  provided,  and  in  this  case,  as
    presented, showing a breach of article 3 or that paragraph 276  ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules was met; or that if  it  was  not,  that  removal
    would be in breach of Article 8, are hard tests to meet, yet  there  is
    no indication that any evidence to prove that case was forthcoming.

 8. The question is raised  as  to  whether  this  was  the  impression  of
    fairness was given in the sense that justice has to be seen to be  done
    but in this case what the appellant did was to do in effect nothing  to
    pursue her case.  She did not supply  any  material  to  the  court.  I
    accept that she is not represented but that does not absolve  her  from
    at least providing some material to the court  or  taking  some  active
    steps in support of her case. It cannot be said  that  justice  is  not
    seen to be done if an appellant simply does not engage with the appeal,
    fails to provide evidence and fails to provide an explanation  for  her
    absence, and her appeal is then dismissed.

 9. There was insufficient medical evidence to show that she was unable  to
    attend, and it is noted that she does have some  assistance  of  family
    who may be able to assist her with linguistic problems.

10. But the reality is that the appellant simply did not  engage  with  the
    case.  She did not attend the hearing, she provided  no  evidence  that
    she was not really fit to attend and yet appears to want  to  say  that
    that is a reason why it is  unfair  for  her  for  the  judge  to  have
    proceeded.

11. On the facts of this case the judge  was  entitled  to  proceed  and  I
    conclude that he has given adequate and sustainable reasons  for  doing
    so.  It cannot be said that on the facts of this case  that  the  judge
    erred in that assessment and it cannot be argued that his  reasons  are
    insufficient.  Little or no material was put before the judge in  which
    he could form an opinion and this is a case where given the  nature  of
    what has been  said  in  the  sense  that  the  difficulties  that  the
    appellant has on return to Bangladesh arise from her medical  problems,
    there was insufficient evidence of that put forward and it  would  need
    to be in the form of some form  of  documentary  evidence  rather  than
    simply the oral evidence of the appellant.

12. To conclude, it cannot in this case be said that the judge acted  in  a
    matter which was unlawful or permitted unfairness in  the  proceedings.
    It is not for the judge to speculate in the absence of evidence  as  to
    what the appellant might or might not be able to  have  produced  at  a
    hearing if she had  attended  where,  as  here,  there  was  simply  no
    evidence as to whether she would be able to do so or intended to do so.



13. For  these  reasons  I  consider  that  the  judge  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for not adjourning the hearing.

14. Further and although this did not form much of the argument before  me,
    I am satisfied that the judge did reach the findings  on  the  material
    matters which were open to him.  The threshold  set  out  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) is a high  threshold.   It  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that on the facts of this case very significant obstacles were
    not established and  his  reasons  at  paragraph  43  are  sustainable.
    Similarly, having considered  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions outside the Immigration Rules  for,  in  reality  paragraph
    GEN.3.2 of the Immigration Rules, that there was no reason why applying
    Section 117B that the decision would not be proportionate.  The grounds
    insofar as they challenge these are really in  reality  a  disagreement
    with those findings rather than pointing out to  any  proper  basis  in
    which it could be said that the  judge  had  erred.   Accordingly,  for
    these reasons I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it did not involve the making of an error of law.

    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 11 December 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

