
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17776/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 November 2018                           |On 18 December 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                 GLORIA [A]
                          (No Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bennett, Solicitor, Kesar & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1986.  She appealed against
    a decision of the  respondent  made  on  7  July  2016  to  refuse  her
    application for leave to remain on the basis of her  family  life  with
    her daughter born in 2013, who, she claims, is a British citizen.

 2. The application was  refused  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had
    dishonestly claimed that her daughter is a British  citizen.   She  had
    given two different accounts of where her daughter was conceived and in
    what circumstances. As she was not considered to be a  British  citizen
    neither the appellant nor her child had any entitlement to remain under
    the immigration rules.

 3. She appealed.

    First tier hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Birmingham on 10 August 2018, Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Grimmett dismissed the appeal.

 5. The judge found that the claim made by the  appellant  in  her  witness
    statement dated 10 December 2013 to  the  effect  that  her  child  was
    conceived following a party  in  Luton  in  October  2012  amounted  to
    "attempted deception" [15], as she had left the UK in  March  2012  and
    did not return until May 2013.

 6. She also found that the need to provide such a statement in  the  first
    place "strongly suggests" that she and the claimed father, Prince  [O],
    were not married "because it would not have been necessary  to  produce
    that document if  she  had  a  valid  marriage  certificate  and  birth
    certificate of the child" [15].

 7. The judge went on to find:-

         "17       Because  of  the  inconsistent  evidence  given  by   the
         appellant about her reasons for seeking leave to remain  I  do  not
         believe that she has told the truth.  I am not satisfied  that  she
         has shown her daughter is the child of a British citizen.  I am not
         satisfied that she herself was married to [a]  British  citizen  or
         that the child was conceived in the UK as she claims."

 8. She sought permission to appeal which was granted on 27 September 2018.


    Error of law hearing

 9. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Everett agreed with Ms Bennett
    that the decision showed material error of law such that the case  must
    be heard again.


10.  In summary, the judge failed to consider the appellant's comprehensive
    witness statement dated 8 December 2017 (pp 13-20 of the  "Consolidated
    Appellant's Bundle.") explaining, inter alia, the late appreciation  of
    her pregnancy, the circumstances which led  to  her  witness  statement
    dated 10 December 2013 being prepared, her  growing  suspicion  towards
    the father of her  child  and  the  sexual  abuse  she  suffered  while
    destitute in the UK which ought to have led her to being treated  as  a
    vulnerable adult in accordance with the  Joint  Presidential   Guidance
    Note No 2 of 2010.

11. That statement was before the judge.  However, her  only  reference  to
    the appellant's written evidence is her short  statement  (10  December
    2013) lodged  with  the  application  and  a  later  unsigned,  undated
    statement prepared without the benefit of legal representation.

12. Further, the judge at [14] stated "It appears  that  tax  credits  were
    awarded but there was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  any  money  was
    deducted from [Mr [O]'s]  income  and  paid  to  the  appellant."   She
    failed, however, to have regard to a statement of Kevin Smyth  dated  9
    April 2018 (pp 3-4 of "Appellant's  Consolidated  Bundle.")  which  was
    before her where it was indicated that maintenance  payments  had  been
    collected from him which supported her claim that  he  is  the  child's
    father.

13. In addition, what bears to be the appellant's marriage  certificate  is
    at page 99 of the "Consolidated Appellant's Bundle." Although  at  [13]
    the judge referred to a "marriage certificate purporting  to  show  she
    and her claimed husband were married on 22 August 2010" in  Ghana,  she
    made no findings on  it  nor  on  a  letter  from  Kumasi  Metropolitan
    Assembly (at page 100) which stated that the Assembly has a  record  of
    the marriage  and  the  certificate  is  therefore  genuine.   Further,
    although these items make reference to her marriage to Prince  Okeyere,
    she submitted evidence to show that Okeyere is the Twi spelling of  [O]
    (e.g. at pp 25-26, 26A of "Consolidated Appellant's Bundle.")

14. By failing to have  regard  to  material  evidence  and  make  findings
    thereon the judge erred.

15. By consent the decision was set aside to be remade.  It was agreed that
    the case be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing.
    This is because entirely new findings  are  required  on  all  material
    matters.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that it is appropriate  under  section  12(2)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Statement
    paragraph 7.2 to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh
    hearing.  No findings stand. The members  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Grimmett.

17. No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway   17 December 2018

