
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: HU/17598/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2019                   |On 20 May 2019                  |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. P.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Weatherall, Counsel, instructed by Collingwood
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Stainthorpe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, an Indian national, enjoyed leave to remain as  a
           student which expired on 7 June 2014. He made  his  most  recent
           application for leave to remain as an  overstayer  on  27  March
           2018, and his wife and two  children  were  dependents  on  that
           application. The application was refused on 10 August 2018.  His
           Article 8 appeal against that decision was heard  and  dismissed
           by First Tier Tribunal Judge Gumsley in a  decision  promulgated
           on 10 January 2019.
        2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by decision of  7
           February 2019 of First tier Tribunal Judge Scott  Baker  because
           it was considered arguable that the Judge's approach had  placed
           too much weight  upon  the  public  interest  in  assessing  the
           reasonableness test  arising  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
           eldest child under s117B(6), and, a  failure  to  make  adequate
           findings in relation to the best interests of that child.
        3. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
        4. Thus the matter came before me.

      The Appellant's position
        5. The Judge noted that the Appellant's presence in the UK had been
           precarious until 7 June 2014, and thereafter unlawful. He  found
           that the Appellant and his wife were determined to remain in the
           UK, although fully aware they had no leave to do so, and in  the
           face of attempts by the Respondent to persuade them to  go  [35-
           6].
        6. It is common ground before me (as it was before the  Judge  [30-
           1]) that the Appellant's appeal could only succeed by virtue  of
           his reliance upon the position of his eldest child, S, who was 8
           years old at the date of the hearing,  and  thus  a  "qualifying
           child". The Appellant's younger child was only a young infant at
           the date of the hearing, not yet two, and it  is  accepted  that
           the Judge, correctly, identified that the youngest child had  no
           "private life"  beyond  the  family  unit,  and  that  her  best
           interests lay in remaining with her parents, wherever  they  may
           live.
        7. Thus the focus  of  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  upon  S.  The
           Appellant relied upon s117B(6), arguing that since  he  was  not
           liable to deportation the public interest did  not  require  his
           removal because he enjoyed a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
           relationship with S, and, it would not be reasonable to expect S
           to leave the UK.
        8.  S was born in the UK, and has grown up here.  Thus  the  UK  is
           said to be the "only country he has ever known".  On  the  other
           hand, it is accepted that S is an Indian national,  and  it  was
           not suggested to the Judge  that  S  had  no  contact  with  his
           extended family in India. The  Judge  found,  and  there  is  no
           challenge  to  this,  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife   had
           downplayed the fluency in Gujarati that S enjoyed. Certainly the
           Judge made no finding that S was unable to communicate with  his
           extended family in  India,  or,  that  language  barriers  would
           prevent S from accessing education in the event the family moved
           to India [49]. In any event no reason was ever offered as to why
           S  could  not  access  his  education  in   India   through   an
           international school, at which he would primarily be  taught  in
           English.
        9. The Judge identified that at the  date  of  the  hearing  S  was
           enrolled at public expense in full time education,  but  he  was
           not at any key point in his education at the date of the hearing
           [47]. That position has not changed subsequently.
       10. There was no suggestion to the Judge that the  family  would  be
           unable to live in India together in safety.  The  Appellant  had
           claimed that he would be unable to  provide  education  for  his
           children in India - but this  was  rejected  as  untrue  by  the
           Judge, and no challenge is made to that adverse finding [46-7].
       11. Equally no challenge is made to the Judge's conclusion that  the
           Appellant would be able to provide his family with a  reasonable
           standard of living in India. Both  he  and  his  wife  are  well
           educated; each possess degrees. Both he  and  his  wife  clearly
           have a very significant earning capacity in India. One  or  both
           may choose not to work, but that would be a  matter  of  choice,
           and no  more.  Indeed  it  would  indicate  that  they  had  the
           financial luxury to make such a choice. The Appellant's family's
           wealth has been sufficient, not only to be able to  educate  him
           in India, but also in the UK. Thus Ms Weatherall  accepted  that
           the family would enjoy a comfortable lifestyle  upon  return  to
           India.


      The challenge
       12. Ms Weatherall, who was not the author of the  grounds,  accepted
           that they offered no challenge to any finding  of  primary  fact
           made by the Judge.
       13. Ms Weatherall accepted that the third ground lacked merit.  This
           is a  complaint  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  consider  the
           Appellant was not financially independent. As an  overstayer  he
           and his wife had however accepted  before  the  Judge  that  the
           family  was  not.  They  denied  that  either  of  them   worked
           illegally, and they told the Judge that the family were entirely
           dependent upon the charity they received from the  local  Indian
           community, through the Temple at which they worshipped [21].
       14. Ms Weatherall accepted that there was little merit in the second
           ground, which is a complaint that the Judge's  consideration  of
           the best interests of S was "entirely lacking". Read as a whole,
           she  accepted   that   the   decision   contained   a   complete
           consideration of the best interests of S [22-25].  She  accepted
           that no material matter had been left out  of  account  in  that
           review of the evidence. Her criticism was  that  the  Judge  had
           failed to make a clear and express finding that it  was  in  the
           best interests of S to remain in the only country  that  he  had
           ever lived in. She argued that had that finding been  made,  the
           Judge's  overall  conclusion   would   necessarily   have   been
           different.
       15. There are in my judgement two  obvious  difficulties  with  that
           approach. First, when the decision is read  as  a  whole  it  is
           quite clear that the Judge was well aware that  the  family  had
           lived in the UK throughout S' life, and there is nothing in  the
           decision to suggest that he overlooked this at any point in  his
           reasoning. Second, the  "best  interests"  of  a  child  is  not
           conclusive of the reasonableness of the  expectation  that  they
           should leave the UK. Were it otherwise, it  is  clear  that  the
           appeal in KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC  53  would  have  succeeded.
           Their Lordships noted that it was in the best interests  of  the
           children concerned in that appeal for their family to remain  in
           the UK, but concluded that there was no  error  of  law  in  the
           assessment of the evidence that had led to the  assessment  that
           it was reasonable (in the context of s117B(6)) to expect them to
           leave the UK with their parents.
       16. Thus the focus of Ms Weatherall's argument fell upon  the  first
           ground; the complaint that the Judge had erred in  his  approach
           to the reasonableness test in s117B(6)(b). It was accepted  that
           the  Judge had directed himself to the relevant statutory  test,
           but argued that in undertaking his assessment he  had,  wrongly,
           adopted  "a  sins  of  the  parents   approach",   rather   than
           approaching the test in its proper context, namely with  a  full
           focus upon the circumstances of the child.
       17. As the Supreme Court identified in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 @
           [18, 19 & 51] the conduct of the Appellant was  not  irrelevant,
           and mere reference to it by the  Judge  could  not,  of  itself,
           establish  a  material  error  of  law  in  his  approach.   The
           Appellant's conduct was  relevant  because  it  established  the
           proper context for the consideration of the Article 8 appeal  In
           this case the Appellant's  conduct  had  led  to  him  being  an
           overstayer in the UK since 2014. His wife's leave to remain  had
           been dependent upon his own, and she had not suggested that  she
           was separately entitled to a grant  of  leave  pursuant  to  the
           Immigration Rules. Thus the proper context for this  appeal  was
           that both the Appellant and his wife had to leave the UK  unless
           he could bring himself within the provisions of s117B(6).
       18. That was the context in which the Judge had to consider  whether
           it  was  reasonable  to  expect  S  to  leave  the  UK,  because
           ordinarily in that context the natural expectation would be that
           the Appellant's children would do so; KO [51]. In  my  judgement
           that is the context in which the Judge considered  the  evidence
           before him concerning S' circumstances. It was open  to  him  on
           the evidence to make the findings of primary fact that he  made,
           concerning S' circumstances, and they were adequately  reasoned.
           It follows that it was open to him to reach  the  conclusion  in
           relation to s117B(6), and upon  the  proportionality  assessment
           concerning the Appellant's "private life" appeal, that he did.
       19. The Judge did not have the benefit of the very  recent  decision
           in AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA  Civ  661,  because  this  was  only
           promulgated on 12 April 2019. However he would not have  derived
           any great assistance from its guidance,  because  the  Court  of
           Appeal were not then concerned with a situation in which neither
           parent had leave to remain, and thus both parents were  required
           to leave the UK.
       20. In the circumstances, and as set out above, I am satisfied  that
           the Judge did not fall into any material error of  law  when  he
           dismissed the Article 8 appeal,  notwithstanding  the  terms  in
           which permission to appeal was  granted.  In  my  judgement  the
           grounds fail to disclose  any  material  error  of  law  in  the
           approach taken by the Judge to the public interest that requires
           his decision to be set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 10
   January 2019 contained no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  to
   dismiss the Appellant's human rights appeal which requires that decision
   to be set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her  or  the
        sponsor. This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
        proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 16 May 2019


