
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/17068/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Thursday 2 May 2019               |On 24th May 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                          MRS MAHEEM HAMEED GHAFOOR
                          (ALIAS MRS USMA GHAFOOR)
                          (ALIAS MS MAHEEM HAMEED)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

     1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Monson promulgated  on  27  November  2018  ("the  Decision")
        dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
        dated 13 November 2017 refusing her human rights claim made in  the
        context of an application for entry clearance to join  her  spouse,
        Mohammed  Ghafoor  (previously  known  as  Mohammed  Tahir)   ("the
        Sponsor").

     2. Identity lays at the heart of this appeal and the Decision  because
        the Appellant has also had previous identities.  Her case  is  that
        she was born Maheem Hameed.  In 2005, she applied in  the  name  of
        Usma Ghafoor for a visa to visit the UK and provided a passport  in
        that name.  It is her case that this is not and never was her  real
        identity.  She says that this was the name in a  passport  obtained
        for her by an agent.  She says that she changed her  name  by  deed
        poll on 13 January 2015 from Maheem Hameed to Maheem Hameed Ghafoor
        and that these are her true identities.

     3. The Judge did not accept the Appellant's case.  He found  that  the
        passport in the name  of  Usma  Ghafoor  was  issued  in  her  true
        identity and, therefore, that the passport in the  name  of  Maheem
        Hameed Ghafoor was not a valid identity document.   He  found  that
        paragraph 320(3) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") was met. He
        found that paragraph 320(11) of the Rules was also met because  the
        Appellant had been an absconder during a previous stay in the UK.

     4. The Appellant's immigration history is set out at [5]  to  [13]  of
        the Decision.   The Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a
        genuine and subsisting relationship with the Sponsor  and  that  he
        meets the minimum income threshold.  However, he concluded that the
        public interest weighing against the Appellant was strong given his
        conclusions on the general grounds raised by  the  Respondent.   He
        therefore dismissed the appeal.

     5. The Appellant challenges the Decision on four grounds.   First,  it
        is said that the Judge misconstrued paragraph 320(3) of the  Rules.
        Second, it is asserted that the Judge has failed to have regard  to
        documents in the Appellant's bundle which she says show that Maheem
        Hameed is her true identity.  Ground three relates to  the  Judge's
        conclusions in relation to paragraph 320(11) of the Rules which  it
        is said are perverse. Ground four asserts that the Judge has failed
        to recognise that paragraph 320(11) is a  discretionary  ground  of
        refusal.

     6. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Davidge on 7  January  2019  (on  largely  different  grounds)  but
        granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 28 February 2019  on  the
        following basis:

           "2.   It is arguable that the judge erred in concluding that the
           appellant failed to produce a valid national passport in seeking
           entry clearance; that the judge's treatment  of  the  supporting
           evidence was flawed and that his treatment  of  the  suitability
           provisions was wrong in law.  It is further  arguable  that  the
           judge failed to  treat  paragraph  320(11)  as  a  discretionary
           ground of refusal."

     7. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is a material
        error of law in the Decision  and  if  so  either  to  re-make  the
        decision or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   Ground One: Paragraph 320(3) of the Rules; Valid National Passport

     8. Paragraph 320(3) of the Rules reads as follows:
           "320. In addition to the grounds of refusal of entry clearance
           or leave to enter set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the
           following grounds for the refusal of entry clearance or leave to
           enter apply:
           Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the United
           Kingdom is to be refused
           ...
           (3) failure by the person seeking entry to the United Kingdom to
           produce to the Immigration Officer a valid national passport or
           other document satisfactorily establishing his identity and
           nationality save that the document does not need to establish
           nationality where it was issued by the national authority of a
           state of which the person is not a national and the person's
           statelessness or other status prevents the person from obtaining
           a document satisfactorily establishing the person's
           nationality;"

     9. The Judge dealt with the identity issue at  [25]  to  [30]  of  the
        Decision as follows:


           "25.   Although  the  respondent  has  failed   to   serve   any
           documentary  evidence,  save  for  a  copy  of   the   completed
           application form, in support of the factual assertions  made  in
           the refusal decision, some of the key facts are  established  on
           the evidence tendered by the  appellant  on  matters  which  are
           outside the direct knowledge of the sponsor, who only claims  to
           have met her at the end of 2010.
           26.   The first issue is whether a  general  ground  of  refusal
           under Rule 320(3) is made out.  In her witness statement  signed
           by her on 30 October 2018, the appellant admits that she entered
           the UK in 2005 under the name of UG, and she accepts  that  this
           was the name in her  passport  that  she  says  the  agent  (who
           accompanied her) tendered to the Immigration Officer on arrival.
            She further states as follows at paragraph  11:  "Therefore,  I
           provided valid passport to the Home Office in UK as well as [to]
           the ECO at the time of the submission  of  the  entry  clearance
           application."
           27.   This appears to be an admission that the passport that she
           used to travel to the UK in  2005  was  validly  issued  by  the
           Pakistani   authorities   in   Pakistan.    Even   if   I   have
           misinterpreted her evidence on this point, the fact that she was
           granted entry clearance on the basis of this passport  raises  a
           prima facie case that the passport was validly issued to her  in
           her true identity.  This case is  reinforced  by  her  admission
           that the same identification number appears  in  both  passports
           (the  passport  of  2005  and  the  passport  of   2015).    Her
           explanation at paragraph 4 is that once an ID  card  is  issued,
           "then you cannot change the number."  So she appears  to  accept
           that the same ID number was used to obtain the passport in  2005
           as was used to obtain the passport in 2015.  This  is  confirmed
           by her evidence at paragraph 3 of her witness  statement,  where
           she says that when she gave her  fingerprints  at  the  Pakistan
           High Commission in London in 2015, she was told by staff at  the
           High Commission that she already had an ID card in the  name  of
           UG.  In short, the fingerprints which the appellant gave in 2015
           matched the fingerprints used to  obtain  the  ID  card  in  the
           identity of UG, and the appellant admits that this ID  card  was
           used to obtain the 2005 passport in the identity of UG.
           28.   Accordingly, from the perspective  of  the  Pakistan  High
           Commission, the appellant was (and is) the same  person  as  the
           person referred to in her old ID card,  and  they  proceeded  to
           issue her with a new passport in 2015 on the basis that she  had
           simply changed her name from UG to MHG.
           29.   The appellant claims that UG is a false identity, and that
           her true identity at the time of entry to the UK in 2005 was MH.
            However, the appellant has not produced a birth certificate, or
           school and medical records, to show that she  was  assigned  the
           name of MH at birth, and that she was brought up in the identity
           of MH.
           30.   Accordingly, I find that Rule 320(3)  is  made  out.   The
           appellant has not produced a valid national  passport  or  other
           document which satisfactorily establishes her claimed  identity,
           which is that she was born  and  brought  up  as  MH,  and  then
           changed her name by Deed Poll to MHG, as opposed to  her  having
           been born and brought up as UG."

    10. Mr Malik submitted that, for the purposes of  satisfying  paragraph
        320(3) of the Rules, all the Appellant had to  show  was  that  the
        passport which she produced was a valid one issued by the Pakistani
        authorities.   He  said  that  the  question  whether  a   document
        satisfactorily establishes  identity  relates  only  to  the  words
        "other document".

    11. As a matter of construction, I cannot agree with  that  submission.
        It is evident from the paragraph read as a whole that  it  concerns
        the need to establish identity and the effect on an application  of
        failing to do so.  There may  be  a  presumption  that  a  passport
        issued by the national authorities  is  sufficient  proof,  but  it
        stands to reason that it can only be so if  the  applicant  is  the
        person to whom the passport belongs who is also the person who  the
        authorities accept is entitled to use that identity.

    12. In most cases, I accept that if the passport is valid on its  face,
        then no question is likely to arise under this paragraph.  However,
        if Mr Malik were right in his submission, then the  passport  which
        the Appellant produced in 2005 in support  of  her  application  to
        visit the UK  would  also  meet  this  provision  even  though  the
        Appellant says that she was not entitled to it and it  was  not  in
        her identity.  It was a passport validly issued  to  Usma  Ghafoor.
        The Appellant says that it was procured by an agent who  presumably
        had established that the Appellant was Usma  Ghafoor  in  order  to
        obtain it.  I do not understand it to be the Appellant's case  that
        the passport was a forgery.

    13. It is somewhat puzzling that the Appellant needed to use  an  agent
        to obtain a passport to which she now says she was not entitled  in
        order to obtain a family visit visa.  Her entry to the UK  was  not
        on a protection basis which might explain the use of a passport  to
        which, on  her  case,  she  was  not  entitled.  Mr  Malik  had  no
        instructions on this point.  However, on Mr  Malik's  construction,
        the  passport  used  in  2005  would  be  sufficient  to  meet  the
        requirement for a "valid national  passport"  in  paragraph  320(3)
        even though the Appellant says that she was not entitled to it.  It
        cannot be the intention of this rule that the Appellant could avoid
        the consequence of it by using a  passport  to  which  she  is  not
        entitled by simply  claiming  that  the  national  authorities  had
        issued a passport which was on its face "valid".

    14. Moreover, a passport is not on a sensible construction  "valid"  if
        it is issued to a person who does not in fact hold the identity  of
        the bearer which is claimed.

    15. For those reasons, given the identity issue which  arises  in  this
        case, the Judge was entitled to go behind the passport to  look  at
        other documents relating to identity to judge whether the  passport
        could be said to be one which was a valid proof of identity.   That
        leads me on to the second of the Appellant's grounds.

   Ground Two: Other Documents Establishing Identity

    16. The short point here is that, at [29]  of  the  Decision  (set  out
        above), the Judge failed to have regard to other evidence which the
        Appellant says does establish that  her  true  identity  is  Maheem
        Hameed.  In addition to her own  statement  with  which  the  Judge
        deals at [26] and [27] of the Decision, the Appellant relies on the
        following documents:

           Document  1:  Deed  Poll  dated  13  January  2015  ([AB/102-4])
           changing her name from Maheem Hameed to  Maheem  Hameed  Ghafoor
           and giving date of birth of 6 December 1970;

           Document 2: IELTS Certificate dated 21 March  2017  in  name  of
           Maheem Hameed Ghafoor bearing  photograph  said  to  be  of  the
           Appellant  and  bearing  the  date  of  birth  6  December  1970
           ([AB/105]);

           Document 3: Money transfers from the Sponsor  to  Maheem  Hameed
           Ghafoor dated 4, 14 and 20 March 2017 ([AB/106-7]).   The  first
           two of those documents refer to there being an  account  in  the
           Appellant's name at Allied Bank in Lahore and the third to  cash
           being  picked  up,  payable  "on  ID".  There  are  other  money
           transfers  elsewhere  showing  similar  transfers  with  similar
           particulars given;

           Document 4: Birth certificate registering the  birth  of  Maheem
           Hameed, date of birth  6  December  1970  on  31  December  2001
           ([AB/113] and in different format at [AB/117]);

           Document 5: School certificate  dated  13  August  1983  showing
           admission on 9 April  1975  and  discharge  on  31  March  1983,
           stating the duration of attendance from 1 April 1982 to 31 March
           1983, and giving date of birth of 6 December 1970 ([AB/114]).

    17. I accept that the Judge has not referred to these  documents.   The
        question is whether any of  them  individually  or  taken  together
        could undermine the Judge's conclusions on the identity  issue  (as
        set out above).  The difficulty with the documents is that  I  only
        have copies.  Even if that were not so, only one bears a photograph
        said to be of the Appellant and that is Document [2].   It  is  not
        said what evidence would have been produced to IELTS  in  order  to
        establish the  identity  used  on  that  occasion.   Nor  is  there
        evidence to show what documents would have been  needed  to  obtain
        the birth certificates at Document [4].  I note that the birth  was
        not registered until 2001 which is not all that  unusual  but  does
        not establish how that certificate was obtained,  nor  whether  the
        Appellant has the original nor that the Appellant  is  entitled  to
        that certificate.  Document [5] suffers from a similar  difficulty.
        Moreover, there is  only  the  one  certificate  for  a  period  in
        education  said  to  be  some  eight  years.   Although  the  money
        transfers at Document  [3]  might  provide  some  support  for  the
        Appellant's case if she has a  bank  account  in  the  name  Maheem
        Hameed Ghafoor, there  is  no  further  evidence  about  when  that
        account was opened or using what identity documents.  The deed poll
        at Document [1] shows only that the Appellant  has  signed  a  deed
        attesting to what she says is her own identity.

    18. I accept that the documents relied upon are consistent as  to  name
        and date  of  birth.   I  also  accept  that,  taken  alone,  those
        documents  might  be  capable  of  providing  proof  of   identity.
        However, those have to be looked at in  the  context  of  what  the
        Judge says on this issue, particularly in relation to the  identity
        card and what is said at [27] of the Decision.  In  light  of  that
        evidence, and although the Judge did not mention the evidence which
        I have set out above (and in fact expressly says that there was  no
        birth certificate or school  records),  I  am  satisfied  that  the
        evidence which was overlooked could not make any difference to  the
        Judge's conclusions on this issue if the documents had  been  taken
        into account.

    19. There is therefore no material error of  law  disclosed  by  Ground
        Two.

   Grounds Three and Four: Paragraph 320(11) of the Rules and Suitability

    20. Strictly, I  do  not  need  to  deal  with  this  ground  given  my
        conclusions on grounds one and two.  Those relate  to  a  mandatory
        ground of refusal which I have concluded was made out and that  the
        Judge was entitled so to find.  Accordingly, the Judge was entitled
        to take  this  into  account  when  judging  proportionality.   The
        outcome would not be any different even if the grounds  challenging
        the conclusion on the discretionary ground were made out.  However,
        I consider this ground also for the sake of completeness.

    21. The Judge dealt with paragraph 320(11) as follows:


           "31.  Turning to  Rule  320(11),  it  is  not  disputed  by  the
           appellant that she was an overstayer.  However, while she admits
           being "caught" by an Immigration Officer on 15 April  2008,  she
           denies being an absconder as she says she was not aware that she
           needed to report.  She points out that the appellant has  failed
           to produce a document stating that she was required to attend  a
           Reporting Centre in 2008.  While the respondent has not produced
           documentary evidence to show that the appellant was served  with
           a notice requiring her to report, it is unlikely  that  she  was
           released without such a notice being served on  her.   Moreover,
           the IS96 notice of August 2015 is described  as  being  a  "new"
           notice, which imports that there was a previous one.
           32.   Accordingly, I find on the balance of  probabilities  that
           the respondent is  correct  to  characterise  the  appellant  as
           absconding after her arrest and then  temporary  release  on  15
           April 2008.  This finding is reinforced by the fact that, by her
           own admission,  the  appellant  gave  the  name  of  UG  to  the
           Immigration Officer when arrested whereas she says that she  was
           operating under the name of MH.  This made it easier for her  to
           disappear.
           33.   Although the sponsor has confirmed that an application was
           made to regularise her status in 2013, no  documentary  evidence
           has been produced to show that at this time she disclosed to the
           Home Office that she had been apprehended in 2008 in the name of
           UG.  So, from the perspective of the Home Office, she was  still
           an absconder.
           34.   I consider that the respondent has also  proved  that  the
           appellant knowingly made a false statement  in  her  application
           form.  This justifies here exclusion on suitability grounds.
           35.   My reasoning is that the respondent has established on the
           balance  of  probabilities  that  the  passport  issued  to  the
           appellant in 2015 was not her first passport (see  above).   The
           respondent has also established that the appellant knew that  it
           was not her first passport.  I  consider  that  the  appellant's
           excuses for not mentioning the existence of the earlier passport
           are spurious.
           36.   Moreover, the  appellant  inculpates  herself  by  another
           piece of information which she gives in  her  application  form.
           She says that she entered the UK in February 2010.  In order  to
           have entered the UK in February 2010, she would  have  needed  a
           passport, and the only plausible candidate is the same  passport
           on which she entered the UK in 2005."

    22. The Appellant says that there  was  no  evidential  basis  for  the
        finding at [32] of the Decision that the Appellant was an absconder
        in the past.   The Appellant relies on the case of  R  (Shabani)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Legacy-residence-SOS's
        limited duty) IJR [2015] UKUT 403 (IAC).  The Appellant  relies  on
        what is said at [27] of the decision in that  case.   The  Tribunal
        said that it would not be right to characterise  the  applicant  in
        that case as an absconder due to lack of  documentation.   However,
        first this was an application for judicial review and therefore the
        Tribunal was scrutinising the Respondent's reasoning in that  case.
        Second, and more importantly, what is there said has to be read  in
        the context of [25] and [26] of that decision where it  is  evident
        that this conclusion was based on the facts of that case.

    23. In this case, the Judge recognised  that  the  Respondent  had  not
        produced the documentation in support of  the  assertion  that  the
        Appellant was an absconder but relied on another document which  he
        considered showed that she had been  an absconder  for  the  reason
        there given.

    24. In any event, the Judge also considered  the  suitability  grounds.
        There is no challenge made to the reason given for the  finding  on
        that basis.  I accept that the reasoning there relies also  on  the
        passport issue but for different reasons to those  relied  upon  in
        relation to paragraph 320(3)  and  based  on  the  Appellant's  own
        evidence. There is no error of law disclosed by ground three.

    25. I accept that the Judge falls into error at [15]  of  the  Decision
        where it is stated that paragraph 320(11) of the Rules is mandatory
        in nature.  However, there is no reason put forward in the  grounds
        for the exercise of discretion in the Appellant's  favour  nor  any
        submission recorded on this basis.  Accordingly, it cannot be  said
        that the Judge has failed to carry out a proper balancing  exercise
        at [37] to [39] of the  Decision,  particularly  in  light  of  the
        finding on the mandatory ground and  the  suitability  finding,  as
        follows:


           "37.  The appellant does not admit to being already  married  at
           the time of her entry to the UK in 2005, and the respondent  has
           not produced evidence to show that her marriage to  the  sponsor
           is bigamous.  So I accept that prima facie the appellant is in a
           genuine and subsisting marital relationship  with  the  sponsor,
           and also that  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the  sponsor
           continues to be genuinely employed by Afro Cosmetics,  and  that
           at all material times he has been earning an  annual  salary  in
           excess of the minimum income requirement.
           38.   Accordingly, I accept that questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar
           test should be answered in the appellant's favour.  Questions  3
           and 4 of the Razgar test must  be  answered  in  favour  of  the
           respondent.  On the issue of proportionality,  I  consider  that
           the public interest in the appellant's continued exclusion  from
           the UK is very strong, given the fact that  the  respondent  has
           made out his case under Rules 320(3) and Rule  320(11)  and  has
           also established that the  appellant  has  breached  a  relevant
           suitability requirement arising under Appendix FM.
           39.   Accordingly, the decision strikes a fair balance  between,
           on the one hand, the rights and interests of the  appellant  and
           the sponsor, and, on the other  hand,  the  wider  interests  of
           society.  It is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
           sought to be  achieved,  namely  the  maintenance  of  firm  and
           effective immigration controls and the prevention of disorder."

   Conclusion

    26. For the above reasons, the Appellant's grounds do not establish any
        material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.

DECISION
I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of  Judge  Monson
promulgated on 27 November 2018 does not contain any material error of  law.
I therefore uphold the Decision.
Signed           [pic] Dated:  23 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
