
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17990/2019
                                                               HU/17992/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2020                   |On 19 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 Janaki Lama
                                Roshan basnet
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Lawrence Youssefian, Counsel instructed by Paul
                    John
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants have permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Judge Hatton) dismissing their  appeals
    against the respondent's decision on 23 October  2019  to  refuse  them
    leave to remain on human rights grounds with reference to an  ETS/TOEIC
    English language  test  fraud  said  to  have  been  committed  by  the
    principal appellant when she attended, or  rather  did  not  attend,  a
    TOEIC test at the Premier Language Test Centre,  in  Wakering  Road  in
    Barking, London.  The  appellants'  evidence  was  that  this  was  the
    closest ETS/TOEIC test centre to where the appellants then  lived.  The
    appeal of the husband, the second appellant, stands or falls with  that
    of the principal appellant.

 2. It was put to the principal appellant that the test she claimed to have
    taken took place on 26 June  2013  at  the  Premier  Language  Training
    Centre in Barking. The judge's typed  Record  of  Proceedings  recorded
    questioning as follows:

         "Q.  The test was at Premier Language Training  Centre  in  Barking
         and it was taken on 26.6.2013  -  we  can  see  from  your  witness
         statement you say you took that test?

         A.   Yes

         Q.   Why did you pick that centre

         A.   My consultancy says to me and for a quick result to apply  for
         the visa."

 3. The principal appellant told the Judge that she took the  DLR  to  West
    Ham, changed to another train to Barking and walked  about  fifteen  or
    twenty minutes to Wakering Road on foot.   The principal appellant told
    the First-tier Tribunal that when she came out of Barking  Station  she
    "tried to find out the test centre" but she could  not  remember  which
    direction she went, or the exact date of the test she took.

 4. The principal appellant told the Tribunal  that  she  had  checked  the
    route on her phone on Google Maps and that in total  the  journey  took
    more than half an hour, with 15-20 minutes of that being her walk  from
    Barking underground station to the test centre in Wakering Road.

 5. The First-tier Judge noted the variation in the  principal  appellant's
    speaking scores over a number of previous IELTS certificates which  are
    in the bundle and her evidence that  "Sometimes  every  test  would  be
    different maybe I couldn't talk properly on  that  day  so  that's  the
    reason."

 6. At [61] the judge held that the principal appellant was  not  confident
    in her ability to speak English to a consistently  reasonable  standard
    and that seven years before the hearing in February 2020, it was likely
    that she would have been insufficiently proficient  in  English  to  be
    confident of successfully sitting and passing a TOEIC test.

 7. From paragraph 62 the judge set out his core reasoning in  relation  to
    the Premier Language Test Centre:

         "62. In addition, I note that in her  witness  statement  dated  24
             February 2020 [Appellants' 2nd  Bundle,  pp.1-15],  the  First
             Appellant was conspicuously unable to confirm  the  date  upon
             which  she  purportedly  attended  Premier  Language  Training
             Centre to sit her speaking and  writing  tests  i.e.  26  June
             2013.  Indeed, the First Appellant  simply  states  that  'The
             exam was booked for a date in June 2013' [para.12].


         63.  Further, the  First  Appellant  was  conspicuously  unable  to
             confirm precisely how she arrived  at  Premier  Language  Test
             Centre.  The First Appellant simply stated as follows: 'On the
             day of the exam I took the DLR  train  from  Woolwich  arsenal
             [sic] station to West Ham station.  I then took the train from
             West Ham to Barking.  The centre was not far from the  station
             and therefore I walked to the test centre.' [para.13]


         64.  During her oral evidence, the First  Appellant  was  asked  to
             clarify precisely how she got to Premier Language Test Centre.
              She was unable to do so.  Further, the First Appellant  could
             not even confirm  which  direction  she  went  after  existing
             Barking station.  I  additionally  note  the  First  Appellant
             confirmed during her oral evidence that it took  her  'fifteen
             or twenty minutes'  to  walk  to  the  test  centre  from  the
             station.


         65.  Having consulted a London A-Z,  I  note  that  Wakering  Road,
             where Premier Language Test Centre was situated, it  literally
             just around the corner from Barking station.   Accordingly,  I
             consider it incredible that it took the First Appellant  15-20
             minutes to walk to the test centre from Barking station.


         66.  Correspondingly, I would reasonably expect the First Appellant
             to know that Premier Language Test Centre was just around  the
             corner from Barking station, if she had genuinely attended the
             test centre on the date in question via  the  route  claimed."
                               [Emphasis added]


 8. The First-tier Tribunal found the principal appellant's account to lack
    credibility and dismissed the appeal.

 9. The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

10. The appellants challenged the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  on  four
    grounds, but permission was  granted  only  on  the  permissibility  or
    otherwise of the First-tier Judge's having consulted Google Maps  after
    the hearing, to see which direction one went from  Barking  Station  to
    the Wakering Road test centre.

11. In the grant of permission First-tier Judge Boyes said this:

         "...2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in respect of  the
             burden  of  proof  (ground  1),  by  conducting  post  hearing
             research (ground 2), in the credibility assessment (ground 3),
             by displaying bias (ground 4) and in the Article 8  Assessment
             (ground 5).


         3.   I have considered the grounds and the judgment.


         4.   The only ground with merit and which is arguable is ground  2.
             It is not perhaps that the judge has consulted a map which  is
             the main issue but that the judge had drawn a conclusion  from
             the map which was not put to the appellants. ...


         8.   Permission granted on Ground 2 only."


Submission for the appellants

12. Mr Youssefian, who appeared for the appellants today, did not have  any
    record of the evidence the appellants gave at the previous hearing.  He
    was unable to produce or to identify in the hearing bundle  either  the
    test centre address, or  the  TOEIC  certificate  relied  upon  by  the
    appellants.  He could not assist the Tribunal as to how  Wakering  Road
    had been identified as the Test Centre address.

13. I did not call on Mr Clarke to make oral submissions.

Analysis

14. All parties this morning have had an opportunity to look at Google Maps
    and to confirm that as the principal appellant said in her evidence  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, Wakering Road is very near Barking Underground
    which is the route the principal appellant says she took.

15. I remind myself  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  fact-finding
    Tribunal and that the First-tier Judge had seen and heard the principal
    appellant give her evidence, which  he  considered  unsatisfactory  and
    lacking in credibility.  Any error of law must be a material  error  of
    law if the decision of the First-tier Judge is  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

16. I apply AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ  1296  and  R
    (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982
    at [90] and am conscious of the narrow circumstances in which the Upper
    Tribunal may interfere with a finding of fact.

17. I remind myself also that where, as here, the Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged the evidential burden upon her of showing that the ETS/TOEIC
    certificate has been procured by dishonesty, it is for  the  appellants
    to provide an innocent explanation:  see SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence -
    Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC).   In the present appeal,  every
    single result from this particular test centre had  been  found  to  be
    invalid or questionable.

18. My primary conclusion is that for the judge after the hearing  to  have
    consulted Google Maps, which the principal appellant had herself relied
    upon in describing her journey from  Barking  to  the  test  centre  in
    Wakering Road, did not amount to impermissible post  hearing  research.
    The point, which was put, was that her description of  her  journey  to
    the hearing centre (and even her knowledge of when she  sat  the  test)
    was vague and lacking in detail.

19. Even if I am wrong, in the light of the evidence  which  the  principal
    appellant gave about her journey and the judge's consideration of  that
    evidence at [62] and following, I am not satisfied that  had  he  asked
    the additional question with the  map in hand, "Surely it did not  take
    you fifteen to twenty minutes to walk round  the  corner  from  Barking
    Station", which I think is how it would have had to be framed, that any
    answer which the  principal  appellant  might  have  given  would  have
    resulted in a different outcome.

20. The principal appellant had already said that she did  not  know  which
    direction she went, that it took her fifteen  to  twenty  minutes  from
    Barking  Station  but  the  entire  journey,  including  a  change   of
    underground station from the DLR to the line for Barking took her about
    30 minutes and that she used Google Maps on her phone to find the  test
    centre.

21. Taken with all the other evidence before the judge, it  was  unarguably
    open to him to find that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the  principal
    appellant was a credible witness  and  to  proceed  on  that  basis  in
    reaching his proper, intelligible and adequately  reasoned  conclusions
    and dismissing these appeals.

22. There is no material error of law in this decision and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

DECISION

23. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date: 13 November
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson





