
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17400/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Martin, Counsel, instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 14 January 2019 of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Swaney which allowed an Article 8  ECHR  appeal  in
    the context of a decision to deport

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the respondent  and  to  GW  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Jamaica born on 27 January 1983.  He came to the UK in 2001 at the  age
    of 18.  On arrival he was refused leave  to  enter,  granted  temporary
    admission and then absconded.   He  did  not  present  himself  to  the
    immigration authorities again until 5 October  2013  when  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.  He  was  granted
    leave until 19 April 2016 and subsequently until 11 February 2019.

 4. However, on 24 May 2017 the appellant was convicted of  two  counts  of
    supplying a Class A drug and sentenced to 32  months  imprisonment.  In
    response to those convictions, the respondent served the appellant with
    a decision to deport on  18  April  2017.   On  6  July  2017  he  made
    submissions relying on Article 8 ECHR  as  to  why  he  should  not  be
    deported.  The respondent refused the human rights claim in a  decision
    dated 14 December 2017 which also maintained the decision to deport.

 5. The appellant appealed the refusal of his Article 8 ECHR claim  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.  There  was  little  dispute  as  to  the   facts
    concerning his family and private life.  Shortly after coming to the UK
    in 2001, the appellant formed a relationship with SM and  became  close
    to her daughter.   He  remained  close  to  the  daughter  although  he
    separated from SM.  The appellant then entered into a relationship with
    CA and they have a child together, DM, born on  24  August  2003.   The
    appellant and CA did not remain together, however, CA marrying  another
    man in  2005.  During  her  marriage  DM  lived  with  his  mother  but
    maintained his relationship with the appellant.  When  CA  divorced  in
    2012 she and DM lived in the home of the appellant's mother.  CA  moved
    in with the appellant's family as she was not well and she wanted DM to
    be in a stable, supportive environment. The appellant came to  live  in
    his mother's home in 2015.  When the appellant was sent  to  prison  in
    2017, CA and DM continued to live with the appellant's mother.

 6. There was also no dispute that CA  has  health  problems,  having  been
    diagnosed with rheumatoid  arthritis.  This  led  to  her  requiring  a
    wheelchair for a period of time but, fortunately the condition remitted
    somewhat and she has been able to work since 2013.  CA is waiting for a
    knee replacement. She has also suffered from depression  and  has  been
    referred to a psychiatrist. It was also undisputed that the appellant's
    mother has been unwell, suffering from heart problems and cancer,  from
    which she is currently in remission.

 7. In the decision issued on 14 January 2019, the First-tier Tribunal  set
    out in paragraphs 54 to 59 the correct legal provisions  for  assessing
    an Article 8 ECHR claim in the context of deportation. At paragraph  62
    she found that the appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his son. In paragraph 63 the judge found that it  was
    in the best interests of the appellant's son that he remain in the UK.

 8. Judge Swaney then proceeded  to  assess  whether  the  appellant  could
    benefit from the provisions of paragraphs 398-399A of  the  Immigration
    Rules. In paragraphs 64 to 77 she considered whether  paragraph  399(a)
    could be met, that is, whether it would be unduly harsh for DM  if  the
    appellant were to be deported. She referred herself in paragraph 64  to
    the correct legal approach to the "unduly harsh"  requirement  provided
    by KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53.  At paragraph  67,  the  judge  stated  that  a  family  being
    separated was a normal consequence of deportation and  that  "something
    more" was required for a finding of undue hardship.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that it would be unduly harsh for  DM
    if the appellant were to be  deported  to  Jamaica.  The  indeterminate
    separation arising from deportation was more serious than the period of
    time the appellant was in prison and the period of time when  DM  lived
    with CA and her husband but remained in contact with the appellant; see
    paragraph 68. CA was  a  credible  witness  and  her  evidence  of  the
    behavioural problems DM developed whilst the appellant  was  in  prison
    were accepted; see paragraph 69. The positive impact  on  DM  when  the
    appellant returned home in the summer of 2018 was also accepted.

10. In paragraph 71 the judge also accepted  that  CA  cannot  always  cook
    easily or go out from the  home  to  attend  meetings  at  DW's  school
    because of her arthritis and her depression.  The judge noted that  the
    appellant's mother is also limited in the  support  she  can  offer  DM
    because of her health problems. In paragraph 72 the  judge  found  that
    notwithstanding the "close supportive family" around DM,  "the  absence
    of the appellant would have a significant detrimental impact"  on  him.
    DM's evidence of the emotional  impact  of  being  separated  from  the
    appellant while he was in prison was  accepted  at  paragraph  73.  The
    judge noted in paragraph 74 that having a supportive family around  him
    and having indirect contact with the appellant whilst he was in  prison
    were not sufficient to  prevent  DM  having  difficulties  during  that
    period.

11. Judge Swaney set out her conclusions in paragraphs 76 to 77:

         "76.     It is a consequence of the appellant's actions that he  is
             facing deportation. His deportation will  inevitably  cause  a
             certain amount  of  distress  to  his  son.   I  find  in  the
             particular circumstances of this case that it would be  unduly
             harsh for the appellant's son to remain in the United  Kingdom
             without the appellant.  I rely on all my findings  above,  but
             the particular factors in this case which combine to  make  it
             unduly harsh, i.e. worse for  the  appellant's  son  than  any
             other child whose parent faces deportation include:

          i) the emotional difficulties he faced while the appellant was in
             prison, the lack of impact of the  support  he  had  from  his
             family during that period and the link between the appellant's
             return and his subsequent improvement.




         ii) The impact of CA and VA's medical problems on their ability to
             meet the needs of  the  appellant's  son,  in  particular  his
             emotional needs, the role the appellant plays in that  regard,
             and the  reasonably  foreseeable  detrimental  impact  of  the
             appellant's absence.




        iii) The foreseeable detrimental impact on  the  appellant's  son's
             education if he is separated from the appellant at this  stage
             of his education, i.e. a few months before he is due to  begin
             his GCSE exams.


         77. It would be unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant's  son  to
             remain in the United Kingdom  without  him.  Accordingly,  the
             appellant satisfies the exception to deportation  set  out  in
             paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules. This means that the
             public   interest   in   his   deportation    is    outweighed
             notwithstanding the seriousness with which his  offences  must
             be viewed."

12. The Secretary of State's challenge to the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is, in essence, that the conclusion that it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the son was not open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence.  The
    consequences that the First-tier Tribunal identified might be harsh but
    were to be expected in the context of  deportation  and  could  not  be
    found to be "unduly" harsh.

13. The guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh" in paragraph  399  and
    Section 117C of the Nationality  and  Immigration  Act  2002   is  that
    approved in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53. In paragraph 27 the Supreme Court confirms the guidance
    given in MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) which states:

         "Unduly harsh does not  equate  with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses  a  considerably
         more  elevated  threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this   context,   denotes
         something severe, or bleak.  It is the  antipathy  of  pleasant  or
         comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the verb 'unduly' raises
         an already elevated standard still higher."

14. Lord Carnwath also indicated in paragraph 23 of KO that:

         "... the  expression  'unduly  harsh'  seems  clearly  intended  to
         introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of  'reasonableness'  under
         Section 117B(6), taking account  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of  foreign  criminals.   Further,  the  word  'unduly'
         implies an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a  "due"
         level of "harshness, that is a level which  may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant  context.  "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child facing  the
         deportation of a parent."

15. As indicated above, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  clearly  referred
    herself to KO and the need for "something more" for a finding of  undue
    harshness. Caution  has  to  be  exercised  where  the  decision  maker
    identified the correct legal precedent. It is still  my  judgment  that
    the material before the First-tier Tribunal did not permit a conclusion
    that the facts, even at their  highest,  showed  circumstances  for  DM
    going beyond those which would necessarily be involved  for  any  child
    facing  the  deportation  of  a  parent.   DM   experienced   distress,
    depression and difficulties at school as a  result  of  the  separation
    from his father whilst he  was  in  prison  and  as  a  result  of  the
    inability of his mother and other relatives to make up for the  absence
    of his father. His difficulties, even taken at their highest, show  the
    "due" level of "harshness" expected where a parent  is  deported.  They
    are not capable of amounting to  the  elevated  level  or  "severe"  or
    "bleak" circumstances required for a finding that  the  test  of  undue
    harshness was met.  It is therefore my conclusion that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material error on a  point  of  law
    and that it must be set aside to be remade.

16. The remaking of the assessment of paragraph 399(a) and the unduly harsh
    test is relatively straightforward given the nature of the error of law
    finding.  It is not my view that the appellant's deportation  would  be
    "unduly harsh" for his son. I accept that it is manifestly in DM's best
    interests that his father remain in the UK.  I  also  accept  that  the
    separation of DM from his father will be harsh but not to the  elevated
    degree required to outweigh the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    deportation.  The evidence here does not show that the difficulties  DM
    will face are materially worse than other children whose parents  faces
    deportation, even  taking  into  account  the  impact  of  the  medical
    problems of his mother and grandmother on him  and  accepting  that  he
    will experience at least the same emotional disturbance as he did  when
    the appellant was imprisoned. Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules
    is not met.

17. It was not argued for the appellant that he could meet  the  provisions
    of paragraph 399(b) as he is  not  in  a  relationship  with  a  person
    settled in the UK or a British national. It is also not  arguable  that
    he can meet paragraph 399A as he has not been lawfully resident in  the
    UK for most of his life and, where he lived in Jamaica until the age of
    18, not arguable that he  would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration there.

18. I must therefore proceed to assess whether, being unable  to  meet  the
    provisions of paragraphs 399 and 399A,  the  appellant  can  show  that
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those provisions
    such that his deportation is not in the public interest.

19. The correct approach in the very  compelling  circumstances  assessment
    has been clarified in a number of cases from the  higher  courts.   The
    Supreme Court has done so in the case of Hesham Ali (Iraq) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60. This case confirms  in
    paragraph 38:
         "38. The implication of the new rules is that rules  399  and  399A
         identify particular categories of case in which  the  Secretary  of
         State accepts that the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
         offender is outweighed under article 8 by  countervailing  factors.
         Cases not covered by those rules (that is to say, foreign offenders
         who have received sentences of at least four  years,  or  who  have
         received sentences of between 12 months and four  years  but  whose
         private or family life does not meet the requirements of rules  399
         and 399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight  should
         generally be given to the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
         such  offenders,  but  that  it  can  be  outweighed,  applying   a
         proportionality test, by very compelling  circumstances:  in  other
         words, by a very strong claim indeed, as  Laws  LJ  put  it  in  SS
         (Nigeria).   The  countervailing  considerations   must   be   very
         compelling in order to outweigh the general public interest in  the
         deportation of such offenders, as assessed by  Parliament  and  the
         Secretary  of  State.   The  Strasbourg   jurisprudence   indicates
         relevant factors to consider, and rules 399  and  399A  provide  an
         indication of the sorts of matters which  the  Secretary  of  State
         regards as very compelling.  As explained at para  26  above,  they
         can include factors bearing on the weight of the public interest in
         the deportation of the particular offender,  such  as  his  conduct
         since the offence was committed, as well as factors relating to his
         private or family life.  Cases falling within the scope of  section
         32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest in  deportation  is
         outweighed, other than those specified in the new rules themselves,
         are likely to be a very small minority (particularly in non-settled
         cases).  They need not necessarily involve any  circumstance  which
         is exceptional in the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel  for
         the Secretary of State accepted, consistently with Huang  [2007]  2
         AC 167, para 20), but they can  be  said  to  involve  'exceptional
         circumstances' in the sense that they involve a departure from  the
         general rule. (my emphasis)"

20. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662, the Court of Appeal also considered the meaning of  "very
    compelling circumstances" and how the test  might  be  met.  The  Court
    concluded at  paragraph 29, referring to the exceptions in section 117C
    which mirror paragraphs 399 and 399A, that a  foreign  criminal  facing
    deportation is not "altogether disentitled  from  seeking  to  rely  on
    matters falling within the scope  of  the  circumstances  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2  when  seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions
    1 and 2". The position is, rather, that:
         "As we have indicated above, a foreign criminal is entitled to rely
         upon such matters, but he would need to be able to point to
         features of his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and
         in paragraphs 399 or 399A of the 2014 rules), or features falling
         outside the circumstances described in those exceptions and those
         paragraphs, which made his claim based on article 8 especially
         strong. (my emphasis)".
    In the case of a medium offender, the Court sets out, at paragraph 32:
         "Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all he could
         advance in support of his article 8 claim was a 'near miss' case in
         which he fell short of bringing himself within either Exception 1
         or Exception 2, it would not be possible to say that he had shown
         that there were 'very compelling circumstances, over and above
         those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. He would need to have a far
         stronger case than that by reference to the interests protected by
         article 8 to bring himself within that fall back protection. But
         again, in principle there may be cases in which such an offender
         can say that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions
         1 and 2 have such great force for article 8 purposes that they do
         constitute such very compelling circumstances, whether taken by
         themselves or in conjunction with other factors relevant to article
         8 but not falling within the factors described in Exceptions 1 and
         2. The decision-maker, be it the Secretary of State or a tribunal,
         must look at all the matters relied upon collectively, in order to
         determine whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the
         high public interest in deportation. (my emphasis)"

21. Following this guidance, it is not my view that this case  is  a  "near
    miss" under either paragraphs 399 or 399A.  The circumstances faced  by
    DM are harsh but not unduly so. The provisions of paragraphs 399(b) and
    399A are far from being met. The appellant therefore has to show  other
    "especially  strong"  factors  able  to  meet  the   "very   compelling
    circumstances" test.

22. There are matters that must  weigh  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
    balance in this assessment.   He  has  strong  relationships  with  his
    immediate relatives in the UK, albeit resumed after he came to  the  UK
    in 2001 as an adult. Also, the appellant  has  a  relationship  with  a
    former step-daughter, SS, albeit  there  was  very  little  information
    about her in the materials beyond a letter dated 20 December 2018 which
    describes the  appellant  as  her  dad  and  refers  to  the  appellant
    supporting her through a difficult  time  when  her  uncle  died.   The
    letter does not indicate how often the  appellant  sees  her,  however.
    Her mother's statement dated 20 December 2018 states that her  daughter
    "would break again if he was not here" but there is little  other  than
    these subjective opinions to support a serious detriment to SS  if  the
    appellant is deported.

23. The appellant's residence in the UK for 18 years must also  be  weighed
    on his side of the balance. The weight attracting to that residence  is
    reduced by his poor  conduct  in  absconding  immediately  on  arrival,
    remaining illegally for 12 years and having had leave for  only  a  few
    years during the time that he has been here.

24. The absence of reoffending and rehabilitation have been found not to be
    significant factors capable of making  a  material  difference  in  the
    assessment of very compelling circumstances;  see  RA  (s.117C  "unduly
    harsh"; offence seriousness) [2019] UKUT 123 and MS  (s.117C(6))  "very
    compelling circumstances") [2019] UKUT 122.

25. Against the factors that can be weighed on the appellant's side of  the
    balance, the public interest in his deportation attracts "great weight"
    as indicated by the Supreme Court in Hesham  Ali.   The  Supreme  Court
    confirmed that only a "very  strong  claim  indeed"  can  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation  of  "medium"  offenders  such  as  this
    appellant.   The  same  case  confirms  in  paragraph  38   that   "the
    countervailing considerations must  be  very  compelling  in  order  to
    outweigh the  general  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  such
    offenders".

26. It is not my conclusion that the positive factors  set  out  above  are
    capable of  amounting  to  very  compelling  circumstances  capable  of
    outweighing the public interest, even taking  them  at  their  highest,
    cumulatively and again taking account of the  harshness  that  DM  will
    experience if the appellant is deported.  I  therefore  find  that  the
    decision to deport the appellant is proportionate and does  not  amount
    to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  of  law  and  is
set aside to be remade.

I remake the appeal as refused.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 9 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt












