
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17092/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|                                              |On 8 January 2019             |
|On 2 November 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                              Mr JAKARIAH ULLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A W Khan, Legal Representative (non-practising
                    Barrister) of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Bangladesh who  arrived  in
    this country in 2004 when he was 12 years old.   He  arrived  with  his
    mother and his two sisters.  One of his sisters  was  about  six  years
    older than him, and his younger sister was then 5.  It is said that his
    mother had been in an abusive relationship with her  husband  and  they
    are now divorced. Although there is not very much evidence  in  support
    of this claim, it does not appear to be disputed by the respondent.

 2. Although the appellant together with his sisters and  mother  had  some
    limited leave to remain that very soon expired and none of  them  left.
    They have accordingly been in this country without leave from about May
    2009.  The older sister (of whom this Tribunal was  unaware  until  the
    hearing today) apparently was married in 2014 and has subsequently  had
    a child.  As her husband is a British citizen,  so  is  her  child  and
    although the Tribunal was not given any details, it  appears  that  she
    now has leave to remain in this country.  She lives  with  her  husband
    and child close to the appellant, about a 30 minute bus journey away.

 3. In or about 2016 the appellant's mother applied for leave to remain  as
    did the appellant and his younger sister.  The appellant by  this  time
    was about 19 and his sister  was  about  14.   None  of  them  met  the
    eligibility  requirements  set  out  within   the   Rules   and   their
    applications were refused.  The respondent considered that  the  family
    could all return as a unit  to  Bangladesh;  although  the  appellant's
    sister had been living in the UK for at least seven years prior to  the
    date of the application, the respondent considered  it  was  reasonable
    for her to return to Bangladesh  along  with  her  mother  and  brother
    having regard to her obligations  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, pursuant to which she is required
    to have regard to the need to safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
    children  who  are  in  the  United  Kingdom,   which   in   subsequent
    jurisprudence it is established requires her to have regard to the best
    interests  of  such  children  as  a  primary   (but   not   paramount)
    consideration.

 4. The appellant together with his mother and younger sister all  appealed
    against this decision and their  appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal at Birmingham on 26 September 2017 but in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 4  October  2017  the  judge  while
    allowing the appeals of the mother and daughter dismissed the appeal of
    this appellant.  So far as the daughter was concerned she was  then  14
    years old and in the middle of her education at school;  having  regard
    to the facts that first she had been here over seven years and secondly
    her  schooling  was  at  a  particularly  important  stage,  the  judge
    considered it would not be proportionate for her  to  return.   Because
    she could not return the judge went on to find that by reason  of  what
    is set out at Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (inserted by Section 19 of the  Immigration  Act  2014)
    the public interest did not require the removal of the  mother  either.
    That is because the mother had a subsisting parental relationship  with
    a qualifying child and (the judge had found) it would not be reasonable
    to expect that child, that is the appellant's younger sister, to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

 5. Although the case  had been argued  before  Judge  Hawden-Beal  on  the
    basis that either all three should stay or all three should be removed,
    the judge having found that but for the daughter's position  at  school
    all the family could return, considered that because this appellant was
    21 years old and would be able, in her words, to "find his own  way  in
    the country of his birth" (this is at paragraph 44 of her decision)  he
    could reasonably be expected to return to Bangladesh and that for  that
    reason "the decision is both justified and proportionate".

 6. The appellant has appealed against this  decision,  leave  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig on  28  March  2018.   When
    granting permission to appeal, Judge Pullig, giving his reasons, stated
    as follows:

         "I find that  there  is  no  finding  as  to  whether  or  not  the
         appellant, being dependent on his mother, has family life with  her
         or, for that matter his sister, taking the family unit as a  whole.
         There was no Article 8 Razgar approach  or  proper  proportionality
         balancing exercise".

 7. The appeal then came before me on 27 July 2018 when I found that  Judge
    Hawden-Beal's decision had contained a material error of law, such that
    the decision had to be re-made and I gave directions  that  the  appeal
    would be re-listed in the Upper  Tribunal  before  me  when  the  Upper
    Tribunal would re-make the decision.  Much  of  what  I  said  in  that
    decision is of necessity repeated in this decision.

 8. As I stated in my earlier decision, and repeat here, the error which  I
    consider Judge Hawden-Beal made in her decision was that  she  did  not
    consider the position of this appellant through the prism of her having
    found that both his mother and  sister  should  remain.   Although  the
    judge did consider the Razgar questions  in  the  context  of  all  the
    evidence jointly, she does not appear to have asked  herself  the  same
    questions with regard to this appellant on the basis that he  would  be
    the only person returning.  In my judgement it was incumbent on her  to
    do so.

 9. When giving my reasons for finding an error of law, I  stated  that  it
    was not realistically arguable that there would be insurmountable (that
    is  very  significant)  obstacles  to  this  appellant   returning   to
    Bangladesh on his own.  Although he had not been there for  nine  years
    (now ten years), he is a fit and healthy young  man  and  I  considered
    then, and I have no reason to alter this aspect of my decision, that he
    would be able to make a life for himself there, albeit possibly not the
    sort of life that he might enjoy in this country.  However, that  still
    left the question to  be  considered  as  to  whether  or  not  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case there are sufficiently compelling
    reasons why exceptionally this appellant should  be  granted  leave  to
    remain under Article 8 outside the Rules.  I considered that a  further
    decision would have to be made following  consideration  of  up-to-date
    evidence and in particular first as to whether or not on usual Kugathas
    principles there were in this case more than the usual  emotional  ties
    to be expected between an adult and  his  parents  (in  this  case  his
    mother and/or his younger sister) such as to engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8,  and  secondly  whether  if  this  was  the  case  it  might
    nonetheless still be proportionate to return him to Bangladesh.  It was
    for this reason that  a  further  hearing  was  necessary  in  which  I
    anticipated hearing further evidence.  I  considered  that  the  issues
    remaining were sufficiently narrow that the appropriate course would be
    to retain this appeal in the Upper Tribunal where I would be able to re-
    make the  decision  myself  in  light  of  such  further  evidence  and
    submissions as were brought before me.

10. Accordingly, I adjourned the hearing part-heard for a  further  hearing
    before myself and directed that the appellant should  serve  up-to-date
    evidence as to the circumstances of his family, to enable the  Tribunal
    to consider primarily first whether there is still existing family life
    between the appellant and his mother and sister such as to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8, and secondly whether if this was the case,  and
    given that the appellant's mother and sister would remain in the UK, it
    would be proportionate to  remove  the  appellant.   The  appellant  in
    particular was to supply up-to-date witness  statements  from  himself,
    his mother and, if so advised, his 15 year old  sister,  which  witness
    statements should be capable of standing  as  evidence-in-chief.   This
    evidence was in fact  lodged  with  the  Tribunal  and  served  on  the
    respondent within the time set out within my directions and the witness
    statements did in the event stand as evidence-in-chief.

The Hearing

11. The appellant was represented at the hearing by Mr Khan,  who  although
    listed as he now has to be as a legal  representative,  is  in  fact  a
    retired barrister who  has  considerable  advocacy  experience.   I  am
    extremely grateful to him for the exceptionally lucid way in  which  he
    argued the case on behalf  of  the  appellant.   I  am  also  extremely
    grateful to Mr Bramble who represented the respondent  at  the  hearing
    before me today for the  very  fair  manner  in  which  he  argued  the
    respondent's case which was both thorough but also concise.   He  asked
    all  the  appropriate  questions  in  cross-examination  and  made  the
    submissions which were properly open to the respondent on what  I  have
    found to be a very finely  balanced  case  in  an  extremely  fair  and
    persuasive manner.

12. At the hearing I heard evidence first from the appellant and then  from
    his mother and sister.  An interpreter was present to assist  both  the
    appellant and his mother.  I asked the appellant to give  his  evidence
    so far as he was able in English and rely on the  interpreter  only  to
    the extent that this was necessary.  Unfortunately, for  reasons  which
    will be apparent, this was necessary to a fairly large extent.  So  far
    as his understanding of English is concerned (which I  mention  because
    one of the matters to which the Tribunal must have regard  pursuant  to
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  is
    whether or not an appellant is able to speak English), I found that the
    appellant's knowledge and understanding of  English  was  less  than  I
    would expect from somebody who has been in this country for  ten  years
    from the age of 11/12 but I nonetheless do consider that  it  is  of  a
    sufficient level that he would be able to  get  by.  Certainly,  having
    regard to the standard of English which is regarded  as  sufficient  to
    enable an applicant to pass an English language test which  is  usually
    seen as the appropriate yardstick, I consider that his level of English
    would be sufficient certainly to pass such a test, although it  is  not
    of a standard that one would expect from a fluent English speaker.   It
    is the case, however, and it is common ground, that the appellant  does
    speak fluent Bengali, which of course is consistent with  the  previous
    finding that he would be able easily to integrate into Bangladesh  were
    he to be returned there.

13. So far as the appellant's mother is concerned, it was quite clear  that
    she spoke very little English indeed.  Even when I asked the most basic
    questions in English she needed the assistance of  the  interpreter  to
    understand that question and her evidence was given entirely in Bengali
    with the assistance of the interpreter.

14. So far as the appellant's young sister is concerned, she is now 15  and
    has been attending school since her arrival in this  country  some  ten
    years or so ago.  She is taking her  GCSEs  next  June  (she  told  the
    Tribunal in about eight subjects) and English is  her  first  language.
    The interpreter was not required for her evidence.

15. All the witnesses affirmed that what was contained within their witness
    statements were true and they were all cross-examined.   I  also  heard
    submissions on behalf  of  both  parties,  which,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, were of a very high standard and have greatly assisted me in
    reaching my decision.  It is not necessary for  the  purposes  of  this
    decision to set out the evidence or the submissions in full.  They  are
    recorded in my Record of Proceedings verbatim, as far as  I  was  able,
    and so I shall refer below only to  such  parts  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions  as  are  necessary.   I  have,  however,  had  regard   to
    everything which was said to me, either by the parties' representatives
    or by the witnesses, as well as to all the documents  contained  within
    the file, before reaching my decision.

The Evidence

16. Essentially the appellant's case is that he has a family life with  his
    mother and sister in this country as well as a private life  here  such
    as to engage Article 8, and that his removal would interfere with those
    rights.  It is his case that the ties between himself  and  his  mother
    and sister go beyond the normal emotional ties to be  expected  between
    an adult child and his mother and/or sibling as predicated in Kugathas,
    such that his article 8 family life rights are engaged.  It is his case
    further that when one applies the Razgar fifth test  to  the  facts  in
    this case it would not be proportionate to remove him from this country
    because although it is not disputed that there is a public interest  in
    so doing, this is not on all  the  facts  of  the  case  sufficient  to
    justify the interference with his Article 8 rights.

17. Mr Bramble reminded the Tribunal that it has first to consider  whether
    or not as a matter of fact the appellant's ties  with  his  mother  and
    sister do go beyond the normal emotional ties to be expected between an
    adult child and his parent and/or sibling.  In this case the  appellant
    and his family say that  his  mother  is  not  well,  suffering  mental
    problems of depression as well as being asthmatic,  and  that  he  does
    some of the cooking and cleaning  within  the  house,  that  he  has  a
    particularly close relationship with his  younger  sister,  effectively
    being the father figure (certainly the only male) in the household  and
    also that he has a particularly close bond with his younger sister.

18. In the witness statements that were provided the  appellant's  case  is
    effectively put on the basis that the appellant's mother speaks Bengali
    but very little English, his younger sister  speaks  English  but  very
    little Bengali, but the appellant alone amongst the three is  the  only
    one who speaks both fluent English and Bengali.  On this version of the
    family dynamic, the appellant is accordingly pivotal within this family
    because he is the one who can interpret  between  the  mother  and  the
    daughter.

19. So far as the mother is concerned, it was clear from the evidence which
    was given that she speaks Bengali  and  no  English.   So  far  as  the
    daughter is concerned, she clearly speaks very good English, but it was
    not possible for this Tribunal  to  assess  fully  the  extent  of  her
    Bengali.  In evidence she said that she could speak to  her  mother  in
    broken Bengali, and  this  must  be  so.   She  was  5  when  she  left
    Bangladesh and obviously at that time was speaking Bengali, and as  she
    has not been able to speak to her mother in any other  language  since,
    the inference that I have to draw is that her knowledge of  Bengali  is
    sufficient at least to  enable  her  to  communicate  and  continue  to
    communicate with her mother.  So far as the  appellant's  knowledge  of
    English is concerned, I have already remarked on this, and it is  clear
    that English remains very much his second language.

20. So far as the witnesses themselves were concerned, I  take  account  of
    the fact that the appellant himself must have  been  extremely  nervous
    when giving his evidence and that accordingly this in itself would have
    made it difficult perhaps for him to put his case as well as  he  might
    have liked.  However, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest  that
    he has any significant private life in this  country  beyond  the  life
    which he has with his family.  He told the Tribunal that  whenever  his
    mother is unable to, he will do the cooking in the house  and  he  will
    also do the cleaning.  He regrettably seems to have  fallen  through  a
    gap in the provision of services in this country  because  although  he
    was on the waiting list for a school for two or three years it  appears
    that he had very little formal education in an  English  school.   Such
    education as he did have was in his words in either an Arab  or  Arabic
    school which might account for why the standard of his English is  less
    than would be normal for a person of his  age  who  had  been  in  this
    country for so long.

21. So far as the evidence of the appellant's mother is concerned, I  found
    her a very unimpressive witness.  It was not clear to me that  she  was
    always attempting to give an answer to the  questions  she  was  asked.
    Although she claimed that her health was so poor that she could not get
    by without the assistance of her son, I have noted  that  the  evidence
    does not include any significant medical evidence as to  the  state  of
    her health.   Also,  I  have  to  consider  her  evidence  against  the
    background which is that she is somebody who came to this country  some
    ten years or so ago and remained without any leave at  all  at  a  time
    when she had absolutely no right to remain here.  There  is  no  reason
    for me to doubt that the decision of Judge Hawden-Beal, which  is  that
    but for the position of her daughter she would have had no claim to  be
    allowed to remain, was correct.   To  the  extent  that  she  has  been
    granted leave to remain this is entirely because of the position of her
    daughter and not because of any intrinsic merit in her own case.

22. The evidence which  I  did  find  impressive  was  that  given  by  the
    appellant's younger sister.  It is right that she is at a  particularly
    important time in her schooling, and I  accept  from  her  evidence  in
    particular that her relationship with her brother is an extremely close
    one.  She told the Tribunal, and I accept, that although most  of  what
    she knows about the behaviour of her father to her mother is  what  she
    has been told by her mother and her brother,  nonetheless  she  has  on
    occasion had flashbacks in which she remembers arguments between  them,
    and I accept that she does rely on her brother  as  an  important  male
    adult who is able to provide support to her which she does not get from
    a father within her own household.  Certainly, I am entirely  satisfied
    despite my misgivings with regard to some of  the  evidence  which  was
    given that the relationship between this particular appellant  and  his
    mother and sister goes beyond what might  be  said  to  be  the  normal
    emotional ties to be expected between an adult  child  and  his  mother
    and/or sibling.  This is a very close-knit family  unit  of  now  three
    people (together with the older sister who they  still  regularly  see)
    and if that relationship were to be interfered with it  would  be  very
    difficult to maintain through Skype or Facebook or  any  other  of  the
    ways in which attempts are usually made to maintain such relationships.
     To his credit Mr Bramble did not suggest that if there  was  a  family
    relationship this could realistically be maintained through the use  of
    modern technology which argument is sometimes relied  on  in  cases  of
    this kind.

23. However, Mr Bramble then submitted that even and  to  the  extent  that
    there was a family relationship between the appellant  and  his  mother
    and sister, it would still  be  proportionate  for  him  to  return  to
    Bangladesh.  With regard to Section 117B, it is of course in the public
    interest to maintain effective immigration control and  it  is  against
    that public interest that the consequences of an  interference  in  the
    family life has to be judged.  Although normally little weight  can  be
    given to a private life  which  is  formed  when  the  presence  of  an
    applicant in this country is unlawful and/or precarious, very fairly Mr
    Bramble accepted that that provision cannot be relied on  to  the  same
    extent in the case of a person whose presence, albeit unlawful, is when
    he or she is a minor, because to that  extent  the  sins  of  a  parent
    cannot be visited on the child.  However, he did rely, in my  judgement
    legitimately, on the fact that the appellant appears to have  developed
    only a very limited, if any, private life in this  country  beyond  the
    family life which he enjoys with his mother and younger sister, and  no
    doubt his older sister and her family as well.  It is also right to say
    that he does have an aunt and cousins in this country.

24. There is no doubt in my judgement that were it not for the family  life
    which this appellant has  in  this  country,  in  particular  with  his
    sister, his appeal would be bound to fail.  None of the provisions  set
    out within paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) to (vi) are satisfied;  as  I  have
    also already indicated above, there would be no real  obstacle  to  his
    reintegrating into life in Bangladesh were he  to  be  returned  there.
    The real issue that has to be considered  in  this  case,  however,  is
    whether or not the decision to remove this appellant  is  proportionate
    having regard in particular to the position of his  younger  sister  in
    light of long established jurisprudence as  set  out  from  Beoku-Betts
    onwards to the effect that the Tribunal must have regard  also  to  the
    interests of the  other  family  members  which  will  be  affected  by
    removal.

25. This appellant is 21 years old and his evidence is that  having  regard
    to the culture in which he was brought up  the  normal  expectation  is
    that he would remain in the same home as his mother even after  he  got
    married because it would be more likely than not that if he got married
    he would bring his wife to live within that home.  That may or may  not
    be the case and certainly in the fullness of time one would expect  his
    sister to move out and as the family get older the family ties  between
    them will or might become no more than the normal emotional ties to  be
    expected between adult siblings with each other and with their parents.
     However, at the moment there is a very strong  family  life  and  this
    Tribunal must consider what it regards as the  likely  consequences  if
    those ties are now broken.

26. I do, as I have already indicated, find this a  finely  balanced  case,
    but having heard the evidence in particular of the appellant's  younger
    sister, I consider that the effect on her would be profound.  She  does
    not at the moment have any other male person to look up to and to guide
    her, and I note in this regard what was said by  Judge  Hawden-Beal  in
    her decision when considering whether or not it was reasonable for  all
    the appellants to return.  She said as follows:

         "25. The question  of  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the  third
             appellant [that is the appellant's younger  sister],  aged  14
             years old to go back to Bangladesh is the crux of this appeal.
              If I find that it is reasonable for her to go back,  none  of
             the appellants could meet Appendix FM and they cannot meet the
             requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  The first  appellant
             cannot succeed under Section 117B(6) if it is  reasonable  for
             the third appellant to go back and if the third appellant goes
             back to Bangladesh with the first appellant as being  in   her
             best interests, following the principle in PD [2016] UKUT 108,
             the second appellant [that is this appellant] then will return
             which will then mean that the  first  appellant  [his  mother]
             will have the male support she needs and there will be no very
             significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  under  paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi).  Conversely, if  it  is  unreasonable  for  the
             third appellant [the younger sister] to go back to Bangladesh,
             then effectively the whole family will stay here as per PD".

27. It is not clear whether or not this is  what  the  judge  had  in  mind
    herself or whether this was the basis  upon  which  the  case  was  put
    before her on behalf of the respondent, but in either event, it appears
    either to have been argued  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  or  to  be
    accepted by the  judge  at  that  stage  in  her  decision,  that  this
    appellant was providing male support which was needed by the mother  at
    that stage.  Although as I have indicated I am less clear  with  regard
    to the support needed by the appellant's mother, partly  because  of  a
    lack of medical evidence and secondly  because  of  the  unsatisfactory
    nature of her evidence, it is nonetheless  clear  to  me  that  at  the
    moment his younger sister is benefiting greatly from the support  which
    he has given to her and not to put too fine a point on it, she would be
    absolutely devastated were she now to have to continue her life in this
    country   without   it.    Also,   when   considering   proportionality
    holistically overall, and notwithstanding my finding that the appellant
    himself could form a life in Bangladesh without his other close family,
    I do understand the cost to him in personal terms were he  now  obliged
    to do so.  Moreover, even leaving these personal considerations out  of
    account I am still able to make my decision by  having  regard  to  the
    effect which I consider that his removal  would  have  on  his  younger
    sister.

28. In my judgement the effect upon the appellant's younger sister would be
    sufficiently detrimental, at a time when it is important  that  she  is
    able to concentrate on getting the best results in her exams as she can
    (she told me, and I believe, that her ambition is to be a doctor) as to
    make the appellant's removal disproportionate for Article  8  purposes.
    There  is  a  very  great  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control but there are exceptionally some  cases  where  the
    countervailing factors are so compelling that an exception  has  to  be
    made.  These cases will be very rare, and will not  occur  very  often,
    but having considered all the evidence in this case I am satisfied that
    this is one of those rare cases where  despite  there  being  a  public
    interest in removing this appellant, the reasons why he should  not  be
    removed are sufficiently compelling as  to  on  balance  outweigh  that
    public interest.

29. It follows that, having given very careful consideration and  extremely
    anxious scrutiny to this decision, this appeal must be  allowed  and  I
    will so order.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of  Judge  Hawden-Beal  as  containing  a  material
error of law and substitute the following decision:

This appellant's appeal is allowed, on human rights grounds, Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:     17 November 2018


