
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17129/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                          |On 8 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  Mr R K A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-Tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr R K A as "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant in this appeal is married to P M, who has leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom until July 2019. She  has  a  child,  K,  from  a
    previous relationship, who was born  on  23  December  2004  and  is  a
    British citizen.  The Appellant appealed a decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 22 November 2017, refusing the Appellant's application for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom. The application had been  made  on  29
    March 2017 on the basis of life as a parent and outside the Immigration
    Rules on the basis of family/private life.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  tribunal
    Griffith, who in a decision promulgated on 30 August 2018 allowed it.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. This was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers in a decision  dated  27  September
    2018. His reasons for so granting were: -

         "1. This appeal stands allowed by a decision of First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Griffith. Having assessed the evidence, the  judge  concluded
         that the appeal succeeded through the application of article  8  of
         the European Convention on Human Rights (taken with section  55  of
         the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).

         2. In my assessment it is arguable, as per the grounds on which the
         respondent seeks permission to appeal, that the judge may not  have
         sufficiently factored in: (1) the very  poor/  abusive  immigration
         history  of  the  appellant;  (2)  the  apparent  misrepresentation
         employed by the appellant's "partner" to obtain leave to remain  in
         the UK; and / or (3) the desirability of the appellant returning to
         his country of nationality (Ghana) to make appropriate  application
         for entry clearance from there (see, for example, Chen (Appendix FM
         - Chikwamba - temporary separation -  proportionality)  IJR  [2015]
         UKUT 00189 (IAC), circulated on 20 April 2015).

         3. Overall, there is sufficient in the grounds to make a  grant  of
         permission appropriate."

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 6. Mr Lindsay relied upon the grounds that sought permission to appeal. At
    the ouset he handed up two authorities being R (on the  application  of
    Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) and KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2018] UKSC 53.

 7. Mr  Lindsay  asserted  that  the  Judge's  credibility  assessment  was
    fundamentally flawed and that  she  had  failed  to  give  any  or  any
    adequate reasons for accepting that the Appellant's partner  had  given
    credible evidence. The Appellant's partner had obtained leave to remain
    as the parent of her child in  2017,  just  prior  to  the  Appellant's
    current application, and stated she was the sole  carer  of  a  British
    Citizen child. The Appellant and his partner married  in  2014  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  it  was  therefore  clear  that   the   partner's
    circumstances had changed by the time of her latest application and the
    Judge has failed to deal with this issue other than recording that  the
    evidence was that she had made  the  application,  not  mentioning  the
    Appellant, on legal advice. Consequently, he  submitted  that  where  a
    sponsor only has limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom, and  it
    was granted on a misrepresentation of the  respondent's  position,  the
    Appellant should not benefit from  this.  Mr  Lindsay  highlighted  the
    Appellant's adverse immigration history which is set out at  paragraphs
    3, 4 and 5 of the Judge's decision. He asserted that in the context  of
    the Appellant's deception in the course of the immigration process  the
    Judge had failed to grapple with this issue when assessing credibility.
    Further, that the Judge  failed  to  attach  any,  or  any  appropriate
    weight, to the Appellant's "appalling immigration history" in assessing
    the appeal either inside or outside the Immigration Rules. The  history
    recorded in the decision letter was sufficient to enable the  Judge  to
    conclude that the Appellant's conduct, short of criminality, meant that
    he was not suitable for leave to be granted,  notwithstanding  what  is
    said about the partner's child in the United Kingdom.

 8. Finally, whilst the Respondent knows  that  the  Appellant's  partner's
    child is a British citizen, the child is not being  required  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and indeed the family  are  not  being  required  to
    choose; in the circumstances of the Appellant outlined it was incumbent
    upon the Appellant to make an appropriate application from abroad  when
    the partner is in a position  to  sponsor  him.  In  short  Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that the "Chikwamba" point had not been  dealt  with  by  the
    Judge.

 9. Mr Al-Rashid argued that the Respondent's grounds are misconceived. The
    first two complain about the conduct of  the  British  citizen  child's
    parents. It is now a matter of settled law that this is not a factor to
    be taken into consideration when assessing  the  best  interests  of  a
    child. He referred me to the most recent authority of  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53.  There  is  no  requirement  to  consider   the
    criminality or misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor. The  issue
    was the reasonableness of the British citizen  child's  departure  from
    the United Kingdom in the context of best interests. He  asserted  that
    there needed to be "powerful reasons" for removing such  a  child.  The
    presumption is that a British citizen child should not be removed  from
    the  United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  properly   found,   as   a   primary
    consideration, that it was in the child's  best  interest  for  him  to
    remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  both  parents.  She  made  proper
    findings and applied the law correctly.

10. I find that there is here no material error of law. The  issue  of  the
    relationship between the Appellant and his partner was never in dispute
    between the parties. It was though, not accepted that  the  Appellant's
    relationship with the child was as the Appellant asserted. However, the
    Judge made  a  finding  at  paragraph  42  of  her  decision  that  the
    Respondent's own finding that the Appellant did  not  have  a  parental
    relationship with K was unreasonable, given the information provided by
    K's mother to the Respondent when she was applying to extend her leave.
    As she does throughout her decision the Judge acknowledged  that  there
    had to be a serious concern about the basis on which this second period
    of leave was obtained, which appeared to conceal from the Respondent  a
    material change in the Appellant's partner's relationship. However,  it
    was open to the Judge to find, as she  does  at  paragraph  43  of  her
    decision, that the Appellant lives in a family unit  with  his  partner
    and K and enjoys family life with them, treating K as his own son. K is
    a British citizen who has grown up in the United Kingdom and  is  being
    educated in this country. The Judge goes on to make findings in respect
    of the Appellant's role in looking after K. She found that  it  appears
    that he operates as a carer largely after K has  returned  from  school
    and during the holidays when his mother is at  work.  The  Judge  found
    that the Appellant is to that extent the  child's  primary  carer.  She
    then referred herself to the Respondent's own guidance  addressing  the
    question of whether it is unreasonable  to  expect  a  British  citizen
    child to leave the United Kingdom. It is stated that it will usually be
    appropriate to grant leave to the parent or  primary  carer  to  enable
    them to remain in the United Kingdom with the child provided  there  is
    satisfactory  evidence   of   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship. The Judge went on to consider the evidence and found that
    it was in K's best interest to continue  to  be  brought  up  with  his
    mother and the Appellant, the latter having had a presence in his  life
    as a father figure since 2012 when he and K's  mother  first  met  and,
    more significantly, since 2014 when they were married. It is also,  she
    found, in K's best interests to have continuity and  stability  in  his
    life and to be able to continue with  his  education.  Importantly  the
    Judge acknowledged, as stated in MA (Pakistan) and others  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, that even where the child's best interests are to stay, it may
    still not be unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  decision
    made clear that what could not be considered would be  the  conduct  in
    immigration history of the  parents.  It  also  is  authority  for  the
    application of the reasonableness test  requiring  the  Judge  to  have
    regard to the wider public interest in consideration of the immigration
    history and status of the parents.

11. The Judge found that the Appellant's immigration history was  poor  and
    indeed at paragraph 47 of her decision she records  that  he  may  well
    fall into the category of an "undeserving  applicant"  but  nonetheless
    when looking at the totality of the evidence one who may be allowed  to
    remain. Contrary therefore to the Respondent's grounds  the  Judge  has
    factored into her analysis the Appellant's poor immigration history but
    has concluded that  the  wider  public  interest  in  removing  him  is
    outweighed by the public interest in allowing K to be brought up by two
    parents in a stable family unit.

12. I find that overall the Respondent's grounds are no more than a dispute
    with the Judge's findings.

13. The Judge has come to conclusions that were open  to  be  made  on  the
    totality of the evidence having applied relevant case law.

14. There is here no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                Date 17 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
