
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/17414/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On April 8, 2019                        | On April 16, 2019                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE MANAGER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            mrs MARIAM ABDULBAKI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Moran, Solicitor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst the respondent is the appellant in these proceedings before me,
    I hereafter refer to the parties using terminology used in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant in the First-tier Tribunal will hereafter
    be referred to as "the appellant" in these proceedings, and the
    respondent will be referred to as "the respondent".

 2. The appellant, a Syrian national, applied for entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom on May 9, 2018 based on her family life with her son.
    The respondent refused her application on August 6, 2018 because she
    did not meet the requirements of Sections E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5 of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Th appellant appealed this decision on August 20, 2018 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The entry
    clearance manager reviewed the decision on October 17, 2018 but upheld
    the decision.

 4. Her appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buckwell on
    January 3, 2019 and in a decision promulgated on January 24, 2019, her
    appeal was allowed under article 8 ECHR on the basis she satisfied the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent appealed this decision February 6, 2019 and although
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Brien refused permission on February
    21, 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission to appeal
    finding it arguable the Judge erred and in particular by finding the
    appellant met the Rules even though no expert evidence was adduced.

 6. A response purporting to be a Rule 24 response was lodged in April 3,
    2019. In it, the appellant submitted there was no error in law because:

      a) The FTT Judge's failure to refer to the legal test, in cases of
         this nature, as being a "rigorous and demanding test" was not an
         error in law.
      b) She disputed there was no independent medical evidence referring
         firstly, to the medical evidence at pages 84-107; secondly, the
         journal articles and thirdly, statements from the sponsor and the
         appellant's carer.
      c) It was wrong in law to say there would be an increased strain on
         the NHS.
      d) The respondent had never raised the use of the sponsor's benefits
         to support the appellant and the only issue was whether there were
         adequate funds available.
      e) There was no trite law that said there was no family life between
         adult family members living in different countries as per Singh v
         SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Avery submitted there was an error in law for the reasons set out in
    the grounds of appeal upon which permission to appeal had  been  given.
    The Judge had to decide if she was capable of looking after herself  or
    whether there was assistance in her home country to  meet  her  medical
    requirements. If care was  available,  then  the  appellant  could  not
    satisfy paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and the Judge erred by so finding. The fact the family wanted  to  look
    after her was insufficient in light of the  guidance  provided  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Briticis v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368 and Ribeli v ECO
    [2018] EWCA Civ 611. It was submitted the Judge erred by  allowing  the
    appeal without independent evidence and relied on the evidence  of  the
    sponsor and a carer in Jordan.

 9. When considering the appellant's claim  outside  the  Rules,  Mr  Avery
    submitted  the  Judge  erred  in  the  approach  to  family  life   and
    proportionality. No weight was attached to the adverse  effect  on  the
    public purse and the Judge simply  allowed  the  decision  because  the
    Rules were met. The decision should be set aside and remade.

10. Mr Moran relied on the Rule 24 response and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    uphold the decision. When considering the Immigration Rules, the  Judge
    placed weight on the medical evidence as evidenced in paragraph  71  of
    the decision and he  disputed  the  respondent's  claim  there  was  no
    medical evidence upon which the decision was made and  he  referred  to
    the Tribunal  to  the  medical  evidence  that  was  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle from page 84 onwards.

11. He submitted that the Judge properly considered paragraphs  E-ECDR  2.4
    and 2.5 along with paragraphs 34  and  35  of  Appendix  FM-SE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He  disputed  the  only  evidence  of  her  medical
    condition came from a  neighbour  and  sponsor  and  argued  the  Judge
    correctly accepted the  evidence  submitted  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 34 of Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules and that  there
    was evidence from a central or local health authority  which  satisfied
    paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules. The Judge also
    had regard to articles contained in  the  bundle  which  supported  his
    claim there was a lack of care facilities for a refugee in Jordan.

12. He argued the Judge engaged with the decisions of Briticis  and  Ribeli
    and concluded at paragraph 75 that it was unreasonable to expect anyone
    to provide the kind of care needed.

    FINDINGS

13. The appellant submitted an application for entry clearance as the adult
    dependant  of  a  person  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Both  the
    respondent and Judge identified the  correct  legislation  to  consider
    this appeal under was Section EC-DR of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

14. The respondent refused the application because he argued the  appellant
    did not satisfy Section EC-DR1.1(d) which  required  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate  she  met  all  of  the  requirements  of  Section  E-ECDR:
    Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.

15. Reliance was placed on Appendix FM-SE  (paragraphs  34  and  35)  which
    required:

         "34. Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
         applicant requires long-term personal care should take the form of:
         (a) Independent medical evidence that the applicant's physical or
         mental condition means that they cannot perform everyday tasks; and
         (b) This must be from a doctor or other health professional.

         35.  Independent evidence that the applicant is unable,  even  with
         the practical and financial help of  the  sponsor  in  the  UK,  to
         obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they  are
         living should be from:
         (a) a central or local health authority;
         (b) a local authority; or
         (c) a doctor or other health professional."

16. In refusing the application, the respondent argued that  the  appellant
    had not satisfied paragraphs E-ECDR 2.4 or 2.5 of Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

17. By the time the  appeal  came  before  the  Tribunal,  the  appellant's
    representatives had submitted a detailed bundle of evidence which  they
    argued addressed the concerns raised in the  decision  letter.  It  was
    therefore argued the Immigration Rule was met and the appeal should  be
    allowed under article 8 ECHR.

18. Mr Avery argued the  evidence  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM_SE or the guidance issued by the Court  of  Appeal  in  the
    cases of Briticis and Ribeli. The bundle of documents that  was  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  included   various   statements   from   the
    appellant's UK sponsor, her son and her neighbour. The bundle submitted
    to the respondent included various medical reports and an article about
    the neglected health needs of older Syrian refugees in Jordan.

19. The Court of Appeal in Britcits stated at paragraph 59 -
         "First, the policy intended to be implemented by the new ADR Rules,
         as appears from the evidence, the new ADR Rules themselves and the
         Guidance, and confirmed in the oral submissions of Mr Neil Sheldon,
         counsel for the SoS, is clear enough. It is twofold: firstly, to
         reduce the burden on the taxpayer for the provision of health and
         social care services to those ADRs whose needs can reasonably and
         adequately be met in their home country; and, secondly, to ensure
         that those ADRs whose needs can only be reasonably and adequately
         met in the UK are granted fully settled status and full access to
         the NHS and social care provided by local authorities. The latter
         is intended to avoid disparity between ADRs depending on their
         wealth and to avoid precariousness of status occasioned by changes
         in the financial circumstances of ADRs once settled here."

20. The Court of Appeal emphasised that the court must consider (a) whether
    the provision of health and social care services could  reasonably  and
    adequately be met in their home country and (b) where their needs could
    only be met in the United Kingdom that the appellant should be  granted
    fully settled status and full access to the NHS  and  any  social  care
    available with the local authority.

21. The main challenge brought by Mr Avery centred on the  requirement  set
    out in paragraphs 34 and 35 of Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.
    There were a number of letters outlining her condition contained within
    the bundle, but these documents did not say she was unable,  even  with
    the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the  UK,  to  obtain
    the required level of care in the country. Reliance for this was  based
    on the article contained at pages 125-128 of the bundle.  This  was  an
    article on displaced Syrians.

22. However, the evidence adduced by the appellant suggested that  she  had
    been able to access health care as evidenced by  the  numerous  reports
    contained in the bundle. Rather than supporting her claim to be  unable
    to access  treatment  they  supported  the  argument  advanced  by  the
    respondent when this appeal came before the First-tier Judge. Mr  Avery
    sought to persuade me that in such circumstances the Judge  had  erred.
    Mr Moran argued the Judge correctly attached weight  to  the  fact  the
    appellant was a refugee in Jordan and had no residence rights there and
    pointed to the fact that she was currently cared for  by  a  neighbour,
    but this could not last indefinitely.

23. Paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  makes
    clear that she must be unable, even with the  practical  and  financial
    help of the sponsor, to obtain  the  required  level  of  care  in  the
    country where she is living, because-(a) it is not available and  there
    is no person in that country who can reasonably provide it; or; (b)  it
    is not affordable.

24. The Judge was satisfied her medical condition was  worsening  and  gave
    reasons  for  this  in  paragraph  71  of  his  decision.  The  witness
    statements supported the medical views expressed and  the  respondent's
    representative in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  challenge  that
    evidence.

25. The  Judge  went  on  to  carefully  analyse  the  appellant's  medical
    condition and concluded that although she currently had support from  a
    neighbour it was not reasonable to expect this care to continue.

26. I am satisfied that the Judge did consider the  Immigration  Rules  and
    having  identified  medical  evidence  (required  by  the  Rules)  then
    proceeded to apply the  tests  set  out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Briticis.

27. He considered whether the provision of health and social care  services
    could reasonably and adequately be met in their home  country  and  (b)
    where their needs could only be met in the United Kingdom.

28. The Judge concluded that  the  provision  of  health  and  social  care
    services could not be provided in Syria (her  home  country)  and  also
    concluded that the provision of health and  social  care  services  was
    also not available in Jordan. He accepted they  could  be  met  in  the
    United Kingdom and if that meant at the expense of the NHS then  so  be
    it. The Court of Appeal made it clear that a lack of  finance  did  not
    mean a person could not succeed.

29. Having made findings that were open to him the Judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude the Immigration Rules were met and following the  decision  in
    TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) [2018] EWCA Civ  1109  had  to  allow  the
    appeal under article 8 ECHR.

30.  There was no error in law.

    DECISION

31. There was no material error in law and I uphold the decision.



Signed                              Date     12/04/2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award because none was made in the First-tier  Tribunal.


Signed                              Date     12/04/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
