
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17452/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th June 2019                    |On 17th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                           mr Azhar Hussain Pathan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, instructed by Inayat Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 19th March 1976.  He appealed the decision of the Secretary of State
    dated 7th August 2018 refusing his application of 11th January 2017 for
    leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  family  and
    private life.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Zahed sitting at Hatton Cross on 25th January  2019.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 2. Not content by that Decision,  by  Notice  dated  4th  April  2019  the
    Appellant made application for permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal.
    The grounds are brief.  In short it was submitted that  the  judge  had
    not adequately considered the evidence going to  the  Appellant's  care
    needs and  that  the  findings  in  relation  to  the  ability  of  the
    Appellant's half-sisters to care for him were erroneous.  Still further
    there was a failure adequately to have regard to Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act and finally that in assessing family life the  judge  did  not
    have regard to the Appellant's relationship with his minor nephews.

 3. During the course of the hearing Ms Appiah sought to add to the grounds
    on the basis that the judge had not  given  sufficient  weight  to  the
    inability of the Appellant properly to communicate his  evidence  which
    was to be contrasted with paragraph 9 of the Decision and Reasons where
    the judge had noted that, "The Appellant adopted his statement and gave
    evidence before me ..."  but Mr  Walker  for  the  Secretary  of  State
    consented to the application and  indeed  I  am  grateful  to  him  for
    informing me that his colleague's note from  the  hearing  was  to  the
    effect that the Appellant was able only to give "garbled" evidence.

 4. Ms Appiah took me to the medical evidence.   She  invited  me  to  have
    regard to reference to social isolation and lack  of  motivation  which
    was recorded in the various reports  from  the  Central  and  Northwest
    London NHS Trust documentation.   It  was  noted  in  the  document  at
    paragraph 55 of the Respondent's bundle that the  Appellant,  "appeared
    casually dressed, unkempt, difficult to establish any rapport,  he  was
    hostile, uncooperative and did not always provide a response".  It  was
    also noted that he was, "monosyllabic and mumbled and was difficult  to
    understand".

 5. Though Ms Appiah  contended  that  the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant  had  some  mental  health  difficulties  he  had,   in   her
    submission, oversimplified the difficulties which faced this Appellant.
      She  invited  me  to  have  regard  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    immigration rules and in particular sub-paragraph (vi)  which  requires
    an examination of whether there would be "very significant obstacles to
    the [Appellant's] integration into the country to which he  would  have
    to go if required to leave the United Kingdom".

 6. It was Ms Appiah submission that Judge Zahed had not properly addressed
    that question.  Still further as I have already  observed  it  was  her
    submission that having regard to the wider application of Article 8  it
    was necessary for the judge to look to Section 117B which provides  for
    considerations applicable in all cases.  They are as follows:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular the  interests
             of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons
             who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able  to
             speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

 7. Even looking  outside  of  the  Rules  Ms  Appiah  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had lived with his brother,  sister-in-law  and  nephews  and
    that when considering the quality of family life the judge had erred by
    not taking into account, as in her submission he should have, the  fact
    that there were nephews in that family of which he had become a part.

 8. It is trite law that the decision that I might have made is  irrelevant
    to my consideration of the  appeal  which  is  brought  essentially  by
    challenging the findings of fact made by the judge in  this  case.   It
    has been stated on numerous occasions and most recently in the case  of
    UT (Sri Lanka) -v- Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1095 that  the  question  for  an  appellate  jurisdiction  is
    whether the findings that were made by the judge  below  were  findings
    that were open to them.

 9. Mr Walker for  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the  medical
    evidence though descriptive, did not give  a  clear  diagnosis  of  the
    Appellant's condition.  Still further it was of note that the Appellant
    had a history of problems whilst in  Pakistan  and  that  he  had  been
    treated for his condition whilst in Pakistan to which reference is made
    by Judge Zahed at paragraph 18 of the Decision and Reasons.  It was  Mr
    Walker's submission that the complaint that the judge had not  assessed
    the evidence properly was misconceived.

10. I observe that at paragraph 7 of the Decision and Reasons  Judge  Zahed
    said:

         "I have taken account of all the documents that have been submitted
         in this appeal even if I have not mentioned  them  specifically  in
         this decision and reasons, and in particular have read through  all
         the medical evidence that has been submitted in this appeal."

    I note further that Judge Zahed made specific reference  to  care  plan
    review letters and assessments,  the  evidence  of  Dr  Sagar  Dhanani,
    noting  the  Appellant's  medical   history   including   hypertension,
    hyperlipidaemia and depressive disorder.

11. Contrary to the submission made  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  I  am
    satisfied from reading the Decision and Reasons that  Judge  Zahed  did
    have in mind the totality of the medical evidence.  I see no reason why
    he would have said that he had were that not the  case  and  there  was
    little to be gained in my view from him simply setting it all out.  The
    Appellant knew what medical evidence was being relied upon.

12. In relation to  276ADE  and  the  issue  of  reintegration,  Ms  Appiah
    accepted that  there  was,  as  the  judge  pointed  out,  no  evidence
    submitted by the half-sisters in Pakistan to state why they  could  not
    help the Appellant even for a short period and she did not contend that
    it was not open to the judge to find that there  was  no  evidence  why
    their  husbands  would  be  unwilling  to  help  their  brother-in-law,
    especially as there had been no evidence that the  sisters  had  fallen
    out with the Appellant.  The burden of proof was upon the Appellant  to
    establish the primary facts.

13. It was open in my judgment to the judge to find, absent evidence to the
    contrary, the burden as I have already stated being on the  Appellants,
    that the Appellant had not proved that he could not  go  to  his  half-
    sisters.  Still further as the judge  observed  at  paragraph  18,  the
    treatment which  the  Appellant  might  need  was  demonstrated  to  be
    available in Pakistan.  If the condition had changed then, as Mr Walker
    observed, there was no diagnosis to establish that the situation facing
    the Appellant was so different that such treatment as was required  was
    unavailable in Pakistan and the evidence therefore was lacking on  that
    point.

14. It was open to the judge to  find  on  the  evidence  that  there  were
    sufficient financial resources  available  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
    assist the Appellant were he to  return  to  Pakistan  and  I  find  no
    material flaw in the judge's assessment of proportionality having asked
    himself, as he was bound to do, the five Razgar questions.   Ms  Appiah
    was right technically that the judge was bound as a matter  of  law  to
    look to Section 117B of the 2002 Act and in this case it  appears  that
    the only factor to which regard was had was the  precarious  nature  of
    the Appellant's  status.   That  the  Appellant  would  be  financially
    independent and speaks some English are relevant factors but  they  are
    neutral factors.  They are factors that weigh in  the  public  interest
    where they are lacking  but  the  presumption  is  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control being in the public interest.

15. The point made in relation to the Appellants nephews  was  not  pursued
    with any real vigour.  Ms  Appiah  was  right  to  take  that  approach
    especially when little reference is made to them in any of the  witness
    statements. What is clear is  that  it  is  in  those  children's  best
    interests to remain with their parents. It was not suggested  by  Judge
    Zahed that they need leave the United Kingdom.

16. Notwithstanding all of the submissions ably made by Ms Appiah on behalf
    of this Appellant I do not find that this judge has lightly  considered
    the medical evidence but rather having regard to the  totality  of  the
    decision clearly had regard to it, made findings that were open to him,
    in circumstances in which both family and private life can continue  in
    Pakistan given that this Appellant is an adult.  This is not an  appeal
    involving a  Sponsor  and  child  where  the  considerations  would  be
    different.  It is perfectly clear  that  the  Appellant's  disabilities
    have been properly considered by the judge.

17. In those circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 11 July 2019









Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker







