
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17031/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 7 April 2021                  |On the 4 June 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                               YANNICK NTANTU
                        (NO Anonymity direCTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Logan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    respondent, Mr Ntantu.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. On 17 October 2019 the respondent made an order that the  appellant
         is to be deported from the United  Kingdom  ('UK'),  following  his
         criminal convictions as it was considered that his presence in  the
         UK was not conducive to the public good. The respondent refused the
         appellant's human rights claim in a decision letter dated 2 October
         2019.

      2. The appellant, a citizen of South Africa, appealed this decision to
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cox) (hereinafter referred to as the
         "FtTJ").  In a decision sent on 5 November 2020, the  FtTJ  allowed
         his appeal on human rights grounds, and the Secretary of State  has
         now appealed, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

      3. Whilst this is the appeal brought on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
         State, for sake of convenience I intend to refer to the parties  as
         they were before the FtT.

      4. The FtT did not make an anonymity order and no  grounds  have  been
         raised by the appellant in support of such an  order  during  these
         proceedings.

      5. The hearing took place on 7 April  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. I conducted the  hearing  with  the
         parties' advocates. No technical problems  encountered  during  the
         hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      6. I am grateful to Mr Whitwell and Ms Logan for  their  detailed  and
         clear oral submissions.

Background:

      7. The appellant's immigration history is summarised in  the  decision
         of the FtTJ at paragraphs 1-10.

      8. The appellant arrived in the UK on 12 April 2001  with  his  mother
         and two other siblings. There is no dispute that he was aged  4  at
         the date of his arrival. His mother applied  for  asylum  with  the
         appellant  and  his  siblings  recorded  as  her  dependents.   The
         application was refused, and her appeal was dismissed  in  November
         2001. Her appeal rights became exhausted on 3 January 2002.

      9. It is recorded that she then applied for leave to remain  on  human
         rights grounds again with the appellant and his siblings listed  as
         her dependents. That application was refused  with  an  in  country
         right of appeal and in a decision dated 9 March  2006,  her  appeal
         was dismissed. She became appeal rights exhausted for a second time
         on 2 May 2008.

     10. On 10 November 2010, the appellant was granted indefinite leave  to
         remain in the UK along with his mother and siblings.

     11. On 21 June 2017, the appellant was convicted of supplying  class  A
         drugs and on  12  October  2017  he  was  sentenced  to  26  months
         detention in a young offender's institution for each offence, to be
         served concurrently.

     12. In light of his conviction, a decision to deport him was issued  on
         17 October 2017. This was responded to by the appellant in July and
         August 2018 where he made a protection claim  and  a  human  rights
         claim. A decision was made on 2 October 2019 to refuse a protection
         and human rights claim.

The decision of the Secretary of State dated 2 October 2019:

     13. The decision letter is a lengthy document extending to 20 pages.

     14. Having set out the appellant's immigration history, the  respondent
         set out the reasons for deportation namely that on 21 June 2017  he
         was convicted two offences of supplying a controlled drug of  class
         A and was sentenced on 12 October 2017 to 26 months detention in  a
         young  offender's  institution  for  each  offence  to  be   served
         concurrently. It is right to observe that the respondent considered
         the conviction in the light  of  the  claim  made  for  asylum  and
         section 72 of the NIAA 2002.

     15. The sentencing remarks of the judge are set out at  paragraph  [24]
         and at [70] of the FtTJ's decision. The respondent considered  that
         objectively any crime which resulted in a sentence of 26 months  is
         considered a serious crime as reflected in the sentencing  remarks.
         Having  reached  that  conclusion,  it  was  considered  that   the
         appellant had failed to rebut the statutory presumptions.

     16. The respondent addressed the submissions made  in  respect  of  the
         protection claim. It is right to note that the  appellant  did  not
         pursue his protection claim before the FtTJ.

     17. In respect of his article 8 claim the respondent set out the nature
         of his claim which related to his relationship  with  his  partner.
         The respondent considered paragraph 399 (b). It  was  not  accepted
         that his partner was a British citizen or settled in the UK because
         the appellant had not  provided  evidence  of  her  citizenship  or
         settlement. There was no evidence either of her  UK  residency.  It
         was further not accepted  that  it  was  a  genuine  or  subsisting
         relationship in light of  the  lack  of  evidence  which  had  been
         provided.

     18. In the alternative, assuming that the relationship was genuine  and
         subsisting, it was formed when he was in the UK  lawfully  and  his
         immigration status had not been precarious this was because he  had
         been granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK in 2010 and  that
         he had met his partner in 2015. However, it was not  accepted  that
         it would be unduly harsh for her to live in  South  Africa  if  she
         chose to do so. Little was  known  about  her  including  her  age,
         nationality, or other  personal  circumstances  that  there  is  no
         reason to believe that she could not live  with  the  appellant  in
         South Africa. Furthermore, it would not be unduly harsh for her  to
         remain in the UK even though he was to be deported. This is because
         no reason to be provided as to why it would be unduly harsh for her
         to remain in the UK whilst he was deported to South Africa.

     19. Consideration was given to paragraph 399A in  the  context  of  the
         appellant's private life.

     20. It was not accepted that he had been lawfully resident  in  the  UK
         for most of his life; this was because he had arrived in the UK  on
         12 April 2001 at the age of four and since then had lived in the UK
         continuously for 17 years in total. However out of  the  17  years,
         only seven years and eight months  had  been  spent  under  "lawful
         residence".

     21. It was not accepted that he was socially and culturally  integrated
         in the UK. Whilst he lived in the UK since the age of four, he  had
         not made any positive contributions to  society  and  had  shown  a
         blatant disregard of the law of the UK having committed  a  serious
         offence of supplying drugs. Reference was made  to  the  sentencing
         remarks.

     22. It is accepted that there would be some  significant  obstacles  to
         his integration into the country to which it was proposed to deport
         him; this is because he had lived in the  UK  since  he  was  four.
         Having left South Africa at such a young  age,  it  was  considered
         that he may no longer have a recollection  of  his  time  in  South
         Africa. It was not known if he had any residual ties back  in  that
         country through his mother or father's ties. He is now a young  man
         who would require a degree of guidance on return to  South  Africa.
         However, it was not considered that the significant obstacles  were
         insurmountable and that with the  help  of  his  mother  and  other
         relatives in the UK and  possibly  abroad,  he  could  successfully
         reintegrate into life in South Africa. Family members  could  visit
         him in South Africa and help him settle down there. Any friendships
         in the UK that had been established  could  be  maintained  through
         modern means of communication.

     23.  Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  deportation   would   have   some
         interference in his private life, his removal  engaged  the  public
         interest due to  his  offending  and  the  interest  of  preventing
         further offending. It was not accepted that he met the requirements
         of the private life Exceptions against deportation.

     24. Under the heading "very compelling circumstances",  the  respondent
         noted that his deportation was conducive to  the  public  good  and
         there was a "significant  public  interest"  because  he  had  been
         convicted of an offence for which he had been sentenced to a period
         of 26 months  for drug offences and thus in order to  outweigh  the
         very significant public interest in deporting him, he would need to
         provide evidence of a very strong article 8 claim  over  and  above
         the circumstances described in the Exceptions to deportation.

     25. In conclusion, the respondent considered that his deportation would
         not breach the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR and the
         public interest in deporting him outweighed his right to a  private
         and family life.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

     26. The appeal came before the FtTJ on  30  September  2020.  The  FtTJ
         heard oral evidence from the appellant, his  partner,  mother,  and
         brother. The FtTJ also had  a  bundle  of  documentation  including
         witness statements from the family members, his partner,  probation
         service and emails as to job applications.

     27. The FtTJ findings of fact and analysis of the issues are set out at
         paragraphs [45]-[89]. I shall set out  a  summary  of  the  factual
         findings made, and the decision reached by him.

     28. As regards the appellant's circumstances, his parents were born  in
         the DRC and later moved to live in South  Africa.  In  April  2001,
         when the appellant was four  years  of  age,  his  mother  and  two
         brothers came to the UK. His stepsister remained  in  South  Africa
         and after coming to the UK for a brief period, she went to  America
         where she continues to live.

     29. In the UK, the appellant's mother  applied  for  asylum  which  was
         subsequently refused as were applications made for leave to remain.
         On 10 November 2010 the appellant was granted indefinite  leave  to
         remain in the UK along with his mother and siblings.

     30. The FtTJ accepted the account of the  appellant  circumstances  set
         out at paragraphs [14 - 33] and found that the appellant  lived  in
         the UK since he was four years of age.  The FtTJ accepted that  the
         appellant had no recollection South Africa; he had no family  there
         and had no connections with the country (at [33]). He had  attended
         school and completed his education in  the  UK  and  had  developed
         social and cultural ties to the  UK.  He  was  satisfied  that  the
         appellant was socially and culturally integrated into  the  UK  (at
         [58]).

     31. The FtTJ found that  the  appellant  had  less  than  10  years  of
         residence in the UK and thus could not demonstrate that he had been
         lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life (at [64]-[66]).

     32. As to his family life in the UK the appellant lived with his mother
         and siblings in the family home; his elder brother having moved  to
         his own  property.  As  the  eldest  male  in  the  household,  the
         appellant  took  on  a  level  of   responsibility   and   provided
         significant support for his mother. In  her  evidence,  she  stated
         that the  family's  life  was  shattered  when  the  appellant  was
         arrested in May 2017. Since his release he  had  supported  her  in
         caring for the two youngest siblings. The appellant's elder brother
         had a close relationship  with  the  appellant  had  supported  the
         appellant in his rehabilitation since release.

     33. The FtTJ found that the appellant and his mother and brother had  a
         close relationship, and that the  appellant  was  currently  living
         with his mother and two younger  siblings.  The  FtTJ  acknowledged
         there had been difficulties in the relationship in  the  past,  but
         the judge accepted they had a closer relationship now and the judge
         accepted that the appellant provided some support  for  his  mother
         (at 55]).

     34. It was conceded on behalf of the appellant  the  evidence  did  not
         demonstrate that there were emotional ties or dependency that  went
         beyond the normal ties between an adult child and parent  and  thus
         the judge did not find that the relationships  fell  within  family
         life  (at  [56]).  However,  at  [57]  the  judge  found  that  the
         relationships formed an integral part of  the  appellant's  private
         life in the UK.

     35. The FtTJ found that the  appellant  had  a  relationship  with  his
         partner, who was a British citizen  and  resident  in  the  UK  (at
         [48]). He found her to be an "impressive witness" and had no reason
         to doubt her evidence relating to the relationship between  herself
         and the appellant (at [50]). The FtTJ found that the appellant  and
         his partner were together, but it was not a  relationship  akin  to
         marriage and they did not live together.  Thus,  it  did  not  come
         within the meaning of family life (at [51]).

     36. The appellant had been convicted in 2017 of offences  of  supplying
         drugs to which he had been sentenced to 26 months imprisonment. The
         circumstances of the offence and the sentencing remarks are set out
         at paragraphs [70]-[74].

     37. The FtTJ found that his was his first offence which the judge found
         was a "serious offence" but that  it  was  an  "isolated  incident"
         which occurred when the appellant was "lost" (see [58] and at [71 -
         74]. The judge found that  the  appellant  had  not  committed  any
         further offences, he was satisfied that  the  appellant  was  "very
         unlikely to commit any further  offences  in  the  UK",  the  judge
         accepted that he truly regretted getting involved and  causing  his
         family pain and anguish. The judge found that  the  appellant  "now
         appreciates the support of his loving family" and  that  the  judge
         believed "he would not want to do anything that would want to cause
         his family any further distress" (at [75]). The FtTJ found that the
         appellant was "genuinely remorseful" at [86], he was at a "very low
         risk of further offending, he had a strong support  network  within
         the UK and that they would continue to  provide  that  support  (at
         [86]-[87]).

     38. The FtTJ found that the appellant could not meet either Exception 1
         or Exception 2  but  found  that  the  appellant's  case  could  be
         distinguished  from  "many  of  the  cases  that  come  before  the
         tribunal" and for the reasons set out at paragraphs [78 - 87],  the
         FtTJ found that the relevant factors  identified  relevant  to  the
         strong private life that he had established in the United  Kingdom,
         taken alongside his rehabilitation, and  lack  of  reoffending  and
         being at a low  risk  of  further  offending,  his  strong  support
         network  and  the  relationships  with  his  family  members   were
         "exceptional"  and  outweighed  the  significant  public   interest
         arising in his case.

     39. The FtTJ therefore allowed the appeal.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

     40. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  that  decision
         and permission was granted by FtTJ Swaney on 3 December 2020.

     41. The Secretary of State  was  represented  by  Mr  Whitwell,  Senior
         Presenting Officer. The appellant was  represented  by  Counsel  Ms
         Logan.

The grounds:

     42. Mr Whitwell relied upon the written  grounds.  No  further  written
         submissions have been received on behalf of the respondent.

     43.  However, Mr Whitwell made oral submissions to which I  have  given
         careful consideration.

     44. The written grounds submit the following:

          1) The judge found that the appellant  could  not  bring  himself
             within either of the Exceptions of section 117C (4) or (5)  as
             the appellant had not resided lawfully in the UK for  half  of
             his life and there were no qualifying relationships  on  which
             to base an "unduly harsh" finding.

          2) At this point the judge should have turned to section 117C (6)
             to determine if there were any "very compelling circumstances"
             taking the case over and above the Exception requirements, but
             he did not. It is submitted that this amounts  to  a  material
             misdirection in law relying upon NA (Pakistan) v  SSHD  [2016]
             EWCA Civ 25 - 27.

          3) The grounds submit that had the correct test been applied,  it
             is clear that there were no very compelling circumstances that
             could be shown. As confirmed by  Rafferty  LJ  in  SSHD  v  CT
             (Vietnam)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  488;  the  starting   point   in
             considering  Exceptional  circumstances  is  not  neutral:  SS
             Nigeria  and  MF  Nigeria.  Rather,  the  scales  are  heavily
             weighted  in  favour  of  deportation   and   something   very
             compelling is required to swing the outcome  in  favour  of  a
             foreign criminal whom Parliament said should be deported.

          4) The  judge  found  at  [89]  that  the  respondent's  decision
             amounted to an unnecessary and  disproportionate  interference
             with the appellant's rights to enjoy respect for  his  private
             life  in  the  UK.  The  appellant's  rights  outweighed   the
             respondent's legitimate aims of protecting the economic  well-
             being of the country and for the  prevention  of  disorder  or
             crime. The basis for this appears to be that  the  appellant's
             non-qualifying family members would not move to South  Africa,
             which it is respectfully submitted for is far short of meeting
             the very high threshold necessary for this  claim  to  succeed
             (at [85]).

          5) In the same paragraph  at  [85]  the  judge  erred  by  making
             allowances for the length of the appellant sentence, which has
             been established and should only be used  to  determine  where
             the case for the consideration  within  section  117  (see  HA
             (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 at paragraph 43.

          6) Finally, it  is  submitted  that  the  judge  gave  inadequate
             reasons for allowing the  appeal;  he  applied  non-applicable
             case law such as Agyarko and Razgar and has failed to consider
             the appeal in the context of criminal deportation.

     45. In his oral submissions Mr Whitwell made the following submissions.

     46. He submitted that this  was  a  case  concerning  "very  compelling
         circumstances over and above "Exceptions 1 and 2" as it was  common
         ground that the appellant did not meet the rules or Exceptions 1 or
         as set out in section 117C.

     47. However, in terms of very  compelling  circumstances  the  skeleton
         argument  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
         considered it "in substance" thus he  submitted  that  was  telling
         because there was no reference in the decision to the test of "very
         compelling circumstances" save for that at  [40]  where  the  judge
         recited s 117.

     48. He submitted that the failure to do so would not be  fatal  to  his
         decision if the judge had  considered  the  issue  "in  substance".
         However when applying the decision in NA (Pakistan) by reference to
         paragraph 29, 30, 32 and 33 of  that  judgement  and  paragraph  32
         which emphasises the fact that if all an appellant could advance in
         support of his article 8 claim was a "near miss"  case in which  he
         fell short  of  bringing  himself  within  either  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2, it would not be possible to say that he had shown that
         there were "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described Exceptions one and two" he  would  need  to  have  a  far
         stronger case than that by reference to the interests protected  by
         article 8 to bring himself within that fallback protection."

     49. And at paragraph [33] of the same decision  that  "cases  in  which
         circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high
         public interest  in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The  commonplace
         incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in poor health  or
         the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not  be
         sufficient."

     50. Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  there  was  an  absence  of  factors
         identified.

     51. As to the assessment, the respondent did not dispute that the judge
         found that the appellant was socially and culturally integrated  in
         the UK, but that Exception 1 contained three limbs and  as  to  the
         second limb, the FtTJ found at paragraph [66]  that  the  appellant
         was not lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life. As to the
         third limb, the judge did not make any  assessment  as  to  whether
         there were any very significant obstacles to his reintegration.

     52. In summary, Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge  was  required  to
         consider how far he met the rules to see whether they circumstances
         were "very compelling over and above those Exceptions. Thus, as  he
         could not meet two of the three limbs, it  could  not  possibly  be
         called a "near miss".

     53. As to family life, the judge found  that  Article  8  (1)  was  not
         engaged and there was no "family life". In respect of his  partner,
         they were not married thus Article 8 was not  engaged  there.  When
         looking to see whether the appellant met the family  life  part  of
         the rule, the judge did not consider undue harshness.

     54. At [63] the FtTJ refers to paragraph 399A which  is  private  life.
         Anyone reading the decision would say that the appellant  does  not
         come close to establishing family life.

     55. When looking at other reasons given by  the  judge,  he  identified
         rehabilitation and seriousness of the offence. In this context,  Mr
         Whitwell referred to the  decision  of  HA  (Iraq)  and  that  such
         findings would be unlikely to carry much  weight.  The  judge  also
         placed weight on the low risk of reoffending.

     56. Drawing together those matters, he submitted  that  the  judge  had
         stated at  paragraph  [84]  that  this  was  a  difficult  case  to
         determine, that is the judge found it to  be  finely  balanced  and
         that being the case it did not require much to tilt the balance  to
         demonstrate that there was a material error of law shown by a  lack
         of reasoning.

     57. Whilst the judge referred to private life it was  not  elevated  to
         demonstrate "compelling circumstances  over  and  above  Exceptions
         1and 2" and if it was, the  judge  had  not  explained  it  in  the
         decision.

     58. He therefore invited the tribunal to set aside the decision.

     59. Ms Logan relied upon her skeleton argument. The written submissions
         make three points:

          1) The decision of the FTJ to allow the appeal  on  human  rights
             grounds was correct.

          2) The  FTJ  found  that  the  appellant's  circumstances,  taken
             cumulatively, were Exceptional and outweighed the  significant
             public interest arising in this case,  and  this  finding  was
             correct (at paragraph 85)

          3) It is submitted that "Exceptional" is in substance the same as
             "very compelling" per Jackson LJ in the case of NA  (Pakistan)
             paragraph 43.

                  "The word Exceptional is often used to denote a  departure
                  from a general rule.  The  general  rule  in  the  present
                  context is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom
                  paras 399 and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons
                  will be  required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
                  deportation". She submits that the FtTJ  gave  "compelling
                  reasons" which were the "Exceptional circumstances".

     60. In her oral submissions she submitted that the FtTJ  had  used  the
         word "Exceptional" and that this had the same meaning as  the  term
         "very compelling circumstances" which is the term used  in  section
         117 C (6) and thus the  judge  did  apply  the  correct  test.  She
         submitted that the judge did go through the whole of  section  117C
         and why would he do that if he was not taking it into account?

     61. In her oral submissions she addressed the  assertion  made  by  the
         respondent that the judge was required to  give  adequate  reasons.
         She submitted that the judge did give adequate reasons.

     62. The written submissions address the factual  circumstances  of  the
         appellant. He was sentenced to a term of 26 months YOI and so as  a
         medium-term offender was not on the face of the statute entitled to
         the above statutory protection but the court  in  the  case  of  NA
         (Pakistan) v  SSHD  2016  (paragraph  25)  held  that  medium  term
         offenders are entitled to the same protection as serious offenders.

     63. The FTJ recited in his judgement the relevant statutory  provisions
         including the above test as set out in section 117 C  (6)  and  had
         regard to it in his Judgement (at paragraph 68).

     64. In her oral submissions she addressed the  assertion  made  by  the
         respondent that the judge was required to  give  adequate  reasons.
         She submitted that the judge did give adequate reasons.

     65. She submitted that the FtTJ gave adequate reasons for his  decision
         which were set out in the factual findings made by judge under  the
         heading "circumstances of the appellant ". They can  be  summarised
         as follows:

           . The appellant came to the UK  with  his  mother  and  his  two
             brothers in 2001 when he was four years old.

           . He has lived in the UK ever since being now 24 years  of  age,
             aged 19 when he committed the offence, aged 23 at the date  of
             the hearing and he has never been back to South Africa.

           . His parents were originally from the  Democratic  Republic  of
             Congo, they married and went to South Africa. His father  left
             the family in 2000 and returned to DRC, they have not seen him
             since, and he has recently passed away. (see  FTJ  appellant's
             circumstances).

           . He has never been back to South Africa and has no  connections
             whatsoever with that country.

           . "The appellant has no recollections of South Africa. He has no
             family there and has no connections with the country" (see FTJ
             paragraph 33)

           . South Africa is  "for  all  intents  and  purposes  a  foreign
             country". (see FTJ paragraph 83).

           . In his asylum interview the appellant stated that he could not
             be expected to live in South Africa because "I  wouldn't  have
             anywhere to live, I wouldn't know what to do for money, how to
             get a job. If I went back, I would end up on the  streets  and
             have to go back to crime" (see FTJ paragraph 42)

           . "At its highest the claim could be said  to  give  rise  to  a
             potential breach of Article 3 on destitution grounds" (see FTJ
             paragraph 43).

     66. In her oral submissions he also referred to  the  factual  findings
         made about the strength of the relationship between  the  appellant
         and his family members including his brother and his mother.

     67. It is submitted in the  written  submissions  that  to  deport  the
         appellant in these circumstances as found by the FTJ, would involve
         uprooting him from his settled UK community where he has  had  very
         strong societal and family ties for many years,  forcibly  removing
         him from his close and loving family, and transporting him to a far
         country where he has no friends or family and with which he has  no
         connection  whatsoever.   Such   circumstances   amount   to   very
         compelling reasons against deportation.

     68. Ms Logan in her oral submissions then turned to  Exception  1.  She
         submitted that the judge correctly found that the appellant had not
         been lawfully resident in the UK for half of his life but that  the
         appellant was a "near miss"  referring  to  paragraph  [32]  of  NA
         (Pakistan).

     69. It is submitted that the FTJ correctly  found  that  the  appellant
         could not bring himself within the Exceptions under  section  117C,
         since as regards Exception 1 the appellant could not prove that  he
         has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life.  However
         - the appellant is still entitled to invite the court to treat  him
         as a "near miss" on the facts as found by the FTJ and stated in his
         Judgement.

     70. The FTJ  found  that  the  appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
         integrated into the UK (at paragraph 58), and  on  the  appellant's
         circumstances as found by  the  FTJ  he  would  plainly  face  very
         significant obstacles to his integration into the country to  which
         he is proposed to be deported (FTJ paragraphs 42, 43)

     71. The appellant was brought to this country by his mother when he was
         4 years old. He had no choice but to accompany his mother and  then
         remain in the UK as a dependent child. His mother did her very best
         to regularise her status and that of her children, claiming  asylum
         on the very date of her arrival in the UK - and she was  eventually
         successful in  obtaining  leave  to  remain  for  herself  and  her
         children. Whilst it is therefore correct that the appellant was  in
         the UK unlawfully until 2010 it would be unduly harsh to  hold  him
         responsible for what he could not help. In her oral submissions she
         stated that the circumstances of the child at the age of  four  and
         having no choice as to where he was taken was a proper  factor  for
         the judge to take account of  in  his  proportionality  assessment.
         When asked to  identify  where  this  was  in  the  proportionality
         assessment, Ms Logan indicated that this was set out at  paragraphs
         58. As to whether there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
         reintegration, Ms Logan identified that this was considered by  the
         FtTJ at paragraphs 42 and 43 when the judge  found  that  in  South
         Africa, he would face destitution. The she  submitted  that  was  a
         very significant obstacle to his integration. Thus,  she  submitted
         that whilst the judge did not use the term "near miss" and this had
         been the term that Counsel had used in her  skeleton  argument,  in
         essence the judge did identify that as key facts.

     72. The third point relied upon in the  written  and  oral  submissions
         relates to the nature of his private life in the UK.

     73.  It  is  submitted  that  the  appellant  has  very  strong  family
         relationships in the UK as was found by the FTJ,  although  it  was
         conceded on behalf of the  appellant  that  there  are  no  special
         elements of dependency beyond the normal emotional  ties  (applying
         Kugathas v SSHD 2003 EWCA Civ 31).

     74. By reference  to  the  material  in  the  bundle,  the  appellant's
         brother, mother, and girlfriend who is a British Citizen all  filed
         and served witness statements and attended court to give evidence.

     75. It is submitted that there was "abundant evidence" as was found  by
         the FTJ that the appellant has the benefit of very close and loving
         relationships with his family and girlfriend. Even  though  he  has
         reached his majority he is still living in the family home with his
         mother and younger brothers and has not yet  qualified  to  earn  a
         living. The appellant is now the oldest male in the  household.  He
         provides support to his  mother  and  his  younger  brothers.  (FTJ
         paragraph 29) Some courts have held that family life  may  continue
         in such circumstances (see SSHD v HK Turkey 2010 EWCA Civ 583).

     76. The FTJ found that the appellant went to school and then sixth form
         college in the  UK.  (FTJ  paragraph  21)  and  that  he  has  been
         gainfully employed although he has not found it easy to obtain work
         after coming out of custody due to his  immigration  status.   (FTJ
         paragraph 28) He hopes to  become  a  joiner  .and  is  seeking  to
         complete a Level 3 NVQ diploma. (FTJ paragraph 30). It is submitted
         that the appellant is not yet equipped to earn a living and lead an
         independent life. He is still dependent on his family with whom  he
         still lives.

     77. The appellant's brother David also gave evidence and confirmed that
         as the eldest male in the household the appellant had  taken  on  a
         level of responsibility and  provides  a  significant  support  for
         their  mother  who  would  be  devastated  if  the  appellant  were
         deported. (FTJ paragraph 53) David gave  evidence  that  he  has  a
         close relationship  with  the  appellant  and  that  he  has  fully
         supported the appellant with his rehabilitation since his  release.
         He said that the appellant is a changed person and that he  thought
         very hard before leaving his mother and moving to away. David  said
         he would not have  moved  if  he  had  had  any  doubts  about  the
         appellant. (FTJ paragraph 54)

     78. The appellant's mother stated that their life  was  shattered  when
         the appellant was arrested in May 2017. she also stated that whilst
         the appellant was in prison, he proved to her that  he  had  learnt
         from his mistake and that since his release he has supported her in
         caring for her youngest sons. (FTJ paragraph 52)

     79. The FTJ stated that he was in no doubt that the Appellant  and  his
         mother and brother have a close relationship. (FTJ paragraph 55).

     80. The appellant has a close relationship with his girlfriend who is a
         British citizen, and they have been together  since  2016  and  she
         visited him regularly whilst he was completing his  sentence.  (FTJ
         paragraph 81) They have talked  about  their  future  together.  As
         stated, above Ms Johnson gave evidence to the FTJ.

     81. Ms Logan submits that the judge stated that  the  appellant's  case
         could be distinguished from many of the cases that come before  the
         Tribunal. The appellant has three discrete  relationships  that  do
         not engage family life but are nonetheless important  relationships
         that cannot be replicated  in  South  Africa.  The  FTJ  stated  "I
         appreciate  that  the  appellant  can   use   modern   methods   of
         communication to remain in contact with his mother his brother  and
         [his girlfriend] but I am satisfied that if so, these relationships
         will be fundamentally different". (paragraph 78).

     82. The FTJ further stated that they could not be  expected  to  uproot
         themselves to maintain their relationships with the appellant.  The
         appellant's mother is the primary  carer  of  two  British  citizen
         school age children who see their father every weekend.   It  would
         be unduly harsh to expect them to leave the UK now and it would  be
         likely to have a profound effect on their relationship  with  their
         father. (FTJ paragraph 82).

     83. As regards his brother, the FTJ stated that he is  in  a  long-term
         relationship, living with his partner, has a business that  he  has
         worked hard to establish  and  is  a  British  citizen.  He  cannot
         reasonably be expected to start again in "what is for  all  intents
         and purposes a foreign country". (FTJ paragraph 83).

     84. In her oral submissions and in answer to those of Mr Whitwell,  she
         submitted that this did amount to a strong private  life  and  that
         the respondent was wrong to submit that it  did  not  constitute  a
         strong private life but was overwhelming evidence.

     85. It is further submitted the  judge  was  correct  to  consider  the
         nature and seriousness of  the  offence  and  the  future  risk  of
         offending. In fact, it is submitted  that  he  had  no  alternative
         having regard to section 117 C (2) "the more  serious  the  offence
         committed  by  a  foreign  criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public
         interest in deportation of the criminal" and section 117 C (6)  and
         case law such as Hesham Ali v SSHD 2016 UKSC to which  he  referred
         in his Judgement (paragraph 62).

     86. In her  oral  submissions,  Ms  Logan  submitted  that  the  FtTJ's
         assessment of the nature and seriousness of  the  offence  properly
         took account of the decision in HA (Iraq) at paragraph 141 and that
         it established that a deportee if he had shown positive evidence of
         rehabilitation and reduced risk of  reoffending  it  could  not  be
         excluded from the assessment. Whilst she accepted that the facts of
         the case had to be put in the balance and that weight will vary and
         it would rarely be of great weight,  she  submitted  it  was  still
         necessary to carry out an assessment of criminality.

     87. By reference to the facts of the appeal  the  FTJ  found  that  the
         appellant was aged 19 at  the  time  of  the  offence  and  had  no
         previous convictions. The FTJ also accepted that the appellant  had
         not committed any further offences and was very unlikely to  commit
         any further offences "The appellant told me that he  truly  regrets
         getting involved and knows that  he  caused  his  family  pain  and
         anguish. In my view he now appreciates the support  of  his  loving
         family. I do not believe he would want to do  anything  that  would
         cause his family further distress. (FTJ paragraphs 70 - 75).

     88. The FTJ  said  further  "probation  service  has  stated  that  the
         appellant is a very low risk of further offending and I  agree.  He
         has a strong support network within the UK, that rallied round  him
         after his arrest, and I have no doubt that they  will  continue  to
         provide him with that support. As such I have attached some  weight
         (not a lot) to my finding that the appellant is  very  unlikely  to
         commit any further offences in the UK" (FTJ paragraphs 85, 87).

     89. Reliance is placed on the decision of HA (Iraq) v  SSHD  2020  EWCA
         Civ 1176

             "... but if there were other compelling circumstances  in  his
             case, the fact that his case   was comparatively less  serious
             could form an element in his  overall  case  that  the  strong
             public interest in deportation was outweighed.

             "generally, for the purpose  of  the  proportionality  balance
             that falls to be struck in a deportation case the  seriousness
             of the relevant offending  is  established  by  the  level  of
             sentence "(paragraphs 93,94).

     90. The last point relied  upon  related  to  an  assessment  of  other
         relevant factors. Ms Logan further submits that  courts  will  have
         regard to the Strasbourg jurisprudence when applying the tests  set
         out in the domestic legislation" (see Jackson LJ, NA  (Pakistan)  v
         SSHD 2016 EWCA Civ 662 (paragraph 38).

     91. The FTJ refers in his Judgement to  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
         Court in the case of  Hesham  Ali  v  SSHD  2016  UKSC  60  and  at
         paragraph 26 (of his Judgement in Hesham Ali) Lord Reed  summarises
         the effect of the Strasbourg case law about foreign  criminals  and
         at paragraph 33 like this court in NA Pakistan he  makes  it  clear
         that the factors referred to in those cases need to be  taken  into
         account in the assessment of the proportionality of the deportation
         of foreign offenders whether or not they are settled migrants"  per
         Underhill LJ- (see HA (Iraq) v SSHD 2020 EWCA Civ 1176  and  Hesham
         Ali paragraph 26)

             "In a well-known series of judgments, the court  has  set  out
             the guiding principles which it  applies  when  assessing  the
             likelihood that the deportation of  a  settled  migrant  would
             interfere with family life and if so  its  proportionality  to
             the legitimate aim pursued. In Boultif v Switzerland  2001  33
             EHRR 50 para 48, the court said that  it  would  consider  the
             nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
             applicant : the length of the applicant's stay in the  country
             from which he or she is to be expelled: the time elapsed since
             the  offence  was  committed  by  the   applicant:   and   the
             applicant's conduct during that period: the  nationalities  of
             the  various  persons  concerned  :  the  applicant's   family
             situation ... Two further factors were  mentioned  in  Uner  v
             Netherlands 2006 45 EHRR 14 para 58:  ... and the solidity  of
             the social and cultural and family ties with the host  country
             and with the country of destination.

             In Maslov v Austria 2009 INLR 47, paras 72  -  75,  the  court
             added that the age of the person concerned  can  play  a  role
             when considering some of these criteria.  For  instance,  when
             assessing the nature and seriousness of the offences,  it  has
             to take into account whether the person committed  them  as  a
             juvenile or as an adult. Equally when assessing the length  of
             the person's stay in the country from which he or she is to be
             expelled and the solidity of the social  cultural  and  family
             ties with the host country, it makes a difference whether  the
             person came to the country during  his  or  her  childhood  or
             youth, or was even born there, or whether he or she came  only
             as an adult. Some of the factors listed in these cases  relate
             to the strength of the public interest in deportation: that is
             to say, the extent to which  the  deportation  of  the  person
             concerned will promote the legitimate aim  pursued.  They  are
             not exhaustive".

         Thus, she submitted that all of those factors were relevant and
         that the judge properly took into account those in his factual
         findings.

     92. In conclusion Ms Logan submitted that the FTJ applied  the  correct
         test to this case in that he did in substance find  that  the  very
         compelling circumstances  of  the  appellant  over  and  above  the
         statutory Exceptions, outweighed  the  strong  public  interest  in
         deportation, and further, that the decision of the FTJ to allow the
         appellant's appeal on human rights grounds was the correct decision
         given the very compelling circumstances of this case.

     93. Mr Whitwell by way of reply submitted that the difficulty with  the
         submissions made on behalf of the appellant is that they asked  the
         tribunal to look at the decision as a whole rather than by  looking
         at the findings of  fact.  An  example  would  be  the  appellant's
         circumstances in South Africa and that this was the  oral  evidence
         and evidence in the appeal rather than factual findings.

     94. As to the issue of very significant obstacles and the reliance upon
         paragraph 42 - 44, the judge did not find that the appellant  would
         be subject to destitution and thus would be a breach of Article  3.
         Had the judge so found, the judge would have allowed the appeal  on
         Article 3 grounds.

     95. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I  reserved  my  decision  and
         indicated to Ms Logan that in the absence of  the  appellant,  that
         she should ensure that her instructing solicitors would inform  the
         appellant that I would be reserving  my  decision  which  would  be
         given in a written judgement. She confirmed that she would do so.

Preliminary issue:

     96. Before dealing with the substantive grounds,  it  is  necessary  to
         address a preliminary issue raised by Ms Logan  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant. It had  not  been  raised  in  the  written  submissions
         previously served on the Tribunal and the respondent.

     97. It relates to the grant of permission. Ms Logan submitted that  the
         FtTJ when granting permission at paragraph [4] considered that  the
         arguable errors related to the issue of inadequacy of reasons only.
         She submitted that the first part of paragraph [4] of the grant  of
         permission stated that "while I am satisfied that the FtTJ  had  in
         mind S117C (6) when making his decision, it is  arguable  that  the
         judge did not give adequate reasons."

     98. Ms Logan submitted that this should be read as a limited  grant  of
         permission.  Mr Whitwell submits that this could  not  properly  be
         read as a limited grant relying on the decision in Safi.

     99. I have considered the submission in  the  light  of  the  grant  of
         permission. The relevant  decision  is  that  of  Safi  and  others
         (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC).

    100. The headnote to that decision stated as follows:

             (1)  It is essential for a judge who is granting permission to
             appeal only on limited grounds to say so,  in  terms,  in  the
             section of  the  standard  form  document  that  contains  the
             decision, as opposed to the reasons for the decision.

             (2)  It is likely to be only in very Exceptional circumstances
             that the Upper Tribunal  will  be  persuaded  to  entertain  a
             submission  that  a  decision  which,  on  its  face,   grants
             permission to appeal  without  express  limitation  is  to  be
             construed as anything other than a grant of permission on  all
             of the grounds accompanying the  application  for  permission,
             regardless of what might be said in the reasons  for  decision
             section of the document.

    101. The grant of permission makes no reference to this being a  limited
         grant of permission. Furthermore, if the FtTJ  granting  permission
         intended this to be a limited grant of permission, the FtTJ has not
         done so in a way which complies with Safi and others (permission to
         appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) as set out above.  The FtTJ
         failed  to  incorporate  his  intention  (if  there  was  such   an
         intention) to  grant  permission  on  limited  grounds  within  the
         decision section of the  standard  document,  where  it  is  simply
         stated, ' is granted'. If a judge intends to grant permission  only
         on limited grounds, he or she must make that fact absolutely clear.
         That is not the position here and there  is  no  reference  to  the
         appeal grounds being limited in  the  way  set  out  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in Safi (see paragraph 43).

    102. Furthermore, paragraph [4] is not entirely clear. Whilst  the  FtTJ
         when granting permission stated that the judge had in  mind  S117C(
         6) when making his decision,  towards the latter part of  paragraph
         [4]  the permission judge returned to the arguable failure to refer
         to the "threshold  for establishing very  compelling  circumstances
         as set out by the Court of  Appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan)  or  how  he
         applied it to the facts" and therefore identifying  that  the  FtTJ
         arguably had not had S117C(6) properly in mind.

    103. I am not satisfied that there  are  any  exceptional  circumstances
         that exist  to  limit  the  grant  of  appeal  nor  have  any  been
         identified by Ms Logan and I am further satisfied that there is  no
         unfairness to the appellant who has submitted  written  submissions
         dealing with all of the grounds and thus being able to engage  with
         the issues raised.

Discussion:

    104. I have carefully considered the submissions made  by  each  of  the
         advocates and I am grateful for the careful and  clear  submissions
         made by each of them as reflected above. I have set out in full the
         submissions made by each of the advocates.

    105. The relevant legal framework that the FtTJ was  required  to  apply
         and relevant to  this  appellant's  appeal  can  be  summarised  as
         follows:

The Legal Framework

    106. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007  ('the  2007  Act')  defines
         those, such as this appellant, who have been sentenced to a  period
         of imprisonment of at least 12  months  as  a  'foreign  criminal'.
         Pursuant to subsection (5), the Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in respect of such a foreign criminal. There  are
         a number of Exceptions contained in section 33, of which  the  only
         relevant Exception is that 'removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach -  (a)  a  person's
         [ECHR] rights...' (see section 33(2)(a)).

    107. For the purposes of  this  appeal,  the  relevant  legal  framework
         concerns Art 8 of the ECHR and Part 5A of the  NIA  Act  2002  and,
         principally, as it applies in deportation  cases.   In  particular,
         the appeal is concerned with  Exception  1  in  s.117C(4)  and  the
         additional provision in s.117C(6) concerned with  "very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions  1  and
         2".  It is common ground that  the  judge  was  required  to  apply
         s.117C  in  determining  the  issue  of  whether  the   appellant's
         deportation would be disproportionate and a breach of Art 8 of  the
         ECHR.

    108. Sections 117C (1) and  (2)  set  out  the  position  regarding  the
         "public interest" as follows:

             "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                  criminal, the greater is the public interest in
                  deportation of the criminal."

    109. By virtue of s.117C(3), if a 'foreign criminal' has been sentenced
         to at least twelve months' imprisonment but not to  four  years  or
         more imprisonment, then if Exception  1  or  Exception  2  applies,
         deportation is not in the public interest (see, HA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
         [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 at [29]).

    110. Section 117C (4) sets out Exception 1 as follows:

             "(4) Exception 1 applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                      integration into the country to which C is proposed
                      to be deported."

    111. Exception 2 is found in s.117C(5) as follows:

             "(5)     Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and
                  subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a
                  genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                  qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                  partner or child would be unduly harsh."

    112. Section 117C (6) of the NIA Act 2002 provides as follows:

             "(6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstance, over and above those described in
                  Exceptions 1 and 2."

    113. Although s.117C(6) is  phrased  as  only  to  apply  to  a  foreign
         criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  at   least   four   years,
         imprisonment, the Court of Appeal has held that this provision must
         also apply to a person who  has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of at least twelve months but less than four years (so-
         called 'medium offenders') and who cannot bring  themselves  within
         either Exception 1 or Exception 2 (see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 662 at [25]-[27]).

    114.  As  regards  "very  compelling   circumstances"   requirement   in
         s.117C(6), the case law recognises the high threshold  required  to
         meet this test which requires the  individual  circumstances  as  a
         whole, including circumstances which did not in  themselves  result
         in  Exception  1  or  Exception  2  being  met,  being   considered
         cumulatively with all other  relevant  circumstances  and  balanced
         against the public interest reflected in  the  seriousness  of  the
         individual's criminal offending (see NA (Pakistan) at [32]  and  HA
         (Iraq) at [60]).

    115. Subsequently, the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2020]  EWCA
         Civ 1296 identified the four leading  authorities  in  relation  to
         ss.117C (5) and (6) beyond which it would  usually  be  unnecessary
         for a Tribunal  to  make  reference:  KO(Nigeria);  HA  (Iraq),  NA
         (Pakistan) and R (Byndloss) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 42.

    116. In respect of the Supreme Court's decision in Byndloss,  the  Court
         of Appeal made specific mention to Lord Wilson's judgment  at  [33]
         and [55] where he said this about the approach  to  proportionality
         in deportation cases:

             "33. The deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
             public good. So said Parliament in enacting section  32(4)  of
             the  2007  Act:  see  para  11  above.  Parliament's   unusual
             statement of fact was expressed  to  be  for  the  purpose  of
             section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act, so its consequence  was  that
             every  foreign  criminal  became   automatically   liable   to
             deportation. Parliament's statement  exemplifies  the  "strong
             public interest in the deportation of  foreign  nationals  who
             have committed serious offences": Ali v Secretary of State for
             the Home Department [2016] 1 WLR 4799, para 14, per Lord Reed
             JSC. In the Ali case the court was required to identify  the
             criterion by reference to which the tribunal should  determine
             an appeal of  a  foreign  criminal  on  human  rights  grounds
             against a deportation order. The decision was that the  public
             interest in his deportation was of such weight that only  very
             compelling reasons would outweigh it: see paras 37 and 38, per
             Lord Reed JSC.

             ...

             55.   The  third  [feature  of  the   background]   is   that,
             particularly  in  the  light  of  this  court's  decision   in
             the Ali case, every foreign criminal who appeals  against  a
             deportation order  by  reference  to  his  human  rights  must
             negotiate a formidable hurdle before his appeal will  succeed:
             see para 33 above. He needs to be in a  position  to  assemble
             and present powerful evidence. I  must  not  be  taken  to  be
             prescriptive in suggesting that the  very  compelling  reasons
             which the tribunal must find before it allows  an  appeal  are
             likely to relate in particular to some or all of the following
             matters: (a) the depth of the claimant's integration in United
             Kingdom society in terms of family, employment and  otherwise;
             (b) the quality of his relationship with any child, partner or
             other family member in the United Kingdom; (c) the  extent  to
             which any relationship with family members might reasonably be
             sustained even after deportation, whether by their joining him
             abroad or otherwise; (d) the impact of his deportation on  the
             need to safeguard and promote the welfare of any child in  the
             United Kingdom; (e) the likely strength of  the  obstacles  to
             his  integration  in  the  society  of  the  country  of   his
             nationality; and, surely in every case;  (f)  any  significant
             risk of his reoffending in  the  United  Kingdom,  judged,  no
             doubt with difficulty, in the light of his criminal record set
             against the credibility of his probable assertions of  remorse
             and reform."

    117. What is said there is particularly relevant to  s.117C(6)  and  the
         issue of "very compelling circumstances".

    118. It is against that background that I engage  with  the  submissions
         advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State.

    119. There is no dispute that the appellant satisfies the definition  of
         foreign criminal as he is  not  a  British  citizen  and  has  been
         convicted of an offence which led to a period of imprisonment of at
         least 12 months: (see section 117D (2) of the 2002 Act).

    120. The appellant's conviction and sentence fall into section 117C  (3)
         of the 2002  Act;  he  has  not  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of four years  or  more,  with  the  effect  that,  if
         Exception 1 or 2 applies, his deportation will not be in the public
         interest. Thus, his deportation can only be resisted  if  he  meets
         one (or both) of the Exceptions  or  shows  that  there  are  "very
         compelling circumstances, over and above  those  Exceptions":   see
         Section 117C (6).

    121. As to the private life Exception (Exception 1) the appellant  could
         not succeed under that Exception as he could  not  meet  all  three
         limbs.  The  FtTJ  found  that  he  was  socially  and   culturally
         integrated in the UK (at [58]). Ms Logan submits that the FtTJ also
         found  that  there  were  very   significant   obstacles   to   his
         integration. That is an issue that I will return to in due course.

    122. On behalf of the respondent, the submissions and  grounds  identify
         that having found that the appellant could not bring himself within
         Exceptions 1 or 2, the FtTJ failed to address  the  relevant  legal
         framework by turning to S 117C (6) and applying the  relevant  test
         of whether there were "very compelling circumstances over and above
         the Exceptions in 1 and 2".

    123. The thrust of the grounds on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  is
         that such a conclusion is absent from the  decision  and  that  the
         judge failed to apply the correct test taking into account the high
         threshold necessary.

    124. With respect to the FtTJ, the  decision  does  lack  structure  and
         clarity and on a first reading one might consider  that  the  judge
         was determining an appeal as  an  article  8  appeal  "outside  the
         rules" as exemplified by his reference at paragraph [88]  where  he
         stated that the appellant had demonstrated that  his  circumstances
         were "sufficiently compassionate so to justify being granted  leave
         to remain outside  of  the  immigration  rules."  The  respondent's
         written grounds identify paragraphs where the judge refers to  case
         law which was irrelevant (for example at [61]).

    125. However, I agree with the submissions made by Ms Logan that  on  an
         overall reading of the decision, the judge was plainly aware of the
         statutory regime applicable and did  adopt  this  as  part  of  his
         reasoning and analysis. At paragraphs [38]-[40] the  FtTJ  set  out
         the applicable statutory framework by reference to  section  32  of
         the UK Borders Act and Part 5A of the NIAA of 2020 and set out  the
         section 117C considerations applicable to appeals involving foreign
         criminals. At [63] the FtTJ referred to paragraph 399 and  399A  of
         the  Immigration  Rules  and  identified  that  the  only  relevant
         paragraph in this appellant's case was that  under  paragraph  399A
         (which is Exception 1; S117C (4)).

    126. Whilst the appellant did advance a case under "family life" on  the
         basis of his relationship with his close  family  members  and  his
         partner, it was not based on Exception 2 and Ms Logan does not seek
         to advance that. In any event, on  the  FtTJ's  assessment  of  the
         evidence, he did not find family life was engaged. He  did  however
         treat the family relationships including that of his partner  as  a
         significant and fundamental part of the appellant's private life.

    127. As to the private life Exception  (Exception  1),  earlier  in  his
         decision the judge addressed whether he was socially and culturally
         integrated in the UK and found in his  favour  on  this  issue  (at
         [58]). The FtTJ also found that he could not  demonstrate  that  he
         had lawfully resided in the UK for most of his life (at [64]- [66].
         The appellant could not succeed under that Exception  as  he  could
         not meet all three limbs. Ms Logan submits that the FtTJ also found
         that there were very significant obstacles to his integration. That
         is an issue that I will return to in due course.

    128. At [67] the FtTJ concluded that the appellant could  not  meet  the
         rules, albeit at that paragraph there is the  misstatement  of  the
         law in the context of this appeal. At [68]-[69], the FtTJ  returned
         to the correct legal framework by  directing  himself  to  sections
         117B and C and that he took as his starting point "the more serious
         the offence committed,  the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in
         deportation of the foreign criminal" and expressly stated Lord Reed
         in the decision of Hesham Ali that "great weight  should  generally
         be given to the public interest in the  deportation  of  a  foreign
         offender who has received a custodial  sentence  of  more  than  12
         months" (paragraph 46)." At [69] the  FtTJ  again  noted  that  the
         appellant did not fall within Exception one or two and did not meet
         the requirement of the rules. He stated, "in my view these  matters
         also weigh heavily against the appellant."

    129. As I have said, the structure and layout does  lack  some  clarity,
         but when viewing the decision as a whole, I am satisfied  that  the
         judge did have  in  his  mind  the  correct  legal  framework  when
         undertaking his analysis and reaching his overall decision. As  set
         out above, the judge plainly had regard to S117C and the Exceptions
         to deportation, recognising that in this appellant's case the  only
         relevant Exception was  that  under  Exception  1;  S117C  (4)  and
         paragraph 399A) and in his analysis found that he  could  not  meet
         the requirements as all three limbs were necessary.

    130. It must therefore follow that the only question that  remained  was
         that under section 117(6) and whether there were  "very  compelling
         circumstances over and above" those Exceptions in this  appellant's
         case.

    131. On behalf of the respondent, it is  submitted  that  there  was  no
         reference to that terminology or that it was a  high  threshold  to
         surmount. In his alternative submission, Mr Whitwell submitted that
         if the FtTJ had considered the issue in substance, there  would  be
         no error in law but that in any event the FtTJ failed  to  set  out
         that there were any "very compelling circumstances" and thus  there
         was an absence of factors identifiable in this appellant's case.

    132. I have given careful consideration to that submission and have done
         so in the light of the decision of the FtTJ and the evidence before
         him. Having done so, I prefer the submissions made by Ms Logan.  As
         she identified, whilst the FtTJ did not refer to  "very  compelling
         circumstances over and above" the Exceptions, in his final analysis
         the assessment made by the judge when considering the circumstances
         cumulatively, he found them to be "exceptional" and that they  were
         such as to "outweigh the significant public interest arising in his
         case" (at [85]). In that paragraph, the FtTJ referred to factors in
         favour of the appellant relevant to his private life  (to  which  I
         will later return) and that whilst individually they would  not  be
         of sufficient weight to outweigh the public  interest,  when  taken
         cumulatively the judge found that he was "satisfied that  they  are
         exceptional and outweigh the significant public interest arising in
         this case." It is also right to observe that the  judge  identified
         further factors in the balancing exercise and relevant  to  whether
         there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
         Exceptions, relating to the appellant's rehabilitation and lack  of
         reoffending (see paragraphs [85[ - [ 87]).

    133. Whilst the FtTJ used the terminology as set  out  in  the  previous
         test of "exceptional circumstances" rather than by reference to the
         terminology in the statute of whether there  are  "very  compelling
         circumstances over and above" the Exceptions, I am  satisfied  that
         his  reference  to  the  exceptionality  of  the  circumstances  in
         substance amounted to the same test.

    134. Mr Whitwell submitted that if  the  FtTJ  had  considered  this  in
         substance there  would  be  no  error  of  law,  but  that  in  the
         alternative,  even  if  the  judge  had  considered  the  issue  in
         substance,  the  judge  had  failed  to   show   on   the   factual
         circumstances of this appellant  that  there  were  in  fact  "very
         compelling circumstances".

    135. When dealing with that issue, the  real  question  in  my  view  is
         whether it was rationally open to the judge, on the  basis  of  the
         factual findings made and on the evidence before him, to find  that
         the appellant could point to 'very compelling  circumstances'  over
         and above the Exceptions.

    136. Whilst the appellant could not meet all three limbs of Exception  1
         (S117C  (4)),  that  does  not  mean  a  foreign  criminal   facing
         deportation it is disentitled  from  seeking  to  rely  on  matters
         falling  within  the  scope  of  the  circumstances  described   in
         Exceptions one and two when seeking to contend that there are "very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         Exceptions one and two". However, if relying  upon  such  features,
         the judge would need to identify features of the  appellant's  case
         of a kind mentioned in Exceptions one and two or  features  outside
         the circumstances described in  those  Exceptions  which  made  his
         claim on article 8 especially strong or in other words sufficiently
         compelling. There can be no dispute that S117C (6) is  a  high  and
         demanding test.

    137. When considering the appellant's circumstances, the FtTJ considered
         his relationships with his family members and also his partner. The
         decision letter proceeded on the basis that the appellant  had  not
         shown that he and his partner were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship or that she was a British citizen resident in  the  UK
         and thus was not a "qualifying partner". However, the judge who had
         heard the evidence of the appellant's partner and found her  to  be
         an "impressive witness" (at [50]) accepted  her  account  of  their
         relationship and that they had met in 2015 - 2016, that she  was  a
         British citizen and had always lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
         whilst  they  were  in  relationship   they   were   not   married.
         Consequently, he did not consider  that  relationship  fell  within
         Exception 2.

    138. As to the family members (his mother and  brother)  it  appears  to
         have been conceded by counsel that  the  relationship  did  not  go
         beyond normal ties (at [56]) however the judge at  [57]  considered
         that the relationships with his family members formed  an  integral
         part of his private life in the UK. It appears by reference to  the
         preceding part of that paragraph  that  this  was  based  on  their
         circumstances, how they had entered  the  United  Kingdom  and  had
         continued to live together alongside the length of  residence  with
         those family members which was not in dispute.

    139. When reading the decision, it is plain that the  judge  found  that
         the appellant had a very strong private life with  his  family  and
         partner. Whilst the appellant was now over 18, it was common ground
         that he remained living in the family  home  with  his  mother  and
         siblings, he was the oldest male  in  the  household  and  provided
         support for both her and his younger siblings (see paragraphs  [29]
         and 35]). The judge concluded at  [78]  that  whilst  there  was  a
         strong public interest in his  deportation,  the  appellant's  case
         could be distinguished from many of the cases that came before  the
         tribunal and made reference to the appellant having "three discrete
         relationships that do not engage family life  but  are  nonetheless
         important relationships that cannot be replicated in South Africa."
         The judge took into account the  respondent's  assertion  that  the
         appellant could use modern forms  of  communication  to  remain  in
         contact with his mother, brother and his partner but was  satisfied
         that if that took place, the relationships would be  "fundamentally
         different". At paragraphs [79] - [83] the judge set out his reasons
         for reaching that conclusion. The judge found that in the event  of
         the appellant's deportation, he would not be able to  maintain  and
         continue to develop his relationship with his partner.  She  was  a
         British citizen who lived all her life in the UK, she  was  in  the
         process of establishing a career and that she could not go to South
         Africa. The judge  stated  "I  am  satisfied  that  she  could  not
         reasonably be expected to uproot herself and try to begin again  to
         establish an adult life in South  Africa  "(at  paragraphs  [79)  -
         [80]). At [81] he placed weight  and  found  to  be  a  significant
         point, that the appellant's partner had visited him  regularly  and
         that it would have been "very easy for her to walk  away  from  the
         appellant that time, but she  stuck  with  him  and  supported  the
         appellant. In my view, this speaks volumes about her feelings about
         the relationship."

    140. When considering the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
         family members (his mother and brother), he reached the  conclusion
         that they also could  not  be  expected  to  uproot  themselves  to
         maintain their relationships with the  appellant.  The  appellant's
         mother being the primary carer of two British citizen children aged
         8 and 13, attending school in the UK and seeing  the  father  every
         weekend (at [82]). At [83] the judge considered  the  circumstances
         of his adult brother; he was a British citizen.  Again,  the  judge
         concluded that on the factual circumstances  his  brother  had  not
         returned to South Africa and had been in the UK for nearly 20 years
         and that he could not reasonably be expected to start again in what
         was for all intents and purposes a "foreign country".

    141. The FtTJ returned to the appellant's private life at  [85]  in  his
         final analysis. Whilst he refers to "three  key  elements  of  "the
         appellant's private life, it is not entirely clear to me whether he
         meant the three different relationships or  whether  he  meant  the
         relationships with his family and partner, the social and  cultural
         links with the United Kingdom and the very significant obstacles to
         his reintegration to South Africa.

    142. I can  find  no  reference  in  the  decision  to  the  term  "very
         significant obstacles". However, on the factual findings and on the
         evidence, which was not  disputed,  such  an  assessment  would  be
         satisfied in his case. There is no dispute that the  appellant  had
         entered the UK along with his mother and two brothers in 2001  when
         he was four years of age. He lived in the UK since  that  date  and
         had never returned to South  Africa.  A  relevant  and  substantial
         factor in his favour was that neither of his parents were nationals
         of South Africa and were originally from the DRC.  His  father  had
         left the family in 2000 and returned to the DRC and  they  had  not
         seen him since. It was common ground that the appellant  had  never
         been back to South Africa and had no connections  to  the  country.
         The judge found that to be the case and also found that he did  not
         have any recollections of that country (at paragraph [33]. At  [83]
         whilst setting it the context of the appellant's brother, but  must
         logically also apply to the appellant, the FtT found that a  return
         to South Africa would be "in all intents  and  purposes  a  foreign
         country."

    143. At [42] the judge considered that the appellant would  arguably  be
         destitute if required to return to South Africa. Whilst that was in
         the context of an asylum/Article 3 claim and was not  analysed  any
         further, it was in some respects supportive of the evidence  before
         the judge which he accepted as to the strength of  his  ties,  both
         family, social and cultural in the UK and the absence of those ties
         in South Africa and thus to the issue of whether  there  were  very
         significant obstacles to his integration. The  respondent  accepted
         that there were  significant  obstacles  but  that  they  were  not
         insurmountable on the basis that there may be family  relatives  in
         South Africa. However, the evidence before the judge was clear that
         there were no such family connections to South Africa  which  would
         not be surprising bearing in mind  the  length  of  time  that  the
         appellant had been absent, the age he left that  country  but  also
         that neither of his parents were nationals of South Africa but were
         nationals of the DRC.

    144. That element of the  private  life  Exception  is  not  essentially
         concerned with the general difficulties of life  in  the  receiving
         country, as explained by Moore-Bick LJ in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA
         Civ at [14]:

             "in my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration"
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,
             as set out in section 117C (4) and paragraph 399A is  a  broad
             one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a  job  or
             to sustain life while living in the other country. It  is  not
             appropriate to treat the statutory language is subject to some
             gloss and it  will  usually  be  sufficient  for  a  court  or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
             evaluative judgement to be made as to whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other countries carried on  and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis  in  that  society  and  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life."

    145. However, on the factual background of the appellant and his  family
         members, and making a "broad evaluative judgement", in my judgement
         it  could  properly  be  said  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
         considered enough of an insider to understand life in South African
         society or to participate in  it.  The  FtTJ's  acceptance  of  the
         factual background and his omnibus conclusion that to "all  intents
         and purposes South Africa is a foreign country" to the  appellant's
         family members, there was sufficient evidence to  demonstrate  that
         there were very significant obstacles to his integration  to  South
         Africa in the event of his deportation, even if the  FtTJ  did  not
         expressly say so.

    146. The FtTJ also found that the appellant was socially and  culturally
         integrated in the UK given the length of residence in  the  age  of
         four, having attended school and completed his education in the  UK
         and having developed social and cultural ties  to  the  UK.  Again,
         whilst not articulated with any clarity, those factors  when  taken
         together must have formed part of the strong private life that  the
         appellant had established in the  UK  during  his  residence  which
         formed part of the assessment of the FtTJ.

    147. In my judgement those factors were relevant factors in  the  FtTJ's
         analysis as identified in the Strasbourg jurisprudence.  The  wide-
         ranging evaluative exercise required  under  s.  117C  (6)  clearly
         includes  an  application  of  the  principles  in  the  Strasbourg
         authorities to ensure compatibility with the UK's obligations under
         Article 8 and must be accommodated within the  statutory  scheme  -
         see NA (Pakistan) at [29] and [38]; HA (Iraq) at [28] and Unuane at
         [72-75]  and  [81-83].  The  Strasbourg  authorities  set  out  the
         relevant criteria to use in order to assess  whether an  expulsion
         measure was necessary in a democratic society and proportionate  to
         the legitimate aim pursued. The respective weight to be attached to
         these criteria will  inevitably  vary  according  to  the  specific
         circumstances of each case - see Unuane at [78]. In  the  Supreme
         Court's decision  of  Byndloss,  at  paragraph  [55]  a  number  of
         criteria were listed relevant to  the  issue  of  "very  compelling
         circumstances". They included:

             "(a) the depth of the claimant's  integration  in  the  United
             Kingdom in terms of family, employment and otherwise.

             (b)  the quality of his relationship with any child partner or
             other family member in United Kingdom:

             (c)  the extent to which any relationship with family  members
             might reasonably be sustained even after deportation,  whether
             by their joining him abroad or otherwise.

             (d)  the impact of his deportation on the  need  to  safeguard
             and promote the welfare of any child in the United Kingdom.

             (e)  the likely strength of the obstacles  to  integration  in
             the society of the country of his nationality is:  and  surely
             in every case

             (f)  any significant risk of his reoffending in United Kingdom
             judge no doubt with difficulty in the light  of  his  criminal
             record set against the credibility of his probable  assertions
             of remorse and reform."

    148. These were some of  the  factors  that  the  judge  considered  and
         identified in his analysis.  A different judge  may  have  taken  a
         different approach for example in relation to  weight  attached  to
         certain evidential factors identified by the  FtTJ  but  I  do  not
         consider that the FtTJ was in error in taking  those  factors  into
         account in his conclusion that on  the  facts  of  this  particular
         appellant's case there  were  "very  compelling  circumstances"  or
         using the terminology of the FtTJ  "  exceptional  circumstances  "
         which taken cumulatively outweighed the strong public  interest  in
         his deportation.

    149. One of the other factors relied upon by the judge concerning  'very
         compelling    circumstances'    related    to    the    appellant's
         rehabilitation.  The appellant relies on Hesham Ali v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 where, at  [38],  Lord
         Reed held that the assessment of the proportionality of a  person's
         deportation:

             '...can include factors bearing on the weight  of  the  public
             interest in the deportation of the particular  offender,  such
             as his conduct since the offence was committed...

    150. Lord Kerr, in his dissenting judgment in Hesham Ali, concurred with
         the majority on the rehabilitation point.  At [164], he said:

             'The strength of the public interest in favour of  deportation
             must depend on such matters as the nature and  seriousness  of
             the crime, the  risk  of  re-offending,  and  the  success  of
             rehabilitation,  etc.  These  factors  are  relevant   to   an
             assessment of the extent to which deportation of a  particular
             individual will further the legitimate aim of preventing crime
             and disorder, and thus, as pointed out by Lord  Reed  at  para
             26,  inform  the  strength   of   the   public   interest   in
             deportation.'

    151. Ms Logan submits that this passage was endorsed  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in [49] of Akinyemi (No. 2) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2098, where it was described  as  a
         conclusion 'not doubted by anyone.'

    152. The Court  of  Appeal  addressed  rehabilitation  in  HA  (Iraq)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1176.
         After having surveyed the authorities (noting  that  he  had  'some
         difficulty' with a suggestion by Hamblen LJ at [84]  of  Binbuga  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 551 that
         rehabilitation  would  'generally  be  of  little  or  no  material
         weight'), Underhill LJ held, at [141]:

             '...the fact that a  potential  deportee  has  shown  positive
             evidence of rehabilitation, and thus of a reduced risk of  re-
             offending, cannot be excluded from the overall proportionality
             exercise. The authorities say so, and  it  must  be  right  in
             principle in view of the holistic  nature  of  that  exercise.
             Where a tribunal is  able  to  make  an  assessment  that  the
             foreign criminal is unlikely to re-offend, that  is  a  factor
             which can carry some weight in the  balance  when  considering
             very compelling circumstances. The weight which it  will  bear
             will vary from case to case, but it will rarely  be  of  great
             weight...'

    153. In her submissions, Ms  Logan  made  reference  to  the  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence.   Those   authorities    also    demonstrate    that
         rehabilitation is not a factor that is irrelevant to  the  question
         of proportionality.  For example, in Boultif  at  [48],  the  court
         held that:

             'In assessing the relevant criteria in such a case, the  Court
             will consider  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence
             committed by the applicant; the length of the applicant's stay
             in the country from which he is going to be expelled; the time
             elapsed since  the  offence  was  committed  as  well  as  the
             applicant's conduct in that period...'

    154. Looking at the FtTJ's assessment of the  issue  of  rehabilitation,
         the offences committed by  this  appellant  were  in  2017  and  it
         appears that he was released in 2018. The hearing before the First-
         tier Tribunal was in September 2020.  That was a reasonable passage
         of time capable of informing a finding as to  rehabilitation.   The
         judge reached unchallenged  findings  of  fact  at  [75]  that  the
         appellant had not committed any further offences and  that  he  was
         satisfied that the  appellant  "is  very  unlikely  to  commit  any
         further offences in the UK".  This  was  supported  by  the  FtTJ's
         assessment of the probation officer's report which stated that  the
         appellant posed a very low  risk  of  re-offending  (at  [87]).  In
         addition, the FtTJ formed a favourable view of  the  appellant  and
         accepted the appellant's evidence that his offending was a "one off
         "and an "isolated incident" (at  [74]  and  [86]).  The  FtTJ  also
         accepted that the appellant was "genuinely  remorseful"  (at  [86])
         and "truly regrets getting involved" and  that  he  had  a  "strong
         support network within the UK" and that his  family  would  support
         him and that the judge did not believe that the appellant would  do
         anything that would cause his family further distress (at [75]).

    155. Drawing this analysis together, on the basis of  the  jurisprudence
         set out above, rehabilitation is capable of attracting some weight.
         Mr Whitwell on behalf of the respondent accepted that the FtTJ  was
         entitled to place weight on this. In fact, the judge ascribed "some
         weight" to the appellant's rehabilitation  (see  [87]).  I  do  not
         consider that the weight ascribed by this judge,  bearing  in  mind
         the moveable quality of the public interest in the  deportation  of
         foreign criminals (as to which, see section 117C (2)  of  the  2002
         Act, and Akinyemi (No. 2) at [39]), sets out) was wrongly  applied.
         Nor do I find  his  assessment  of  this  issue  coupled  with  his
         consideration of the  appellant's  offending  to  be  in  error  or
         irrational. The written grounds at paragraph 6 submit that the FtTJ
         erred in law by making allowances for the length of the appellant's
         sentence which, it is submitted, should only be used  to  determine
         where the case falls for consideration within S117 as set out at in
         HA (Iraq) at [43]. The paragraph given within that citation is  not
         support  for  that  submission.  At  paragraph  43  the  court  was
         addressing the issue of undue harshness. However,  whilst  I  would
         agree that the length  of  the  sentence  imposed  is  relevant  to
         establishing the category in which the appellant falls, it is  also
         relevant to Sections 117C (1) and (2) which set  out  the  position
         regarding the "public interest" as follows:

             "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                  criminal, the greater is the public interest in
                  deportation of the criminal."

    156. Thus, the FtTJ's analysis of the offence at [85] and by refence  to
         the length of sentence  by  reference  to  where  it  fell  in  the
         sentencing guidelines was not an impermissible assessment  nor  was
         it one that could not carry any weight and was relevant to  S  117C
         (2). Barring irrationality, weight is a matter for the judge.

    157. The judge was  fully  cognisant  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign criminals, and correctly directed himself on
         the issue throughout the decision (at [68], [76] and [84]. At  [68]
         he referred to S117C and reminded  himself  of  the  importance  of
         S117C (2) and the "great weight" given to the  public  interest  in
         the deportation of foreign criminals (citing  Hesham  Ali)  and  at
         [85] referred to the "significant public interest arising  in  this
         case".

    158. His analysis of the evidence and his  factual  findings  concerning
         the strong private life and the nature  of  the  'very  significant
         obstacles' the appellant would be likely to face  in  South  Africa
         (even if not articulated using  that  terminology)  was  rationally
         open to him, they were unchallenged findings alongside those  which
         demonstrated  that  the  appellant  was  socially  and   culturally
         integrated. Those factors  alongside  the  finding  concerning  the
         appellant's rehabilitation, the strong private  life  relationships
         he had in the United Kingdom which could not be replicated  outside
         of the UK  and  this  cumulatively  amounted  to  'very  compelling
         circumstances' was a judgment rationally open to the judge.

    159. Therefore, the FtTJ having considered all factors weighing  in  the
         appellant's side  of  the  balance  cumulatively  was  entitled  to
         conclude that the weight of the public interest in this  particular
         case did not require his deportation because it could be said  that
         there were "very compelling circumstances"  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

    160. I remind myself that an appeal to the tribunal may only  lie  where
         there is an error of law. It is trite law  that  many  judges  will
         approach the same set of facts very differently. The mere fact that
         one judge adopts a  relatively  favourable  interpretation  of  the
         evidence they have heard does not necessarily render  that  finding
         irrational, simply on the basis that other judges, even many  other
         judges, may have  approached  the  same  question  in  a  different
         manner.

    161. I also remind myself of the observations of Floyd  LJ  in  UT  (Sri
         Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 at paragraph 19:

             "19. I start  with  two  preliminary  observations  about  the
             nature of, and approach to, and appeal to the UT.  First,  the
             right of appeal to the UT is "on any point of law arising from
             a decision made by the [FTT) other than an excluded decision":
             Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  ("the  2007  Act"),
             section 11 (1) and (2). If the UT finds an error of  law,  the
             UT may set aside the  decision  of  the  FTT  and  remake  the
             decision: section 12 (1) and (2) of the 2007 Act. If there  is
             no error of law in  the  FTT's  decision,  the  decision  will
             stand. Secondly, although "error of law" is widely defined, it
             is not the case that the UT is entitled to remake the decision
             of the FTT simply because  it  does  not  agree  with  it,  or
             because it thinks it can  produce  a  better  one.  Thus,  the
             reasons given for considering there to  be  an  error  of  law
             really matter. Baroness Hale put it in this way in AH  (Sudan)
             v SSHD at [30):

                  "Appellate  courts  should   not   rush   to   find   such
                  misdirection simply, because they  might  have  reached  a
                  different conclusion on the facts  or  express  themselves
                  differently."

    162. Even if the decision could be characterised as a generous  one,  it
         has not been demonstrated by the respondent that on the  particular
         factual circumstances of this appellant's case and on the  evidence
         before the FtTJ that the decision was either inadequately  reasoned
         or that  he  failed  to  apply  the  correct  legal  principles  in
         substance. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the  decision  of
         the FtTJ did not involve the making of a material error on a  point
         of law so that the Upper Tribunal should set aside the decision.  I
         therefore dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not not involve  the  making  of
an error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.


Signed   Dated 17 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

