
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17384/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                          |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr changcai wang
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lam, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal from the decision of First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated on  12  September  2018.   The
       applicant is a citizen of China born on 20 July 1985.


    2.   The judge dealt with the applicant's poor immigration history  and
       went through the documentation. At paragraphs 44 and  following  the
       judge set out the arguments that had been raised and made  necessary
       findings.  The  findings  are  to  be  found  at  paragraph  52  and
       following.  The issues for the judge to consider were the  statutory
       public interest criteria, particularly section 117B, in relation  to
       a child where that child's best interests had been determined to lie
       in remaining in this country.

    3.   The judge made reference to Home Office guidance dated 22 February
       2018 extracts of which  I  have  had  placed  before.   The  judge's
       material conclusions are at paragraph 61 and following:

         "61. The respondent's view appears to be that it is not  reasonable
             to expect a British child to leave the UK  with  a  parent  or
             primary carer but  it  is  clear  that  the  Home  office  are
             considering whether the child will actually leave the UK.   If
             the child would not or would not be likely to continue to live
             in the UK with another parent or primary carer then  the  Home
             Office consider EX.1(a) is likely to apply.  It might  however
             be appropriate to refuse to grant leave  to  a  parent/primary
             carer where  their  conduct  gives  rise  to  public  interest
             considerations of such weight as to justify their removal when
             the child could remain in the UK with  another  parent/primary
             carer who has leave.  The circumstances given  as  an  example
             are significant or persistent criminal offences falling  below
             the deportation threshold or a very poor  immigration  history
             having repeatedly and deliberately breached the Rules.


         62.  The Upper Tribunal in SF and Others (Guidance  post-2014  Act)
             Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) held, considering  the  August
             2015  Guidance,  that  even  in  the  absence  of  a  'not  in
             accordance with the law' ground of appeal the  Tribunal  ought
             to take the Secretary of State's guidance into account  if  it
             points clearly to a particular outcome in  the  instant  case.
             Only in that way can consistency  be  obtained  between  those
             cases that do and those that do not come before the Tribunal.


         63.  I have considered the respondent's 2018 Guidance and find that
             it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  locate  to
             China.  He is a British citizen and has the  right  to  reside
             here even if he is still at pre-school age.  I accept that  if
             the appellant is removed the child's mother would take up  the
             role of primary carer however the best interests of the  child
             must be to remain in a family environment  with  both  parents
             and this was not a matter considered  in  any  detail  by  the
             decision-maker.  The appellant has cheated on a TOEIC test and
             has overstayed but I do not find these matters to be  a  'very
             poor immigration history having  repeatedly  and  deliberately
             breached the Immigration Rules'.  As suggested in the guidance
             in making this finding I follow the principle  in  MT  and  ET
             (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT
             00088.  His history is poor but not very poor in  my  finding.
             The appellant meets the requirements of  Section  117B(6)  and
             his appeal is therefore allowed."

    4.   The principal arguments advanced on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
       State are that the judge erred in law in reading  too  narrowly  and
       restrictively the Home Office's own guidance. It is said is that the
       judge has taken  what  are  merely  examples  in  the  guidance  and
       elevated them to the status of exhaustive statements.  It is further
       said that the judge has not applied the balance correctly because in
       this instance the immigration history of the parent was particularly
       poor having regard to dishonesty  in  the  form  of  cheating  in  a
       language test and deliberate and culpable overstaying.  The point is
       also made that in the case of MT and ET and in the more recent  case
       of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 the  court  was  not  concerned  with
       British children.


    5.   This is undoubtedly a decision which is generous to the applicant.
        That said, the function of the Upper Tribunal  is  not  to  make  a
       second decision based on the evidence but to enquire  whether  there
       is any error of law  in  the  approach  adopted  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal such that justice requires it to be set aside.

    6.   I do not consider that  there  is  anything  in  the  decision  to
       suggest that the judge's approach was other than on all  fours  with
       the proper legal framework.  It may be that a different judge  would
       have taken a different  view  as  to  the  immigration  history  and
       equally may have resolved the balancing exercise in relation to  the
       child's best interests in a different way. However, in my considered
       view the First-tier Tribunal properly applied the law and reached  a
       decision which is within  the  broad  band  of  discretion  properly
       accorded to First-tier Tribunals.

    7.   It therefore follows that this appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  tribunal  is
affirmed.


Signed        Mark Hill             Date              7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
