
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17558/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2019                      |On 31 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                SAFEER AHMAD
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation;
Appellant:    Mr Farhat, Solicitor, Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, entered the UK lawfully as a student
with leave to enter expiring on 31 August 2008.

The Appellant made an in time application to vary his leave as a Tier (Post
Study Work) Migrant, but that application was refused on 16 January 2009
for dishonesty, by reference to paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules,
the Appellant having relied upon a Post Graduate Diploma in IT purportedly
issued to him by the Cambridge College of Learning ["CCOL"]. His appeal was
initially allowed by decision of Immigration Judge Flynn of 24 March 2009,
but that decision was set aside for error of law, and upon reconsideration
the appeal was dismissed by decision of Senior Immigration Judge Kekic of 8
December 2009. In so doing she noted that the Appellant relied upon
documents said to have been generated during his studies as course-work and
assignments, but they were unmarked, and did not bear his name. Further
that he had claimed to have been taught at the CCOL by the same Mr Malik,
who had denied in other litigation that the course the Appellant had
claimed to have successfully completed was never offered, or taught, by the
College. She concluded that he had never earned, or been awarded with, the
qualification that he claimed to have legitimately earned and been awarded
with [NA & Others (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKUT 11].
The exhaustion of the Appellant's appeal rights following this decision
only occurred on 23 April 2010 as a result of a delay in the service of the
decision to refuse him permission to appeal of 19 February 2010.

The Appellant made an application to the Respondent for the issue of a
Certificate of Approval for marriage to a British citizen, Ms R, on 21 June
2010, which was issued on 19 October 2010.

It is common ground before us that the Appellant had no leave to remain in
the UK between 23 April 2010, and 19 October 2011; he was then granted
discretionary leave to remain as a spouse for three years following his
marriage to Ms R. That leave expired on 19 October 2014.

Although the Appellant accepts that the marriage to Ms R had broken down
before the expiry of this leave on 19 October 2014, it is not clear to us
precisely when it failed, or, when it was formally terminated by divorce.
However we note that Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic recorded in her decision of
17 January 2017 that it had failed in 2011-2, although it was only
terminated by divorce in June 2014, and that the Appellant had initially
failed to disclose the failure of this relationship to the Respondent [ApB
p43 #1], when he applied on 17 October 2014 for a further grant of
discretionary leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

The 17 October 2014 application was refused on 26 January 2015. The appeal
against this refusal was dismissed by decision of First tier Tribunal Judge
Plumptre after a hearing held in the Appellant's absence. Despite a grant
of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal his appeal rights against
that decision were exhausted on 10 April 2017, following the dismissal of
his complaint by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic of 16 January 2017
[ApB p42], and the subsequent refusal of permission to appeal to the Court
of Appeal.

In the meantime the Appellant is recorded as having claimed to have enjoyed
a relationship with a further British citizen, Ms B, from 2011, but save
for the potential effect upon his relationship with Ms R, and the potential
for damage to his general credibility, nothing turns upon this. It was
accepted before us that this relationship never led to marriage, and was
itself ended some time ago. The Appellant denies having relied upon any
relationship with Ms B in making his 17 October 2014 application, although
that denial begs the question (which we do not seek to answer) of how the
Respondent knew of it, and felt obliged to deal with it, in the course of
his decision of 10 August 2018.

On 14 October 2016 the Appellant made an application for ILR on the basis
of his claim that he had accrued ten years continuous lawful residence in
the UK. At the time he was pursuing an appeal against the decision of 26
January 2015, which was itself made upon the application for DLR of 17
October 2014. He did not formally withdraw the application for DLR in order
to lodge the application for ILR, and he could not of course vary the
application for ILR because a decision had already been made by the
Respondent upon it; JH (Zimbabwe) [2009] EWCA Civ 78. It does not appear
from the papers before us that he sought to use the section 120 (one stop)
notice process in order to place a claim for ILR based upon paragraph 276B
before the Tribunal in the course of his appeal against the decision of 26
January 2015.

On 10 August 2018 the Respondent refused the application of 17 October
2014, and accepted that he was thereby refusing a human rights claim. This
prompted a further appeal, which was heard, and dismissed, by First tier
Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence in a decision of 4 April 2019. It is this
decision which is the focus of the current challenge. The Appellant's
application for permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Andrew on 14 June 2019. The Respondent has not replied to that grant
with a Rule 24 response, and neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
15(2A) to introduce further evidence.

The complaint

The Appellant advances two complaints; although distinct, they are each
founded in procedural unfairness. As indicated to the parties at the
hearing we are satisfied that each is made out, and that their individual,
and combined, effect, is that the Appellant did not receive a fair hearing
of his appeal because his case was not adequately engaged with, and
resolved.

As to the first. The Respondent's decision of 10 August 2018 stated in
clear terms that he accepted the 14 October 2016 application for ILR did
not fall for refusal by reference to the "suitability" requirements of S-
LTR of Appendix FM. However when the appeal was called on for hearing
before Judge Lawrence, the presenting officer indicated that he intended to
rely upon the decision of SIJ Kekic of 8 December 2009 to show that the
Appellant's dishonesty meant that he did not meet the requirements of
paragraph S-LTR either when he submitted his application, or, at the date
of the hearing. This was a matter that it was said should be weighed in the
Respondent's favour in the assessment of the proportionality of the
decision. Faced with this change in stance, which was a withdrawal of a
concession, of which he had been given no notice, the Appellant sought an
adjournment in order to; (i) place evidence before the Tribunal to show
that he had genuinely and innocently studied at the Cambridge College of
Learning, and that he was therefore the innocent victim of a fraud, and,
(ii) research the litigation over the Cambridge College of Learning,
subsequent to the decision in NA, the evidence relied upon, and the content
of the decisions that were made. (With hindsight it appears that this is a
reference to at least the reported decisions in Khan and Tabassum [2011]
UKUT 249, and TR (CCOL applications) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 33.) This
application was refused, apparently on the sole basis that the Appellant
could be taken to be familiar with the decisions that had been made against
him in the past [4]. The "ambush" point was not overtly addressed. We are
satisfied, and indeed we understand Mr Bramble ultimately to have agreed
that to withdraw a concession in this way was to all intents and purposes
an ambush of the Appellant, and, that the Judge's approach to that ambush
deprived the Appellant of a fair hearing.

The second complaint concerns the Judge's approach to the break in the
chain of continuous lawful residence between 23 April 2010 and 19 October
2011. It was the Appellant's case that "but for" the operation by the
Respondent of the unlawful scheme for the issue of approvals before
marriages could be undertaken, he would have married Ms R, and he would
then have been able to successfully apply for leave to remain as her
spouse, in late 2009. In that event, he argues, there would have been no
break in the chain of continuous lawful residence. He relies, with
hindsight, upon the guidance as to the relevant policy to be found in Masum
Ahmed [2019] EWCA Civ 1070

It is accepted before us that the details of the "but for" argument emerged
very late, and that its constituent parts could not be discerned from the
grounds of appeal. Indeed we are satisfied that in reality it only emerged
in the Appellant's witness statement dated 12 March 2019 filed at the
hearing.

The constituent assertions of primary fact that underpin this argument are
that he and Ms R had tried to marry in 2009, but they had been refused by a
Registrar because he had no immigration status, and they did not have the
Respondent's approval to do so [#14-20]. Because the application for leave
as a spouse that he did make in 2011, that was based upon his later
marriage to Ms R was successful, the Appellant's argument as framed by Mr
Farhat before us was that an application of this nature would similarly
have been successful if it had been made in 2009.

The constituent assertions of primary fact are uncorroborated by any
evidence from Ms R, the Registrar who is said to have refused to marry
them, or, the lawyers who were in 2009 retained by the Appellant to advise
him upon his ongoing immigration appeal (although one might have expected
the Appellant to have that available to him at least, if he had consulted
them upon his ability to marry Ms R). There was no application made to the
Respondent in 2009 for the discretionary issue of an approval for the
marriage he proposed to Ms R, although it is accepted before us by Mr
Farhat that it would have been open to the Appellant to make one. Nor is
there any corroboration of the Appellant's claim that he was advised by the
immigration lawyers that he then retained that there was no point in making
an application for the discretionary issue of an approval to the marriage
because it would fail.

Nor has there been any attempt to demonstrate through relevant evidence
that an application for leave to remain as the spouse of Ms R would have
been successful if he had been in a position to make such an application in
late 2009 - the Appellant simply relies on the proposition that since the
application he made two years later was successful, then an application
made in 2009 must have succeeded. That proposition strikes us as somewhat
speculative. As we indicated to Mr Farhat during the course of the hearing
the Appellant has yet to produce any evidence in the course of this appeal
to show that save for the inability to marry because of the lack of a
certificate of approval, he was otherwise in a position to make a
successful spouse application in late 2009, because Ms R was then in a
position to sponsor such an application successfully. This proposition may,
or may not, be capable of being discerned from the evidence that was
supplied in support of the 2011 application for leave to remain as a
spouse, but which was not served in support of this appeal. It is however
unnecessary for us to engage with the evidence relied upon in support of
these various assertions and proposition, that must be for another day.

Moreover, the Appellant's general credibility as a witness of fact will in
due course need to be viewed and assessed through the lens of (a) the
finding by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic in 2017 that he had not disclosed the
breakdown of his marriage to Ms R when making his 2014 application, and,
(b) since the concession over paragraph S-LTR is now withdrawn, whatever
findings will ultimately be made in relation to his case that he was an
innocent victim of a fraud concerning CCOL. As to the latter, the starting
point must be the decision of SIJ Kekic of 2009 that he had relied upon a
false document, and, the decision in NA that CCOL never offered the course
the Appellant claimed to have undertaken. We note the "innocent
explanation" relied upon by the Appellant, and the Appellant's application
to the Judge for an adjournment in order that he might file evidence in its
support. The assessment of the weight that can be given to the evidence he
relies upon must be for another day, and we say no more about it.

What is however clear to us, is that the Judge failed adequately to engage
with the evidence that was before him, and that was relied upon by the
Appellant in support of his argument that "but for" the Respondent's
unlawful scheme, he would have had no break in the chain of continuous
lawful residence.

It is accepted before us that if the Respondent made out his case in
relation to paragraph S-LTR then there would be an enhanced public interest
in removal. Even without that, if the Appellant failed to make out his case
on the "but for" argument, then it is accepted before us by Mr Farhat in
the light of Onwuje [2018] EWCA Civ 336 that a "private life" appeal based
essentially upon the commercial interests he claims to have established in
the UK would be likely to carry little weight against the prevailing public
interest. The issue of where the balance of proportionality may lie must
however be one that falls to be decided upon another day in the light of
all the relevant facts, and after a procedurally fair hearing. It is not
possible for us to make that assessment, not least because there is no
finding of fact one way or the other as to whether the Judge was satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant had become engaged to Ms
R in November 2009, that they had visited their local Registrar together,
that they had been refused a marriage, or, that he had been advised by his
then lawyer that there was no point his applying for a certificate of
approval because it would be refused. There is also no finding of fact to
record whether the Judge was satisfied, or not, that the second proposition
was made out.

We have noted Mr Bramble's argument that none of this is material because
the Appellant could not have varied his 2008 Tier 1 (PSW) application in
late 2009 to rely upon a marriage to Ms R, because a decision had already
been made upon it; JH (Zimbabwe). We also note his argument concerning the
operation of section 3C, that the effect of any withdrawal of the appeal
against the refusal of the 2008 application, would serve only to extend the
length of the break in the chain of continuous lawful residence. We also
note the decision in Masum Ahmed [2019] EWCA Civ 1070. These arguments may
have significant force, but we are satisfied that they must await
resolution for another day. This is a human rights appeal, and the Tribunal
must first make findings in relation to the relevant assertions of fact
relied upon by both parties in a procedurally fair hearing, and this has
not yet taken place. The Appellant has been on notice since the hearing
below that the Respondent does rely upon paragraph S-LTR of Appendix FM,
and that any concession otherwise is withdrawn. That position was confirmed
before us. Whilst it will be for him to choose how to engage with the
assertion that he was knowingly dishonest in his reliance upon a CCOL
diploma, findings must be made in relation as to whether the Respondent has
discharged the legal burden of proving his dishonesty.

Whilst we should not be taken to be giving any indication of the findings
of fact that may ultimately be made by the Tribunal, we are satisfied that
a fresh hearing is the only pragmatic course open, because it cannot be
said that the Appellant has yet had a fair hearing of his appeal. In
circumstances such as this, where it would appear that the relevant
evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the
effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First Tier
Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.
Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is such
that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

    To that end we remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence, at the Hatton Cross
    Hearing Centre.

    No interpreter is required.

    The Appellant is now aware that the Respondent has withdrawn any
    concession to this effect, and does assert that he dishonestly relied
    upon a CCOL Post Graduate Diploma in IT, and that as a result he does
    not meet, and has never met, paragraph S-LTR of Appendix FM. It is for
    him to decide what evidence to file in support of his assertion that he
    has an innocent explanation for his possession and use of that document
    but any further evidence that he seeks to rely upon in support of his
    appeal shall be filed and served by 5pm 24 August 2019.

    The remitted appeal may be listed on the first available date after 29
    August 2019.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

No direction was made in the First tier Tribunal, and none is  requested  of
us.


Signed                              Date 23 July 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes


