
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/17177/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2017                    |On 23 February 2018                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                 MISS S S L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Khalid, Counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the daughter of  a  Gurkha  who  has  died
    before exercising any right he may have had to enter the United Kingdom
    but his widow entered the United Kingdom with  leave.   Their  daughter
    now wishes to do so and relies on Article 8  of  the  Convention.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer refused entry and that decision was  upheld  by
    an Entry Clearance Manager.  An appeal was taken and dealt with by  the
    First-tier Tribunal at a hearing on 17 January 2017.  The determination
    was promulgated on 23 January.

2.   Unfortunately the determination is deficient in a number  of  respects.
    As far as the facts are concerned paragraphs 24 and  25  indicate  that
    the judge found that there was family life between  the  appellant  and
    her mother which engaged Article 8 of the Convention and  that  refusal
    of entry clearance likely constituted an interference with family  life
    that she enjoyed with her mother and the judge found the arguments  put
    forward in written submissions  as  well  to  be  credible  as  to  the
    substance of the relationship between her and her mother.  Paragraph 28
    is amongst other things to the effect that the  judge  could  not  find
    that the relationship went above and beyond the  normal  types  of  tie
    between adult children of 30 and parents in their 60s.  This is a major
    contradiction.

3.   In addition, in assessing the proportionality issue, the  judge  relied
    on what I might call Gurung Ghising.  He relied on the  failed  Ghising
    case which found that the historical wrong suffered by Gurkhas  carried
    substantially less weight than that perpetrated upon  British  overseas
    citizens.  As we all know that is now not thought to be  the  case  and
    indeed the law is that the historic wrong is  not  to  be  regarded  as
    carrying substantially less weight.  In fact the  case  of  Ghising  in
    [2013] has effectively overruled the position as stated in 2012 so  the
    wrong test was applied in any event by the judge.

4.   Another issue which occurs to us is that nowhere in  the  determination
    is there an indication that the appellant's father would have exercised
    any right to enter the United Kingdom.  That is a matter which  has  to
    be addressed.  In view of the number and the range of the  difficulties
    with this determination it seems to me it has not  been  determined  at
    all in any meaningful sense and the matter  will  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full  hearing  so  that  the  matter  can  be
    reconsidered before a different First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                      Date: 19 February 2018
