
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17407/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC,             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Parties attending remotely by Skype  |                                     |
|On 1st September 2020                |On 14 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               MD TAUKIR AHAD
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, Counsel instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

   1. The hearing before me on 1st September 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. The appellant was represented by
      counsel.  The respondent was represented by a Senior Presenting
      Officer.  Neither party objected to a remote hearing.  I sat at the
      Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were
      open to the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and I was
      addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would
      have been, if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was
      satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
      open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
      prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
      right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.   I
      was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in
      accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote
      hearing because of the present need to take precautions against the
      spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote
      hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a
      way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  His appeal against the
      respondent's decision of 11th October 2019 to refuse his application
      for leave to remain in the UK was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Hatton for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 11th
      March 2020.


   3. The appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraphs [3] to
      [13] of the decision. For present purposes, it is sufficient to record
      that the appellant arrived in the UK in March 2009 as a student. In
      July 2014, the appellant made an in-time application for further leave
      to remain as a student and that application was refused by the
      respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 22nd December 2014.
       The respondent claimed the appellant had submitted a TOEIC
      certificate from ETS in support of his previous application of 27th
      July 2012, which the respondent considered was fraudulently obtained
      by using a proxy test taker. The appellant issued a claim for judicial
      review challenging the decision of 22nd December 2014 but permission
      was refused, and the claim for judicial review was certified as being
      totally without merit by the Upper Tribunal in January 2016.


   4. The appellant then made two unsuccessful applications for an EEA
      Residence Card as the purported partner of an EEA national. Following
      refusal of those applications, in June 2017, the appellant made an
      application for leave to remain on private and family life grounds.
      That application was refused by the respondent on 11th October 2019
      giving rise to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


   5. The issues in the appeal are set out at paragraphs [14] to [16] of the
      decision of the FtT.  Judge Hatton considered whether the appellant
      meets the requirements for leave to remain on private life grounds set
      out in paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules. He noted the
      respondent's decision that the appellant fails to meet the suitability
      requirements for two reasons. First, the appellant fraudulently
      obtained a TOEIC certificate by way of deception, and second, the
      appellant was convicted on 19th August 2019 for three offences of
      handling stolen goods.


   6. At paragraphs [30] to [60], Judge Hatton addressed the allegation made
      by the respondent that the appellant obtained a TOEIC certificate by
      deception.  At paragraph [34] of his decision, Judge Hatton states:


         "As a starting point, I note that the Appellant's application for
         permission to apply for Judicial Review was refused and certified
         as being totally without merit by Upper Tribunal Judge ("UTJ")
         Storey three years ago, on 28 January 2016, for the following
         reasons ..."


   7. At paragraph [35], Judge Hatton stated:


         "Accordingly, I must establish whether there is sufficient
         evidential basis for departing from the clear and unequivocal
         findings of UTJ Storey in dismissing the Applicant's judicial
         review claim of 27 January 2015."


   8. At paragraphs [36] to [59] of his decision Judge Hatton considered the
      evidence relied upon by the parties.  At paragraph [44] he stated:


         "It is remarkable that the Appellant has not sought to adduce any
         documentary evidence in rebuttal of UTJ Storey's findings in
         respect of his human rights appeal before me, especially as three
         years have now passed since the dismissal of his Judicial Review
         application (on 28 January 2016)."


   9. Judge Hatton also noted, at [45] to [48], that the appellant's
      representatives had obtained the relevant voice recordings of the
      tests taken by the appellant at Queensway College on 18th July 2012,
      but had not sought to instruct an expert to analyse the voice
      recordings.  At paragraph [51], Judge Hatton said:


         "Accordingly, I have no option but to consider that the subjective
         and objective evidence against the appellant in respect of this
         matter is highly compelling for the following reasons:"


  10. At paragraphs [52] to [56] Judge Hatton sets out five reasons and at
      paragraphs [57] to [60], he stated:


         "57. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the respondent has discharged
         their evidential burden to provide prima facie evidence of
         dishonesty and the appellant has correspondingly failed to provide
         a satisfactory explanation for his ability to obtain such
         significantly higher test scores within such a short space of time.
         On the balance of probabilities, I therefore consider that the
         appellant utilised the services of a proxy tester for the purposes
         of facilitating the passing of TOEIC tests by way of deception.


         58.  In so finding, I note that by his own admission, the appellant
         left taking the mandatory TOEIC tests "to the last minute" and it
         was only in June 2012 that he properly applied his mind to it
         [witness statement, para. 16]. In view of the fact that the
         appellant's leave was scheduled to expire on 31 July 2012, I
         consider he was under considerable pressure to pass the requisite
         tests within such a timeframe, which spurred his ill-conceived
         attempt to cheat."


  11. At paragraphs [61] to [65] of his decision, Judge Hatton referred to
      the appellant's conviction of handling stolen goods at High Wycombe
      Magistrates Court on 19th August 2019, for which he received a fine.
      He found the appellant has provided conflicting explanations regarding
      the circumstances that led to his conviction.  At paragraphs [66] and
      [67], Judge Hatton concluded:


         "66. Further, I consider the appellant has demonstrated significant
         dishonesty, not only in relation to the circumstances by which he
         obtained TOEIC test certificates in 2012, but also regarding the
         circumstances in which he was convicted of handling stolen goods in
         2019.


         67.  With regard to all the above circumstances, I am satisfied
         there is sufficient justification for refusing the appellant's
         application for leave to remain in view of his failure to meet the
         suitability requirements under Section S-LTR of Appendix FM of the
         immigration rules."


  12. Having found that the appellant cannot meets the requirements of the
      immigration rules, Judge Hatton addressed the Article 8 claim outside
      the rules and concluded the appellant has failed to establish a
      private life within the meaning of Article 8.  Judge Hatton also
      concluded that the relationship that the appellant claims to have with
      his uncle, Mr Rahman, is insufficient to constitute a family life
      within the meaning of Article 8.   In any event, Judge Hatton went on
      to address the private and family life claims made by the appellant,
      and concluded that the refusal of leave to remain would not constitute
      a disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights.




The appeal before me


  13. The appellant advances six grounds of appeal set out in the
      appellant's grounds for permission to appeal settled by counsel and
      dated 24th March 2020. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Scott Baker on 11th May 2020.  At the outset of the
      hearing before me, Mr Youssefian confirmed the appellant no longer
      relies upon the third ground. That is, the claim that the decision of
      Judge Hatton is vitiated by procedural unfairness. I address each of
      the remaining grounds in turn.


  14. I take the first and second grounds together.  The first ground of
      appeal is that Judge Hatton erred in treating the decision of Upper
      Tribunal Judge Storey when permission to claim judicial review was
      refused, as the "starting point".  The second ground is that Judge
      Hatton erred in his assessment of the evidence and his approach to the
      test of deception.  Mr Youssefian submits that at the time of the
      decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Storey, the relevant legal landscape
      was very different and has since developed.  More fundamentally, in
      the claim for Judicial Review, Upper Tribunal Judge Storey was only
      concerned with the question whether the respondent's decision of 22nd
      December 2014 could be impugned on public law grounds.  Upper Tribunal
      Judge Storey did not make his own assessment of the evidence.  Mr
      Youssefian submits the first error is at paragraph [35], where Judge
      Hatton considers whether there is sufficient to depart from the
      findings of Upper Tribunal Judge Storey.  The language used is the
      language of the 'Devalseelan' guidance.  The adverse observations made
      by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey when he certified the claim for
      judicial review as totally without merit, appear to have been adopted
      by Judge Hatton as the starting point for his decision.   Mr
      Youssefian accepts Judge Hatton then appears to go through the
      evidence before the Tribunal in the paragraphs that follow, but
      submits the defect is not cured because of the erroneous premise upon
      which the judge started.


  15. Mr Clarke accepts that the matters considered by a judge in a claim
      for judicial review are intrinsically different to the matters to be
      considered by a Judge in a statutory appeal. He accepts that Judge
      Hatton erred in saying that he must establish whether there is
      sufficient evidential basis for departing from the clear and
      unequivocal findings of UTJ Storey, but, he submits, that is
      immaterial because in the paragraphs that follow, Judge Hatton
      properly considered the evidence before the Tribunal and reached a
      decision for himself as to whether the appellant utilised the services
      of a proxy test taker.


  16. I have no hesitation in concluding Judge Hatton erred in his self-
      direction that he must establish whether there is sufficient
      evidential basis to depart from the findings of Upper Tribunal Judge
      Storey.  The decision of Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to claim
      judicial review of the respondent's prior decision of 22nd December
      2014 was not the starting point. No findings were made by Upper
      Tribunal Judge Storey.  When considering the application for
      permission to claim judicial review of the respondent's decision of
      22nd December 2014, the Upper Tribunal Judge did not reach a decision
      for himself as to whether the appellant had utilised the services of a
      proxy test taker, but was concerned with the altogether different
      question of whether it was open to the respondent to conclude that the
      appellant had submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS in support of his
      previous application, which the respondent considered, was
      fraudulently obtained by using a proxy test taker.  However, I must
      consider whether that error is material to the outcome of the appeal.
      At paragraphs [36] to [60] of his decision, Judge Hatton considered
      for himself the evidence relied upon by the respondent, the evidence
      set out in the witness statement of the appellant and his oral
      evidence before the FtT.   It is the way in which the judge analysed
      the evidence and the test that he adopted, that forms the second
      ground of appeal.


  17. In the second ground of appeal the appellant claims that at paragraph
      [57] of his decision, Judge Hatton appears to proceed upon the premise
      that the respondent has discharged the evidential burden to provide
      prima facie evidence of dishonesty, but then appears to have shifted
      the burden of proof to the appellant to give an innocent explanation.
      The appellant claims Judge Hatton was wrong in law to find that the
      respondent had discharged the burden upon her, because the appellant
      did not provide an innocent explanation.


  18. Mr Youssefian submits it is trite to say the respondent has the burden
      of proof.  He accepts that it was open to Judge Hatton to find, at
      [57], that he was satisfied that the respondent has discharged the
      evidential burden to provide prima facie evidence of dishonesty.  He
      submits the judge then fell into error when he went on to say "... and
      the appellant has correspondingly failed to provide a satisfactory
      explanation for his ability to obtain such significantly higher test
      scores within such a short space of time...".  Mr Youssefian submits
      Judge Hatton appears to proceed upon the understanding that the burden
      of proof had shifted to the appellant.  He refers to paragraph [57] of
      the judgment in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC)
      in which the Upper Tribunal confirmed that the respondent is making
      the positive case that the student concerned dishonestly obtained the
      English language qualification by the use of a proxy test taker, and,
      at the end of the day, the SSHD bears the burden of proof and that,
      doctrinally, a legal burden of proof does not "shift".  Mr Youssefian
      submits Judge Hatton should have considered the innocent explanation
      given by the appellant that satisfied the requirement of a minimum
      level of plausibility. The burden remained on the respondent to
      establish that in all the circumstances, the appellant dishonestly
      obtained the English language qualification by the use of a proxy test
      taker.


  19. Mr Clarke submits that having been satisfied that the respondent had
      discharged the evidential burden to provide prima facie evidence of
      dishonesty, the spotlight switched to the appellant, to raise an
      innocent explanation, namely an account which satisfies the minimum
      level of plausibility.  Here, Judge Hatton found, at [57], that the
      appellant had failed to provide a satisfactory explanation for his
      ability to obtain such significantly higher test scores within such a
      short space of time.  Mr Clarke submits that at paragraphs [36] to
      [50] of his decision, the judge refers to the evidence specific to the
      appellant and the tests he claimed to have taken that was before the
      Tribunal.  At paragraphs [51] to [58], there is a summary by Judge
      Hatton explaining why he found the respondent had discharged the
      evidential burden upon her and why found the appellant had not
      discharged the evidential burden of raising an innocent explanation.


  20. I reject the claim that Judge Hatton erroneously proceeds upon the
      basis that the burden of proof had shifted to the appellant.  As set
      out in SM and Qadir, in certain contexts the evidential pendulum
      swings three times and in three different directions.  The 'evidential
      burden' is not to be conflated with the legal burden of proving that
      the TOEIC certificate had been procured by dishonesty.  It is common
      ground that the legal burden of proving dishonesty rests upon the
      respondent throughout.


  21. Judge Hatton found the respondent's evidence, much of which was
      specific to the appellant and the tests he claimed to have taken,
      sufficed to discharge the evidential burden of proving that the TOEIC
      certificates had been procured by dishonesty.  The spotlight thereby
      switched to the appellant. There was an evidential burden on him, of
      raising an innocent explanation. Here, Judge Hatton found the
      appellant had not discharged the evidential burden on him to raise an
      innocent explanation, namely an account which satisfies the minimum
      level of plausibility.  At paragraph [57] of his decision Judge Hatton
      was in my judgment addressing the evidential burden upon the
      appellant.  The legal burden rested on the respondent throughout to
      establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the appellant's prima
      facie innocent explanation is to be rejected, but as Judge Hatton was
      not satisfied that the appellant had provided a satisfactory
      explanation (i.e. an account which satisfies the minimum level of
      plausibility) it follows that the question whether the respondent has
      established that the innocent explanation is to be rejected, did not
      arise. There was no further transfer of the evidential burden to the
      respondent; SM & Qadir, at [57] and MA, at [59].  If any further
      reasons were required for the conclusion that the respondent has
      discharged the legal burden of proof that rests on the respondent,
      they are set out at paragraphs [58] and [59] of the decision.
      Although there is no reference to the decision of the Upper Tribunal
      in SM and Qadir, I am quite satisfied that Judge Hatton considered the
      evidence of the respondent and the appellant adopting 'the evidential
      pendulum' and it was open to him to conclude, on the balance of
      probabilities, that the appellant utilise the services of a proxy
      tester, for the reasons set out in the decision.


  22. As I have already said, the third ground of appeal is no longer relied
      upon.  The fourth ground of appeal is that Judge Hatton failed to take
      into account material evidence, and had regard to matters that are
      immaterial.  The appellant claims the criticism made by Judge Hatton
      regarding the failure to adduce evidence regarding the voice
      recordings is unwarranted when the appellant had accepted that the
      voice in the recording he had obtained was not his, and thus there was
      nothing to gain by analysis of the voice recording by an expert.
      Furthermore, in support of the appeal the appellant relied upon three
      separate independent reports from the National Audit Office, the All
      Parliamentary Party Group and the House of Commons Committee of Public
      Accounts, 'English language tests for overseas students', that were
      critical of the respondent's evidence and its reliability.  The
      appellant submits there is no reference at all to any of those reports
      and Judge Hatton failed to engage with the evidence relied upon by the
      appellant.


  23. Mr Youssefian submits that in the appellant's skeleton argument, Judge
      Hatton had been referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MA
      (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450, in which the Upper Tribunal
      referred to expert evidence that highlights that there are enduring
      unanswered questions and uncertainties relating in particular to
      systems, processes and procedures concerning the TOEIC testing, the
      subsequent allocation of scores and the later conduct and activities
      of ETS.  In MA, the respondent had relied upon a greater volume of
      evidence that was both general and specific that had contributed
      significantly to the presentation of a more focused and considerably
      more substantial case against the appellant.  Mr Youssefian submits
      that here, there was no truly specific evidence relating to the
      appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.  Furthermore, the appellant
      had also sought to establish that the evidence relied upon by the
      respondent was not reliable by reference to the independent reports
      that the judge fails to engage with at all.  Mr Youssefian submits the
      reports cast doubt on the reliability of the methods adopted by ETS
      and where the legal burden rested with the respondent, the Judge
      should have considered that evidence, which was capable of undermining
      the core evidence relied upon by the respondent.  He submits Judge
      Hatton fails to engage with any of the reports that were relied upon
      by the appellant and which raised serious concerns regarding the
      reliability of the ETS evidence relied upon by the respondent.  Mr
      Youssefian referred to the evidence relied upon by the respondent
      relating the tests completed at Queensway College on 20th June 2012
      and 18th July 2012.  He drew attention to entries that demonstrate
      that on both 20th June 2012 and 18th July 2012, individuals achieved
      low scores for 'speaking', but nevertheless, it was determined that
      the test was 'invalid'.  He submits it is unlikely that an individual
      that engages in deception by the use of a proxy test taker, would
      achieve such low scores and that undermines the reliability of the
      process and procedure adopted when considering whether a test score is
      invalid.  Mr Youssefian submits Judge Hatton referred to the criminal
      investigation against Queensway College (i.e. Project Fa�ade) but that
      is not even handed objective material.  He submits that all these
      matters taken together materially affected the outcome of the appeal.


  24. Mr Clarkes quite properly acknowledges there is no reference in the
      decision of Judge Hatton to the reports that were relied upon by the
      appellant.  He submits the reports are not independent reports that
      undermine the evidence that the Court of Appeal and the Upper Tribunal
      has accepted, is sufficient to discharge the evidential burden that
      initially rests upon the respondent.  He submits the reports are not
      specific to the appellant, and it was open to the Judge to reach his
      decision based upon the evidence that was specific to the appellant.


  25. Although Judge Hatton makes no reference to the reports that were
      relied upon by the appellant, the evidence relied upon by Judge Hatton
      and referred to in his decision, is more specific to the appellant
      than the All Party Parliamentary Group report which addresses the ETS
      system more generally and widely, and expresses criticisms of the ETS
      evidence so that it is impossible to take decisions based on that
      evidence alone.  Judge Hatton had set out the evidence that was
      specific to the appellant and the two dates upon which he took tests
      at Queensway College at paragraphs [37] to [43] of his decision.  At
      paragraph [40], Judge Hatton referred to the increase in the test
      scores achieved by the appellant for speaking and writing between 20th
      June 2012 and 18th July 2012.  At paragraph [41], Judge Hatton said it
      is remarkable that the appellant was able to make such a significant
      leap in attainment from 20th June 2012 to 18th July 2012.  He noted,
      at [42], that the appellant's witness statement provides no reason or
      explanation for his ability to obtain much higher results within such
      a short space of time, and at [43], he said:


         "During his oral evidence, the appellant claimed that after taking
         the 20 June 2012 tests, he undertook additional preparation through
         book learning and following online guidance via the Internet and
         YouTube. Further, friends and teachers in his college helped him
         improve his spoken English. I note that the appellant has not
         sought to adduce any evidence from the individuals who purportedly
         assisted him in this process."


  26. At paragraph [49], Judge Hatton referred to the ongoing criminal
      investigation against Queensway College which indicated that between
      20th March 2012 and 5th February 2014, of the 2793 TOEIC speaking and
      writing tests, 70% were identified as invalid and the remaining were
      identified as being questionable.  Judge Hatton noted that
      significantly, there were no tests during that period that were
      released as valid.  To put that in context, Judge Hatton referred, at
      paragraph [50] to the evidence in relation to Bloomsbury and
      Westminster public test centres, in which just 0.28% of the speaking
      and writing tests were said to be invalid.


  27. In reaching his decision Judge Hatton considered the subjective and
      objective evidence against the appellant to be highly compelling for
      the five reasons set out at paragraphs [52] to [56] of his decision;


         "52. First, the objective evidence strongly indicates there was
         widespread cheating occurring at Queensway College during the
         period in which the appellant purportedly took his tests.


         53.  Second, the objective evidence confirms there were exceedingly
         high levels of cheating on both dates which the appellant
         purportedly took his tests, especially on the second date i.e. 18
         July 2012.


         54.  Third, the objective evidence also confirms there was a very
         significant increase in respect of the Appellant's test results
         from 20 June 2012 to 18 July 2012.


         55.  Fourth, the appellant did not provide any reason or
         explanation for his ability to obtain such significantly higher
         scores during such a short space of time until the date of his
         appeal hearing. Further, I consider the belated explanation
         provided for the first time during his hearing to be unconvincing,
         especially as it was not supported by any documentary evidence [see
         above].


         56.  Fifth, in spite of having had ample opportunity to obtain his
         own documentary and/or expert evidence in an attempt to rebut the
         respondent's findings, the appellant has refrained from doing so,
         without reason or explanation."


  28. The respondent's case against the appellant relates to the tests
      undertaken on 18th July 2012, but the evidence concerning the scores
      relating to the first test, were plainly relevant.  Judge Hatton made
      an overall assessment of the evidence relevant to the appellant rather
      than simply referring to, and relying upon the generic evidence of the
      respondent.  Judge Hatton considered the subjective and objective
      evidence, relying in particular upon the subjective evidence
      concerning the tests said to be completed by the appellant, in the
      round, and reached conclusions which were open to him on the evidence
      and with adequate reasons being given for those findings.  At a
      general level, Judge Hatton referred to the clear evidence of cheating
      at Queensway College, where the appellant claims to have been
      examined.  Subjectively, Judge Hatton had regard to the clear evidence
      regarding the significant increase in the test scores achieved on 18th
      July 2012 and rejected the appellant's account of events.  The general
      and more widespread concerns referred to in the reports that were
      relied upon by the appellant do not undermine the intrinsically fact
      specific assessment made by Judge Hatton.  It had been open to the
      appellant to obtain evidence specific to him to undermine the matters
      relied upon by the respondent, but as Judge Hatton said, the appellant
      did not do so.  For example, the respondent had expressly referred to
      the increase in the appellant's test scores and it was open to the
      appellant to adduce evidence to support his claims, but he did not do
      so.


  29. The fifth ground of appeal is that Judge Hatton failed to make a
      finding as to whether the appellant's conviction for handling stolen
      goods, in and of itself, meant that he fell foul of the suitability
      requirement in the immigration rules.  In light of my conclusions
      regarding the other grounds of appeal that I have already considered,
      it is sufficient for me to say that it was plainly open to Judge
      Hatton to conclude at paragraphs [66] and [67] as follows:


         "66. Further, I consider that the appellant has demonstrated
         significant dishonesty, not only in relation to the circumstances
         by which he obtained TOEIC test certificates in 2012, but also
         regarding the circumstances in which he was convicted of handling
         stolen goods in 2019.


         67.  With regard to all the above circumstances, I am satisfied
         there is sufficient justification for refusing the appellant's
         application for leave to remain in view of his failure to meet the
         suitability requirements under Section S-LTR of Appendix FM of the
         Immigration Rules"


  30.  Finally, the appellant claims that the errors of law relied upon,
      infected the First-tier Tribunal's overall assessment of the Article 8
      claim.  For the reasons I have already set out, I reject the claim
      that there was a material error of law in the analysis of the evidence
      or the test applied by Judge Hatton in reaching his conclusion that
      the suitability requirement set out in Appendix FM of the immigration
      rules is not met by the appellant.


  31. The assessment of an Article 8 claim and the consideration of whether
      removal is proportionate, is always a highly fact sensitive task.
      Having found the immigration rules cannot be met, Judge Hatton
      considered the Article 8 claim outside the immigration rules at
      paragraphs [68] to [99] of his decision.  In the end, upon my reading
      of the determination as a whole, it is quite clear that the
      conclusions of Judge Hatton as to the Article 8 appeal, were supported
      by reasons open to the judge on the evidence before the Tribunal, and
      the findings made. The findings and conclusions reached by Judge
      Hatton were neither irrational nor unreasonable in
      the Wednesbury sense, or findings and conclusions that were wholly
      unsupported by the evidence.


  32. In my judgement there is no material error of law in the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Hatton and it follows that I dismiss the
      appeal.


Notice of Decision


  33. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of FtT Judge Hatton
      promulgated on 11th March 2020 stands.


Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         5th October 2020

      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




