
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/17976/2016
                                                               HU/17978/2016
                                                               HU/17981/2016
                                                               HU/17996/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre                     Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
|On 22 May 2018                              |On 22 November 2018                 |
|                                            |                                    |
|                                            |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                    KTMM
                                     SM
                                     KM
                                     YM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr B. Chimpango, Crown & Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


              DETERMINATION AND REASONS IN RESPECT OF KM AND YM
      'ERROR OF LAW' DECISION AND DIRECTIONS IN RESPECT OF KTMM AND SM


 1. The Appellants are all nationals of Malawi.  They  are  respectively  a
    mother, father and their two adult sons. They appeal with permission[1]
    against the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Bannerman)  to
    dismiss their linked human rights appeals.




    Anonymity Order

 2. The appeal turns in part on medical evidence relating to the first  and
    second Appellants. Having  had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate
    to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify any of the Appellants or  any
        member of their family.  This direction applies to, amongst others,
        both the Appellants and the Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with
        this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Decisions of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The First Appellant was born in Malawi in 1986. She came to the  UK  in
    December 2002 in possession of a valid  student  visa.  She  thereafter
    varied that leave so as to extend it, but it is common ground that  she
    has been without leave to remain in the UK since 30th November 2003.


 4. The Second Appellant was born in Malawi in 1974.  He  arrived  in  this
    country in July 2004 with leave to enter as a visitor.   He  overstayed
    that visa and has had no basis to remain in this country since then.

 5. The Third Appellant was born in Malawi on the 29th September  1993.  He
    arrived in the UK on the 7th December 2005  and  has  lived  here  ever
    since, having overstayed the visit visa that was granted on arrival.

 6. The Fourth Appellant was born in Malawi on the  14th  March  1995.   He
    arrived with his brother in December 2005 and was also given  leave  to
    enter as a visitor which he subsequently overstayed.

 7. The applications that led to the Respondent's decisions  to  refuse  to
    grant leave to remain on human rights grounds were, as  far  as  I  can
    tell, made on the 23rd June 2016. The basis  of  those  claims  can  be
    summarised as follows. The two sons of this family had  lived  in  this
    country for a good part of their lives. They had grown up here,  become
    accustomed to life in the UK and  had  established  meaningful  private
    lives. They submitted that it would be a disproportionate  interference
    with their Article 8 rights to remove them at this point.  The  parents
    in the family averred that they too have each established private lives
    and that they would like to remain here with their  sons.  Their  cases
    had the additional dimension that they have both  been  diagnosed  with
    HIV and they fear that they  would  not  be  able  to  access  adequate
    treatment for their condition should they be returned to  Malawi.  They
    are both receiving anti-retroviral therapy here.

 8. The Respondent refused each of the four applications.  The letters  are
    all dated the 7th July 2016. The broad thrust of those refusals is that
    the family can be expected to re-establish themselves in Malawi without
    undue difficulty. They all speak Chichewa, a language widely spoken  in
    Malawi and are familiar with the culture and  norms  of  that  country.
    None of the individual applicants  could  meet  any  of  the  competing
    requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Rules  nor  bring  him  or
    herself within the ambit of Article 8 'outside of the rules'. Nor could
    any of the applicants have recourse to Appendix FM,  since  the  family
    life they share is with each other. In respect of the parents'  medical
    condition  the  Respondent  took  the  view  that  treatment  would  be
    available in Malawi.


 9. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed all four appeals and  each  Appellant
    has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal.   It  is
    convenient that I deal with each appeal in turn.

10. I would preface my findings by saying  this.  Although  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did produce four separate decisions they are largely the same.
     The bulk of the evidence summary, and reasoning, appears to relate  to
    the First Appellant, but it segues mid-paragraph into consideration  of
    the evidence relating to her sons or husband  -  which  it  is,  it  is
    sometimes hard to tell. Testimony is introduced without  identification
    of the witness. Many of the paragraphs make no sense  at  all.  Overall
    these determinations give the unfortunate  impression  of  having  been
    drafted in haste and having been promulgated without being  proof-read.
    Given the gravity of its consequences for the Appellants  this  is,  to
    say the least, regrettable.


11. That said, the drafting and grammar are not matters directly raised  in
    the appeal before me.  Rather the appeal is pursued on the grounds that
    the  Tribunal  misdirected  itself  in  law   and   misunderstood,   or
    misapplied, the evidence before it.



    Discussion and Findings

    The Fourth Appellant

12. As I  mention  above,  most  of  the  determination  relating  to  this
    appellant is taken up with evidence and findings about his mother.   At
    paragraph  56  of  the  decision  the  representative's  submission  is
    recorded as being that the "tribunal could issue the  discretion  which
    the Secretary of State should have used to grant the application as  it
    say against the rule 267ADE(v)" (sic). I take this to be a reference to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v). The determination does not return  to  consider
    that submission and the  appeal  is  dismissed  on  Article  8  grounds
    without any substantive reasoning.


13. The grounds assert that the "gist" of the grounds  of  appeal  as  they
    related to the Fourth Appellant was indeed that by the  time  that  the
    appeal was heard, he met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1)(v) of
    the Immigration Rules.  That provides that leave  to  remain  shall  be
    granted where the applicant:
          (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment);
14. The Fourth Appellant was born on the 14th March 1995. He arrived in the
    UK on the 7th December 2005. That means that he had spent 10  years,  8
    months and twenty-three days of his life at that point outside  of  the
    UK. The First-tier Tribunal decision was promulgated on  the  25th  May
    2017, at which point the Fourth Appellant had spent eleven years,  five
    months and 17 days of his life in the UK. On the day that the  decision
    was made he was 22 years old.  On that date he  prima  facie  qualified
    for leave to remain with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).

15. I am  satisfied  that  the  failure  to  address  this  matter  in  the
    determination was an error of law that  was  plainly  material  to  the
    outcome of the Fourth Appellant's appeal.  No  suitability  issues  had
    been raised in his case. There  is  no  discretion  built  in  to  sub-
    paragraph (v) of the Rule. Either the Appellant has lived here for more
    than half of his life or he hasn't.    As for the point that he had not
    so qualified at the date of application  that  is  somewhat  moot.  The
    qualification under the Rules was, absent any  countervailing  factors,
    determinative of the Article 8 appeal in that the Respondent could  not
    possibly show the decision to be proportionate. If there was any  doubt
    about whether the changed circumstances between application and  appeal
    could be taken into account in the context of the rules the answer  was
    to be found in paragraph 276AO:

         276A0. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement to
         make a valid application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is
         raised:
         (i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further submission
         in person after an asylum claim has been refused;
         (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention. A migrant in
         immigration detention or their representative must submit any
         application or claim raising Article 8 to a prison officer, a
         prisoner custody officer, a detainee custody officer or a member of
         Home Office staff at the migrant's place of detention; or
         (iii) in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary of
         State where applicable).
16. For the sake of completeness I find that the 'consent of the  Secretary
    of State', an allusion to s85(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, was not applicable in this case. That would only arise
    if the Article 8 claim raised was based on a new matter. The fact  that
    the Appellant had been here a bit longer was simply  a  development  of
    existing facts and as such as not a 'new matter'.


17. I therefore set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, insofar as  it
    relates to the Fourth Appellant, aside. I remake the  decision  in  his
    appeal by allowing it on human rights grounds.

    The Third Appellant


18. The grounds as they relate to the Third Appellant are that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to take make reasoned findings on  his  case.   Mr
    Chimpango submitted that the Third Appellant had given  extensive  oral
    evidence about the extent to which he is now part of  British  society,
    and how  his  links  to  Malawi  have  correspondingly  diminished.  Mr
    Chimpango assured me that this evidence had been "pretty moving stuff".
     His submission was that in its consideration of Article 8 the Tribunal
    had failed to make clear findings on either Article 8 'outside  of  the
    rules' or on the  only  sub-paragraph  of  276ADE(1)  that  might  have
    conceivably  applied  to  the  Third  Appellant  at  the  date  of  the
    application or appeal, sub-section (vi):


         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.


19. Whilst Mr Bates accepted that the drafting of  the  determination  left
    something to be desired he did point out that there does appear  to  be
    some text therein that relates to the Fourth Appellant.   At  paragraph
    68 the determination reads (in the context  of  the  First  Appellant's
    case) that "her sons are now grown men who are able to effectively fend
    for themselves". At paragraph  74  the  Tribunal  records  that  it  is
    "unconvinced" (itself an unhelpful phrase given the standard of  proof)
    that neither brother can speak "the Malawi language".   The  conclusion
    is reached in the same paragraph that the Fourth Appellant is  a  young
    and able man who has succeeded in his education and school  in  the  UK
    and is "clearly resourceful enough  to  make  progress  and  settle  in
    Malawi with family there and sporting interests with which to make  new
    friends".


20. I have considered whether the scant references to the Fourth  Appellant
    - approximately seven lines in total in his  own  determination  -  are
    sufficient to withstand the challenge made in this appeal.  Although  I
    have been unable to find any record in the file of the "pretty  moving"
    oral evidence that he is said to have given, I have been able  to  read
    the Fourth Appellant's witness statement. Having done so I am satisfied
    that the decision must be set aside for a lack  of  reasoned  findings.
    The Fourth Appellant has lived in this country since he  was  12  years
    old. In those circumstances it was not fanciful for him to assert  that
    there would be a substantial interference with his private life in  the
    UK should he be refused further leave to remain here. It may  not  have
    been a case that would inevitably succeed, but he was entitled to  have
    his evidence at least considered; if his case was  to  be  rejected  an
    explanation should have been given as to why.


21. I need not consider whether any of the Fourth  Appellant's  submissions
    on 276ADE(1)(vi) or Article 8 would ultimately have succeeded, since at
    the date of my decision the Third Appellant  now  qualifies,  like  his
    brother, for leave to remain pursuant to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v).  The
    Third Appellant was born on the 29th September 2013  and  by  the  date
    that he arrived here on the 7th December 2005 he had spent 12 years,  2
    months and 8 days outside of the UK. As of todays date he has been here
    for 12 years, 5  months  and  14  days.  He  does  not  turn  25  until
    September. No 'suitability' concerns have been raised. I  am  satisfied
    that at the date of the appeal before me the Third Appellant  therefore
    qualifies for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v)  the  Rules.
    As in the case of his brother (above) this  determines  the  Article  8
    appeal in his favour, since the Respondent cannot show the decision  to
    refuse leave to be proportionate.

    The First and Second Appellants

22. The case for the parents in  these  linked  family  appeals  was  based
    squarely on Article 8.  That much  is  apparent  from  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and the summary of the cases in their
    respective determinations.


23. It follows that I need not deal in  any  detail  with  the  grounds  of
    appeal advanced to this Tribunal in respect of Article 3, but  for  the
    sake of completeness I find them to be without merit. Complaint is made
    that the Tribunal did not take the approach suggested by Paposhvilli  v
    Belgium (Appl no 41738/10). In fact the Tribunal did direct  itself  to
    that Strasbourg case but found on the facts that even on that  modified
    approach to Article 3 the test was not met.   It is  further  suggested
    that the Tribunal erred in failing to apply  the  ratio  of  JA  (Ivory
    Coast) & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 1353, which apparently says that where applicants have been  living
    in the UK lawfully when they receive their diagnosis  and  start  anti-
    retroviral therapy "they are supposed to be allowed to remain in the UK
    so that  they  can  continue  with  treatment".    That  submission  is
    baseless. First, that is not what JA (Ivory Coast) says. Second, on the
    papers before me it is unclear whether either  Appellant  was  in  fact
    living in this country lawfully when the UK assumed responsibility  for
    their treatment

24. I am nevertheless satisfied that in all the circumstances the decisions
    relating to both of these  Appellants  must  be  set  aside.    Neither
    determination has followed the appropriate  structure,  ie  examination
    first of the rule (in this case  276ADE(1)(vi))  and  then  Article  8.
    There rather appears to have been a conflation  of  the  two  with  the
    tests under Article  3.    I  am  in  particular  concerned  that  this
    structural defect has led to a  failure  to  consider  the  Appellants'
    respective  medical  conditions  in  the  context  of  the  test  'very
    significant obstacles'  to  their  integration.  The  fact  that  anti-
    retrovirals are available in Malawi is not a complete answer to whether
    these  particular  individuals  would  be  able  to  access  medication
    suitable for their needs, whilst  managing  to  reintegrate  themselves
    into Malawian society.  That question required a holistic evaluation of
    where they might live, how they might survive economically and so on.

25. Further it does not appear to be in issue that the four members of this
    family continue to live together, and that although  the  sons  of  the
    family are now adults they  retain  a  close  relationship  with  their
    parents.   Given the errors in approach to the appeals of the sons,  it
    is at least arguable that the outcome in  the  parents'  appeals  would
    have been different but for those errors.

26. I therefore set the decisions  in  respect  of  the  First  and  Second
    Appellants aside to be remade.


    Decisions


27. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contain  errors  of  law  such
    that they much each be set aside.


28. The decisions in the appeals of the THIRD  and  FOURTH  Appellants  are
    remade as follows: the appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

29. I will remake  the  decisions  in  respect  of  the  FIRST  and  SECOND
    Appellants following a further hearing, to be resumed before  me  at  a
    date to be notified. This has  been  necessitated  by  there  being  no
    record of proceedings in the file and so  I  am  unable  to  take  into
    account the evidence  that  was  given  at  the  first  instance.   The
    Appellants have leave to submit any further documentary  evidence  that
    they wish to rely upon but any such evidence must be served  and  filed
    no later than four days prior to the further hearing.

30. There is a direction for anonymity.

                                       [pic]
                                                   Upper Tribunal Judge
Bruce
                                               24th May 2018


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Robertson on the 12th
December 2017



