
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17377/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 9 April 2021                    |On : 20 April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            roshan mohanan pillai
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Heybroek, instructed by Carmelite Law Practice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Mr  Pillai's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  his  human
      rights claim.

   3. For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereinafter  refer  to  the
      Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr Pillai as  the  appellant,
      reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   4. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 20 April 1988. He entered
      the UK on 12 January 2011 as a Tier 4 student, with leave valid  until
      29 February 2012. An application for further leave as a Tier 4 student
      was refused but the appellant was subsequently granted leave to remain
      under the Armed Forces provisions on 27 February 2013, until 27 August
      2013. An application for further leave on that basis was refused on 22
      January 2014 and an appeal against that decision was finally dismissed
      on 1 May 2015. On 29 July 2015 the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
      remain on family/  private  life  grounds,  but  his  application  was
      refused on 27 January 2016.

   5. On 29 June 2019 the appellant made a human rights claim on  the  basis
      of his family life with his wife-to-be, a national of  Sri  Lanka  who
      had been granted refugee status in the UK, whom he later married on  5
      August 2019. In his application it was stated that his application for
      further leave under the Armed Forces provisions had been refused owing
      to a change in the immigration rules  on  11  July  2013  requiring  a
      person to have lived in the UK for at least five years  before  formal
      recruitment. It was also stated that the appellant met his wife at the
      end of 2014 and started living with her from the middle of  2015.  His
      wife had been in the UK with leave as the spouse of a refugee, but had
      separated from  her  ex-husband  in  June  2014  due  to  his  violent
      behaviour and had divorced him on 27 August 2015, following which  she
      had been granted refugee status in her own right in November 2018.  It
      was stated that the appellant could not return to India because of his
      wife's health issues as she suffered from depression,  she  had  never
      been to India and she was employed in the UK.

   6. The appellant's application was refused  on  8  October  2019  on  the
      grounds that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
      continuing in India and that the requirements of Appendix FM could not
      therefore be met, that the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)  could
      not be met and that there were no  exceptional  circumstances  outside
      the immigration rules.

   7. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor on 17 February 2020. The appellant
      and his wife gave oral evidence before the judge. The judge found that
      there were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in India
      owing to the sponsor's mental health issues  which  had  arisen  as  a
      result of the events she had experienced in Sri Lanka and  the  trauma
      of being involved in an abusive marriage.  The judge  found  that  the
      sponsor's mental health had stabilised as a result  of  the  treatment
      she had received from the Ayurvedic Clinic  and  the  support  of  the
      appellant and her friends. The judge  considered  that  requiring  the
      appellant to leave the UK could have a profound effect on the  sponsor
      which may result in the deterioration of her health and the  need  for
      additional  treatment.  Accordingly  the  judge  concluded  that   the
      requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM were met and  the  claim
      succeeded under the immigration rules. In any event  the  judge  found
      that the appellant would be very likely to be granted entry  clearance
      to the UK if he returned to India to make an application and, applying
      the test in Chikwamba v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2008] UKHL 40, he considered that it was not in the  public  interest
      to separate the appellant and the sponsor for a number  of  months  in
      order for him to do  so.  He  accordingly  allowed  the  appeal  in  a
      decision promulgated on 11 March 2020.

   8. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Taylor's
      decision on the basis that there was inadequate reasoning in regard to
      the insurmountable obstacles test, that there was insufficient to meet
      the  high  threshold  set  out  in  Agyarko  and  Ikuga,  R  (on   the
      applications of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
      UKSC 11 and that the judge erred by applying the case of Chikwamba.

   9. Permission was refused in the First-tier Tribunal but was subsequently
      granted on a renewed application in the  Upper  Tribunal.  Submissions
      were made by the parties in response to directions as  to  whether  an
      oral hearing was required and, as a result, the appeal was listed  for
      a remote hearing conducted through Skype for Business.

Hearing and submissions

  10. Both parties made submissions before me, relying  and  expanding  upon
      their respective written submissions previously made.

  11. Mr Whitwell set out the two grounds of appeal, namely that  the  judge
      had  either  not  applied  the  stringent  test  for   'insurmountable
      obstacles' or had given inadequate reasons as to why the test was  met
      on the evidence, and that he had erred in his reliance upon Chikwamba.
      With regard to the first ground, Mr Whitwell relied upon the cases  of
      Agyarko and Lal v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2019] EWCA Civ 1925. He submitted that the judge's  finding  at  [16]
      that the test was met relied on three strands, namely  the  stress  of
      the move to  India  for  the  sponsor,  the  sponsor's  mental  health
      concerns and the proximity of India to Sri Lanka. However, that failed
      to take account of the earlier evidence at [7] that  the  sponsor  was
      managing to hold down a job, that she had managed to adapt to life  in
      a different country, that there was family support available in  India
      and that the sponsor was not currently receiving treatment. She  would
      continue to receive care and support from the appellant as they  would
      be returning to India together. As for the second  ground,  the  judge
      was wrong to say that the appellant was bound to succeed in  an  entry
      clearance application as he had failed to meet  the  English  language
      requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  and   therefore   such   an
      application was bound to fail.

  12. Ms  Heybroek  submitted  that  the  first  ground  was  essentially  a
      rationality argument, which amounted to no more  than  a  disagreement
      with the judge's decision. The judge had had the correct test in  mind
      when considering the question of 'insurmountable  obstacles'  and  had
      given various reasons for concluding that the test was met,  including
      the medical treatment the sponsor was  receiving  from  the  Ayurvedic
      Clinic. Although that was not traditional medical  treatment,  it  was
      nevertheless relevant treatment which was assisting the  sponsor.  The
      judge was entitled to find that  the  sponsor's  mental  health  would
      deteriorate  if  she  was  removed  from  that  supportive   Ayurvedic
      community and was entitled to conclude as he did. The Chikwamba  point
      was not raised by the respondent in the refusal decision or before the
      judge but it had been included in the  appellant's  skeleton  argument
      before the judge and had been taken up by the judge himself. It  could
      not be said that the appellant's entry clearance application was bound
      to fail, as his history showed that he could meet the English language
      requirements.

Discussion and conclusions

  13. As I indicated to the parties at the conclusion of  the  hearing,  the
      judge's  decision  may  well  be  viewed  as  a  generous   one   and,
      furthermore, one which another judge may have decided differently, but
      that did not mean that it was legally erroneous. Ultimately  it  seems
      to me that the Secretary of State's challenge is one of  disagreement,
      as Ms Heybroek submitted. The judge had the benefit  of  hearing  oral
      evidence from the appellant and the sponsor and was clearly  persuaded
      by their evidence as to the impact upon them, and  in  particular  the
      sponsor, of relocation to India or separation from each other, even on
      a temporary basis. I agree with Ms Heybroek that  the  judge  followed
      the correct approach when applying the relevant  legal  provisions  to
      that evidence and was entitled to make the findings that he did on the
      basis of that evidence.

  14. At [14] and [15] the judge properly set out the relevant issues in the
      context of the immigration rules and at [16] he carefully assessed the
      circumstances of the appellant and the sponsor against the  background
      of the relevant test for 'insurmountable obstacles' in paragraph  EX.2
      of Appendix FM and the evidence before him. He was plainly fully aware
      that the test was a stringent one and that the threshold  for  meeting
      the test was high and he provided reasons as to why he considered  the
      threshold had been met. It was not simply, as Mr  Whitwell  submitted,
      the stress of the move to  India,  the  concern  about  the  sponsor's
      mental health and the proximity of India to Sri Lanka which  persuaded
      the judge that the high threshold had been met. There were many  other
      factors which the judge considered to be of relevance,  including  the
      sponsor's past experiences in Sri Lanka and as a  victim  of  domestic
      violence in the UK which had led to her mental  health  concerns,  the
      progress that had been made in treating her mental health through  the
      Ayurvedic Clinic and the impact upon her of  the  withdrawal  of  that
      support if she had to leave  the  UK  in  order  to  remain  with  the
      appellant or alternatively  if  she  had  to  be  separated  from  the
      appellant even for a short time. In light of the evidence before  him,
      in the form of the report from the Ayurvedic Clinic and  the  evidence
      of the appellant and sponsor, the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
      conclude that the withdrawal of support from the sponsor would  result
      in the deterioration of her mental health and would  have  a  profound
      effect on her and was entitled to find that  that  was  sufficient  to
      meet the high threshold for demonstrating  'insurmountable  obstacles'
      to relocation to India.

  15. As Mr Whitwell properly accepted, the second ground, relating  to  the
      principles in Chikwamba, was parasitic upon the first  ground.  Having
      found, for reasons  cogently  given,  that  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules were met, the judge properly found that  the  appeal
      could be allowed on  Article  8  grounds  on  that  basis  alone.  The
      challenge to the judge's decision outside  the  immigration  rules  is
      therefore immaterial.

  16. For all of these reasons I find  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision requiring it to be set aside and I uphold the decision.

DECISION

  17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to allow the appeal  stands  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal is dismissed.



Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  9 April 2021
