
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17572/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2019                      |On 27 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Aisha ghafoor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Adebayo, Legal Representative, Syed Lawcare
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy promulgated on  28
    September 2017.

 2. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Pakistan born on 9 April  1983.  She  sought  entry  clearance  as  the
    partner of a British citizen, which application was refused on 27  June
    2016, on the basis that the evidence failed to show that  the  claimant
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  the  Sponsor.  It  was
    conceded that all the other requirements of Appendix FM  of  the  Rules
    were met.

 3. The Claimant appealed against that decision.  Her  appeal  came  before
    Designated Judge McCarthy for hearing  on  15  September  2017.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 28 September 2017 the judge allowed
    the appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought in time by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    on the basis that the judge had erred materially in law:-

      1) in failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of fact or
         opinion on material matters.  The basis of this  assertion  is  the
         fact there was a  lack  of  documentary  evidence  to  support  the
         judge's  findings  which  were  based  on  the  assessment  of  the
         credibility of the Sponsor's evidence; and that

      2) the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for his decision,  in
         particular why it would be unreasonable for the Sponsor to relocate
         to Pakistan to join his wife.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Woodcraft  on  the
    basis that:-

         "It is arguably unclear to the  losing  party,  in  this  case  the
         Respondent, why in the  absence  of  entry  clearance  which  could
         otherwise be easily obtained the Designated Judge has  allowed  the
         appeal."

    Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal,  Ms  Aboni  for  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer sought  to  rely  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   She
    submitted that the issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether
    there was a genuine and subsisting relationship and that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in allowing the appeal, finding that there was
    a genuine relationship but failing to give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings in light of the fact that there was  no  supporting  evidence.
    The judge accepted the evidence of the Sponsor,  however  there  was  a
    lack of supporting evidence which she submitted could easily have  been
    obtained.  Ms Aboni submitted there were no reasons for the  conclusion
    that the Claimant meets the requirements of Appendix FM.

 7. Ms Aboni sought to rely on the fact that the Sponsor  had  not  visited
    the Claimant since 2014.  His explanation was that his employer was not
    willing to give him more than a week's  leave,  however  this  was  not
    sufficient and there was no explanation  from  the  employer  but  just
    confirmation of the Sponsor's employment.

 8. Ms Aboni submitted that there was no supporting  evidence  of  devotion
    between the couple, particularly in light of the absence of evidence as
    to face-to-face contact.  At  [13]  there  was  evidence  of  telephone
    calls, however she submitted that these  could  not  be  linked  except
    through the Sponsor's own statement as to the Claimant's phone  number.
    She submitted ultimately that the judge  had  erred  in  accepting  the
    Sponsor's evidence, absent  anything  to  back  it  up,  and  thus  the
    decision was flawed.

 9. In his submissions, Mr Adebayo submitted that the Claimant had met  all
    the requirements for entry clearance,  that  there  was  a  substantial
    examination of the Sponsor in court who was able to shed light  on  the
    evidence, including the evidence of telephone contact.  He submitted it
    would be implausible for the Sponsor to make so many calls  to  someone
    who is not his wife.  The Sponsor  felt  to  blame  for  the  delay  in
    bringing his wife to the UK and so travelled to Pakistan to visit  her,
    as a consequence of which he lost his job.  It was pointed  out  to  Mr
    Adebayo that this was, however, post decision evidence and not material
    to the question of whether or not the judge made a material error.

10. I reserved my decision which I now give with my reasons.

11. The Sponsor attended the hearing of the  appeal,  adopted  his  witness
    statement and gave further  evidence.  At  [6]  the  Judge  found:  "He
    demonstrated a good, up to date knowledge about his wife." At [12]  the
    Judge had regard to the decision by the former President of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Mr Justice Blake, in Goudey (subsisting marriage -  evidence)
    Sudan [2012] UKUT 41, which held inter alia:

         "10. In our judgement the judge has mis-directed himself as to  the
         weight to be attached to the total documentation  relating  to  the
         telephone calls. Whilst it is true that this documentation does not
         of itself prove that the sponsor has been speaking to his  wife  as
         opposed  to  someone  else  in  the  Sudan,  the   material   gives
         corroborative support for the wife's account in the entry clearance
         application and the appellant's testimony  in  the  appeal.  It  is
         clear that a great many telephone calls have been  made  using  the
         telephone cards during the period  of  the  relationship.  This  is
         substantial support for the proposition that they  conducted  their
         relationship  by  telephone.  It  is  improbable  that   all   this
         communication was with someone else rather than the person who  the
         sponsor has married and wants to bring to the United Kingdom ...

         11.  Everything else is neutral in this case. There is no  evidence
         of lies, poor immigration  history  or  deception.  There  is  some
         evidence of financial sponsorship though the judge was entitled  to
         be unimpressed by it for the reason he gave the absence of receipts
         is not a factor that goes to the discredit of the application.

         12.  Accordingly we find that there has been an error of law in the
         assessment of  this  case  and  whether  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules had been met. It may be  that  the  ECO  and  the
         judge  considered  that  the  requirement  to  show  a  "subsisting
         marriage" imposes some significant burden to produce evidence other
         than that showing that  there  was  a  genuine  intention  to  live
         together as man and wife  in  a  married  relationship.  If  so  we
         conclude that that  is  an  error  of  law.  The  authority  of  GA
         ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006] UKAIT 00046; [2006]  Imm  AR
         543 only requires that there is a real relationship as  opposed  to
         the merely formal one of a marriage which has not been  terminated.
         Where there is a legally recognised marriage and  the  parties  who
         are living apart both want to be  together  and  live  together  as
         husband  and  wife,  we  cannot  see  that  more  is  required   to
         demonstrate that the marriage  is  subsisting  and  thus  qualifies
         under the Immigration Rules."

12. Judge McCarthy then went on to find as follows:

         "14. The question for me, therefore, is  can  I  believe  what  the
         sponsor has stated? I find that I am satisfied it  is  more  likely
         than not that he has given a truthful and accurate account. I reach
         this conclusion for the following reasons. First, the  sponsor  has
         attempted to provide supporting evidence from his employer and  the
         phone company. This is not a case  where  there  is  no  supporting
         evidence. What documentary evidence exists is consistent with  what
         the sponsor has stated. Second, some of the phone records  identify
         the sponsor as the caller. The pattern of calls  in  those  records
         mirrors the call pattern in the other records. This makes  it  more
         likely than not that the calls were made by the same person. Third,
         the sponsor was very candid in his answers. He  did  not  deny  the
         problems with his evidence once the problems were pointed  out.  He
         did  not  seek  to  embellish  his  account  or   to   change   his
         explanations. He was consistent even when  faced  with  challenging
         cross-examination. These are signifiers of  a  person  telling  the
         truth.

         15.  I find that I can believe the sponsor's evidence.  I  find  it
         more likely than not  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship as claimed. It follows that I find  the  couple  enjoy
         family life together and the decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance
         interferes in their right to enjoy their family life."

         16.  The same  finding  means  the  appellant  in  fact  meets  the
         requirements of appendix FM as a  spouse.  All  other  requirements
         were conceded as having been met. My  finding  satisfies  the  only
         issue in dispute."

13. It is apparent from the  Judge's  findings  set  out  above,  that  his
    reasoning in respect of the evidence before him was clear and detailed.
    I find that the Judge gave adequate and  sustainable  reasons  for  his
    finding that the Sponsor's evidence was credible and that, applying the
    requisite standard of proof, that there is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and the  Sponsor.  Contrary  to  the
    assertion  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  there  was  some   supporting
    documentary evidence and the Judge was entitled to attach weight to it,
    given that it was supported by the Sponsor's evidence.

14. I find that the grounds of appeal are essentially a  disagreement  with
    the findings of the Judge, which were  entirely  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

Notice of Decision

I find no error of law in the decision of  Designated  Judge  McCarthy.  The
appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer - UKVS Sheffield, is  dismissed,  with
the effect that the Judge's decision to allow the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds (article 8) is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
