

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/17147/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 31 December 2020          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                      A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, aged 60.  She came to the UK with  6
   months leave as a visitor in June 2009.  She says she has  remained  here
   since leave expired (although the  respondent  notes  that  her  marriage
   certificate shows that she  and  her  husband  married  in  Ghana  on  12
   December 2018).  She made unsuccessful applications for a residence  card
   in 2019.   On 13 September 2019, she  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on
   family and private life grounds,  based  on  her  relationship  with  her
   husband.


2. The respondent  refused  her  application  for  reasons  explained  in  a
   decision  dated  4  October  2019.   The  appellant  did  not  meet   the
   eligibility immigration status requirement.  It  was  considered  whether
   she was exempt through paragraph EX.1 of appendix FM of  the  immigration
   rules, but there were found to be no insurmountable  obstacles,  or  very
   significant difficulties, to the appellant  and  her  husband  continuing
   their family life in Ghana, of which country  they  are  both  nationals.



3. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  Judge Howorth  dismissed  her  appeal
   by a decision promulgated  on  24  February  2020.   The  judge  accepted
   evidence from the appellant and her husband (which emerged only  in  oral
   evidence at the hearing, although the appellant was represented) that her
   ex-husband had attempted to kill her and had threatened  her  before  her
   divorce.  However, there was no evidence of any  ongoing  threat,  or  of
   absence of legal protection, so no  very  significant  difficulties  were
   found, and no disproportionate interference with article 8 rights.

4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on  grounds  attached
   to an application dated 6 March 2020.  The grounds  are  confused.   They
   proceed in part on the misconception that compliance with  the  financial
   requirements of the immigration rules, and with requirements  to  provide
   evidence with an application, may be established by providing evidence in
   the course of the appeals procedure, even up  to  the  stage  of  seeking
   permission to appeal from the FtT to the UT

5. By a decision dated 27 and issued  on  31  July  2020,  the  FtT  granted
   permission, on the view that  the  FtT  arguably  "erred  in  considering
   article 8 in that the decision considers only the claimed threat  to  the
   appellant from her former husband and not the personal  circumstances  of
   the appellant and her husband and families."

6. By a note and directions issued  on  28  August  2020  the  UT  took  the
   provisional view that it would be  appropriate  to  determine  without  a
   hearing whether the making of the decision of the FtT involved the making
   of an error on a point of law and, if so, whether it should be set aside.
    Parties were also given the  opportunity  to  submit  on  whether  there
   should be a hearing to resolve those issues.  Neither party asked  for  a
   hearing.

7. The case firstly came before me at that stage.  I resolved the  error  of
   law issue without a hearing, in terms of rules 2 and 34, as follows.

8. In her response, dated 9 September 2020, the SSHD  "did  not  oppose  the
   application for permission to appeal" - which was beside  the  point,  as
   that application had been granted.  The gist of the response was that the
   SSHD accepted that the decision should be set aside for legal error,  and
   remade.  The SSHD also appeared to accept that it  might  be  appropriate
   for further evidence, which was not before the FtT,  to  be  entertained.
   There was a rather vague submission that some findings of the FtT  should
   be preserved.

9. In a response, also dated 9 September  2020,  the  appellant  argued  the
   case on a rather confused basis, ending at [21] by asking for  permission
   to appeal - redundantly, as the case had  passed  that  stage  -  and  by
   looking forward "to a favourable response in granting the appellant leave
   to remain" - an outcome which is not within the scope of the FtT  or  the
   UT.  Tribunals allow or dismiss appeals; they cannot grant leave.


10. In light of the grounds  of  appeal  (although,  perhaps,  reading  them
   rather generously) and of the SSHD's concession, the decision of the  FtT
   was set aside by my "error of law" decision dated 13  and  issued  on  19
   November 2020.  The substance of that decision is incorporated above.


11. Parties were given 14 days from the date the  "error  of  law"  decision
   was issued to submit on  further  procedure  required;  on  whether  that
   should take place in the FtT, or in the UT; and on the  eventual  outcome
   sought.  It was indicated that after that time, the UT would consider how
   to proceed further; and might do so, whether responses were  received  or
   not, by dismissing or allowing the appeal, as originally brought  to  the
   FtT.

12. Time for those submissions having gone by, the case  is  before  me  for
   further decision.

13. In a response dated 27 November 2020, the SSHD submits  thus:  the  case
   should remain in the UT; the FtT judge erred by not properly  considering
   the relationship between the appellant and her husband; the appellant has
   not challenged the findings that she  could  not  obtain  protection,  or
   relocate; there is lack of evidence about the  ex-husband's  threats,  or
   her ability to know if she returns;  relevant  findings  by  the  FtT  at
   [20,22  and  23]  "should  be  sustained";  "once  an  error  is   found,
   submissions may be made" on additional evidence from the  appellant;  she
   has not indicated whether she wishes to give oral evidence; the case  can
   be resolved by way of submissions.

14. This is a little muddled, but makes it sufficiently clear that the  SSHD
   agrees that a further decision may be reached, without a  hearing,  based
   on materials on file.

15. In a response dated 1 December 2020, the appellant submits thus:  it  is
   agreed the case "can be resolved via  submissions";  the  appellant  does
   challenge the findings on protection and relocation in Ghana, and on  her
   ex-husband's ability to know of her return; there is  evidence  from  the
   appellant, her husband, and a family friend, on those  matters;  and  the
   appeal should be allowed "so that the appellant can live peacefully  with
   her spouse in UK".

16. In light of the agreement of both parties, the UT  may  now  proceed  in
   terms of rules 2 and 34 to make  a  fresh  decision  on  the  appeal,  as
   originally brought to the FtT.

17. The only live issue  is  whether  the  appellant's  ex-husband  poses  a
   threat to her in Ghana, amounting to an insurmountable obstacle, or  very
   significant difficulty, in the way of her and  her  husband  carrying  on
   their family life in Ghana.  She has not suggested  any  other  obstacle,
   and there is no evidence by which she might be found to have a  right  to
   remain in the UK for any other reason.

18. A statement from a supporting witness, living in Ghana,  says  that  she
   is a former neighbour and close family  friend  of  the  appellant.   She
   witnessed domestic violence, and cites an example  on  10  January  1998.
   She says that the appellant's ex-husband proposes to hunt her "regardless
   of her location".

19. Another statement is from a pastor and close  family  friend  in  Ghana,
   who says that he witnessed domestic violence from 1999 to 2009, when  the
   appellant "got the chance to travel".

20. I find the evidence sufficient to show, on the balance  of  probability,
   and as the FtT accepted, that the appellant  was  subjected  to  domestic
   violence by her former husband before she left Ghana.

21.  That  was  a  long  time  ago,  circumstances  have  changed,  and  the
   assertions of ongoing malevolence are vague.  I do not find the  evidence
   sufficient to show, on the balance of probability, that  the  appellant's
   ex-husband continues to pose a threat to her.

22. There is no evidence from which it  might  sensibly  be  held  that  the
   appellant's ex-husband is likely to know, or to  be  able  to  track  her
   down, if she returns to Ghana.  It is not the largest country in  Africa,
   but it is quite extensive, with a population of 30 million; 2 million  in
   Accra and 1.5 million in the second largest city, Kumasi.  It is idle  to
   suggest that the appellant and her husband could not locate themselves in
   security.

23. There is also no evidence the level of protection  from  violent  former
   partners officially available in Ghana is less than legally sufficient.

24. For those several reasons, any one of which would suffice, the  evidence
   falls well short of showing  that  the  appellant's  ex-husband  poses  a
   threat to her in Ghana, amounting to an insurmountable obstacle, or  very
   significant difficulty, in the way of her and  her  husband  carrying  on
   their family life in Ghana.


25. The grant of permission, and the SSHD's concession, appear to have  been
   made in an abundance of caution, lest some other feature of the case  had
   been overlooked which might have disclosed a right to  remain.   However,
   there is simply no other basis on which the appeal  might  rationally  be
   allowed on article 8 grounds.

26. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Parties have  not  addressed  that
   issue.  The direction remains in place.

      [pic]
      11 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




