
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17970/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 3 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   S R A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Basith, Solicitor, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born on 15 December  1977
    who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 8 July 2016 to refuse the appellant further  leave  to
    remain.  The First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27
    December 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
     The appellant appeals with permission from the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    appellant's grounds were as follows:

      1) that the judge erred in this assessment of the evidence in relation
         to the TOEIC certificate and in finding the appellant had  procured
         the certificate by deceit;

      2)  in  relation  to  the  reasonableness  test  in  respect  of   the
         appellant's British child.  It was submitted that the  judge  erred
         in failing to attach  appropriate  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's minor child  is  a  British  citizen;  it  was  further
         submitted that the assessment of very  significant  obstacles  test
         was insufficient;

      3) it was submitted the judge failed, in assessing proportionality, to
         apply the correct test.

 2. In granting permission Judge of the Upper Tribunal  Storey  found  that
    the judge had given cogent reasons for concluding that  the  respondent
    had discharged the burden of proof on her to prove  the  appellant  had
    used deception in a TOEIC test and additionally that there was  nothing
    in the challenge to the judge's findings that  the  appellant  had  not
    shown that there would be very significant obstacles to his integrating
    in Bangladesh.  However, the sole ground for granting permission was on
    the basis that the judge had arguably failed to apply the relevant Home
    Office guidance with respect to parents of British children, see SF and
    others [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC).

Error of Law Discussion

 3. I share the view, of both the First-tier Tribunal permission judge  and
    the judge granting permission in the Upper Tribunal, that  the  judge's
    findings in respect of the TOEIC certificate  are  unimpeachable.   The
    judge directed himself correctly to the appropriate test  and  assessed
    the evidence in light of the guidance in the Court of Appeal in Shehzad
    and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

 4. The judge made a comprehensive consideration of all the  evidence  from
    [19] onwards and reminded himself that the burden was on the respondent
    to discharge the evidential burden of proving the appellant was  guilty
    of dishonesty.  The judge recounted the appellant's evidence, including
    in his witness statement, in oral evidence, and his difficulties in the
    June 2016 interviews, which was considered by the respondent and by the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For all the adequate reasons given,  which  could
    not be said to be irrational, the judge concluded,  at  [31]  that  the
    respondent had adduced sufficient evidence to raise the issue of fraud,
    and that no innocent explanation, which satisfied the minimum level  of
    plausibility had been provided by the appellant.

 5. The judge found himself  satisfied  on  the  civil  standard  that  the
    appellant's  explanation  should  be  rejected  for  the  comprehensive
    reasons he had given.  Similarly in respect of the  remaining  grounds,
    again the  judge  considered  all  of  the  issues  and  made  adequate
    sustainable findings on those issues.  The appellant's  grounds  amount
    to no more than a disagreement with those findings.

 6. It was not disputed therefore, before me, that the key remaining  issue
    was in relation to the treatment of the qualifying British  child.   It
    was not disputed that the appellant married his spouse in Bangladesh in
    June 2008 and that she entered the United Kingdom in 2012 and became  a
    British citizen by way of right of abode.  On 10  May  2016  their  son
    Master S was born and it was submitted that he is a British citizen.

 7. Mr Basith conceded that the Home Office guidance in relation to British
    children changed in 2018 and considered it curious that this would have
    been the case when permission was granted, although I  accept  that  at
    the time of the hearing, the  previous  guidance  would  have  been  in
    force.   Mr  Basith  submitted  that  the  judge  accepted  a   genuine
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and  the  question  the
    judge should have asked is why the child should be asked to  leave  and
    the effect that it would have on the child.

 8. Somewhat surprisingly Mr  Basith  submitted  before  me,  as  had  been
    submitted before the First-tier Tribunal, that the  appellant  was  the
    primary carer.  As I indicated at the hearing, that submission had been
    comprehensively rejected and had not been challenged in any  meaningful
    way.  Indeed, as noted at paragraph [38], despite Mr  Basith's  initial
    suggestion that the appellant was the primary carer of  the  child,  it
    was 'quite properly conceded' before the First-tier Tribunal that  this
    was not the basis on which the appellant's claim was being presented.

 9. I was referred to KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53.   Mr  Basith  submitted
    that had the judge adopted the approach adopted by the Supreme Court he
    would have found in favour of the appellant.   He  submitted  that  the
    assessment was flawed by a failure to assess reasonableness  correctly.
    He submitted that had adequate findings  been  made  on  reasonableness
    then the judge would have found it unreasonable for the child to follow
    the appellant.  It was further submitted that the rights of  the  child
    as a British citizen were not necessarily taken into consideration.

10. Although  the  judge  made  a  best  interests'  assessment  Mr  Basith
    submitted that there was no specific reference to Section 55 and it was
    his submission that  the  judge  did  not  have  in  mind  the  welfare
    considerations.

11. Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge, at [42], made  a  best  interests
    assessment that the appellant's son was 18 months of age and  that  his
    best interests were served in remaining with his parents.  However, the
    judge also considered, in  the  alternative,  that  there  was  nothing
    unreasonable and that there would be little impact upon the appellant's
    wife and young son if the appellant's son and his  mother  remained  in
    the UK.

12. Although the judge had found that it was ultimately not unreasonable to
    expect the British child to accompany the appellant to  Bangladesh  the
    judge made alternative findings that it  was  not  disproportionate  to
    require the appellant to  return  and  for  there  to  be  a  temporary
    separation and the judge  did  not  accept  the  submissions  that  the
    appellant's  spouse  would  not  be  able  to  cope  given  her  health
    difficulties and took into consideration her family  in  the  UK.   The
    judge found at [56]:

         "There is no reason to suggest or suspect that  she  would  not  be
         able  to  call  upon  them  for  assistance  during  any  temporary
         separation.  It is unclear as to why the appellant and  his  spouse
         have not made enquiries of Social Services to identify any specific
         need that can be supported by them including but not  exclusive  to
         home help, and adaptions."

13. In terms of what was said in SF and others  (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 0012, that case refers  to  the  respondent's  2015
    guidance as follows:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the UK, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  Judgment
         in Zambrano.


         ...


         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.


         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


           . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;


           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.


         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation.   If
         the decision maker is minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where  appropriate,  advice
         may be sought from the Office of the  Children's  Champion  on  the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to  inform  the
         decision."

14. Mr Whitwell also directed me to the respondent's  current  guidance  on
    Family Migration, published in February  2018,  including  at  page  76
    where it might be appropriate to refuse when a child had been here  for
    seven years or more and where a child is a British citizen:

         'Where the child is a British citizen, it will not be reasonable to
         expect them to leave the UK with the applicant  parent  or  primary
         carer facing removal.  Accordingly, where this means that the child
         would have to leave the UK because, in  practice,  the  child  will
         not, or is not likely to, continue to live it he  UK  with  another
         parent or primary carer, EX.1(a) is likely to apply.


         In particular circumstances, it may be  appropriate  to  refuse  to
         grant leave to a parent or primary carer where their conduct  gives
         rise to public interest considerations of such weight as to justify
         their removal, where the British citizen child could remain in  the
         UK with another parent or  alternative  primary  carer,  who  is  a
         British citizen or settle in the UK or who has or is being  granted
         leave to remain.  The circumstances  envisaged  include  those  win
         which to grant leave could undermine our immigration controls,  for
         example where the applicant has committed significant or persistent
         criminal offences falling below the thresholds for deportation  set
         out I paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or  has  a  very  poor
         immigration history having repeatedly and deliberately breached the
         Immigration Rules'.

15. It was Mr Whitwell's submission that the Secretary  of  State  was  not
    suggesting that the child would have to  leave  in  this  case  and  he
    argued there was no material error including taking  into  account  the
    current guidance.

16. In reply Mr Basith submitted that page 77 of the new  guidance  clearly
    says that the appellant has committed a criminal offence (although,  as
    Mr Whitwell points out the guidance is not exhaustive).   He  submitted
    that the TOEIC issue was not a significant breach  of  the  immigration
    rules nor a significant criminal offence and argued that  the  guidance
    in force  in  2015  did  not  have  the  caveat  about  significant  or
    persistent criminal offending.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17. Although the judge did not directly cite the respondent's  guidance  as
    it then was in 2015, as the judge correctly identified, the decision of
    whether the child should stay  with  his  mother  or  return  with  his
    parents will be a choice for the appellant and his partner to  make  on
    behalf of the child as identified by the judge at [53].

18. The British Citizen child was 18 months of age.  The judge carried  out
    an appropriate best interests' assessment, including at [55] that there
    was no suggestion of any physical or mental difficulties and the  judge
    was satisfied, given his age, that his best interests  were  served  in
    remaining with his parents, (whether that is in Bangladesh or  the  UK)
    and that he was of an age where he would be primarily focussed  on  his
    mother.  Given the very young age of the child, it is difficult to  see
    what other reasoned conclusion the judge could have come to.

19. The judge also took into account that  the  appellant's  spouse  was  a
    British citizen and had a physical disability and  was  in  receipt  of
    benefits  and  receiving  physiotherapy  but  did  not  consider  these
    insurmountable obstacles to return.  The judge was satisfied that there
    were no insurmountable obstacles in respect of the temporary separation
    and did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  wife  did  not  have  the
    assistance of family and/or Social Services.

20. The respondent's 2015 guidance (the applicable guidance given the First-
    tier Tribunal decision was promulgated  in  December  2017)  considered
    that it may be appropriate to refuse leave if the child could otherwise
    stay with another parent and this is precisely the scenario  which  the
    judge considered, including at [56].  The reference in that guidance to
    the type of circumstances where it might be appropriate to refuse leave
    if  the  child  could  otherwise  stay  with  another  parent  is   not
    exhaustive, referring specifically to the fact that the  'circumstances
    envisaged could cover "amongst others".

21. In finding  ultimately  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  utilised
    deception in obtaining his TOEIC certificate was sufficient to  require
    him to leave, the judge made no material error  in  finding  ultimately
    that  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances  were  insufficient  to
    outweigh the public interest considerations.    I do  not  accept  that
    there was any material error in the judge's reasoned conclusions,  that
    in effect, the appellant's circumstances in practicing  deception  were
    sufficient to justify separation from a British citizen child.

22.  In taking into account that the appellant's conduct and  that  he  had
    been dishonest, in considering the reasonableness of removal, the judge
    was considering the appellant's conduct relevant in so far as it  meant
    that the appellant had to leave the country (see  KO  [2018]  UKSC  53,
    paragraph 51).

23. The judge was cognisant of the fact that the appellant's  child  was  a
    British citizen, including as  cited  at  [38].   In  finding,  in  the
    alternative, that it would not be unreasonable to expect the  child  to
    return with his parents, the judge expressly makes his finding only  in
    the context where that decision might be made by the appellant's mother
    and father and  considers  the  circumstances  the  family  would  find
    themselves in and that the family would have a  choice  of  either  the
    appellant returning to Bangladesh on his own and  his  wife  and  child
    remaining in the UK or the family choosing to return together.

24. There  was  no  material  error,  despite  the  lack  of  any  specific
    consideration of the respondent's guidance, as, in effect the judge has
    applied the Home Office policy in finding the appellant's deception was
    sufficient to render separation of the family proportionate.

25. The judge at [42] found that there  was  nothing  unreasonable  in  the
    respondent's decision to refuse the appellant leave, having found  that
    the appellant had utilised deception and could not meet the suitability
    requirements under Appendix FM (at [32]) and that there would be little
    impact upon the appellant's wife and young son who would continue to be
    supported and directed by his mother in the absence of his father,  who
    ultimately could make an application to join his family if that is what
    they desired, so long as the Immigration Rules  were  met.   The  judge
    took into consideration the impact of separation on the family  and  in
    all the circumstances found it to be proportionate.   There is no error
    in that reasoning.

Notice of Decision

26. The First-tier Tribunal did not materially err and the  decision  shall
    stand. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  20 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed, I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  20 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

