
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/17821/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd May 2018                           |On 11th May 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR ALRICK O'NEILL CLARKE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Amgbah, UK Law Associates

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is the Secretary  of  State  and  the  respondent  is  Mr
    Clarke.  However, for the purposes of the  decision,  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal where the appellant
    was Mr Clarke.

 2. Mr Clarke is a citizen of Jamaica,  born  on  11  September  1975.   He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 11 July 2016 refusing his  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  In a decision promulgated on 10  January
    2018, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robinson allowed the appellant's
    appeal as the judge was satisfied  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals with permission on the grounds that  the
    judge made a material misdirection in finding, the appellant was taking
    and intending to continue  to  take  an  active  role  in  his  child's
    upbringing, on the basis of insufficient evidence.

Error of law - discussion

 4. Mr Walker, who had not drafted the grounds, indicated that he  had  not
    much to say and noted that the respondent had previously  been  granted
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis of  his  relationship  with  the
    child (in 2013).  Mr Walker also noted that the Secretary of State  had
    made reference to the further evidence that was before  the  judge  and
    that the judge had heard oral evidence.  Although therefore, Mr  Walker
    did not specifically concede the appeal he did not pursue it  with  any
    force.

 5. Mr Amgbah for Mr Clarke submitted that the Secretary of State was wrong
    to have contested as he did in the grounds that  there  was  inadequate
    evidence from the child's school and the Secretary of  State  rehearsed
    the fact that the decision had been delayed so that  official  evidence
    could be obtained  from  the  school  yet  this  evidence  had  not  be
    produced.  However, Mr Amgbah submitted that this was  not  a  required
    document.  Mr Clarke has  no  ongoing  relationship  with  the  child's
    mother and therefore  had  difficulty  obtaining  such  documents.   Mr
    Amgbah further submitted that the policy guidance states that a  letter
    from the child's mother can be accepted as evidence and  the  appellant
    did produce such evidence.

 6. Mr Amgbah referred to the  respondent's  'Guidance  on  application  of
    EX.1. - consideration of a child's  best  interests  under  the  family
    Rules and in Article 8  claims  where  the  criminality  thresholds  in
    paragraph 399 of the Rules do not apply.'   This  states  including  as
    follows in respect  of  whether  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship:

         "4.  This is a  key  test  under  paragraph  399.   There  must  be
             evidence that there is an active and ongoing relationship.  In
             considering whether the relationship is genuine and subsisting
             the following factors are likely to be relevant:

              Does the applicant have a parental relationship with a child?

                 . What is the relationship  -  biological,  adopted,  step-
                   child, legal guardian?

                 . Are they the child's de facto primary carer?

             Is it a genuine and subsisting relationship?

                .  Does the child live with the person?

                .  Where does the applicant live in relation to the child?

                .  How regularly do they see one another?

                .  Any relevant court orders governing access to the child?

                .  Is there  any  evidence  or  other  relevant  information
                    provided with the application - for  example,  views  of
                    the child, other family members or from social worker or
                    other relevant professionals?

                .   To  what  extent  is  the  applicant  making  an  active
                    contribution to the child's life.  Factors  which  might
                    prompt closer scrutiny include:

                       > there is little or no contact with  the  child  or
                         contact is irregular;

                      > Any contact is only recent in nature;

                     > support is only financial  in  nature,  there  is  no
                       contact or emotional or welfare support;

                      > the child is largely independent of the person."

 7. Mr Amgbah relied on the  appellant's  oral  evidence  which  the  judge
    accepted.  In addition, there were a number of photographs  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal which the judge referred to.   However,  Mr  Amgbah
    pointed out that the judge had not  highlighted  that  each  photograph
    related to the receipts and, for example, showed the appellant and  the
    child at Nandos and at JD Sports.

 8. As already noted, Mr Walker did not pursue his own  grounds  of  appeal
    with any force.  It was a matter for the judge what weight he  attached
    to the relevant evidence.  It is not an arguable error of  law  for  an
    Immigration Judge to give too little weight or too  much  weight  to  a
    factor, unless irrationality is alleged (which it was not).  The  judge
    had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from the  appellant  and  took
    into consideration that the appellant had previously been granted leave
    in the UK on the basis of his role in his son's life.

 9. Although the respondent had asserted that the evidence,  including  the
    letters from the child's mother, were not sufficient,  the  letter  had
    confirmed that the child was a British citizen and that  the  appellant
    had access to the child.  That letter was dated 3  December  2017.   It
    confirmed that the appellant was fully involved in the child's life and
    took the child out and sometimes looked after the child in the mother's
    absence.  It further confirmed that she wanted him to continue to  have
    responsibility to look after the child and be part of the child's life.
     The child's mother also confirmed that the child  was  diagnosed  with
    autism at the age of 3 which has affected his development and that  the
    appellant provided support and has continued to  provide  support  over
    the years to the best of his ability in raising their son; it  was  the
    mother's view that it was important for his father to  continue  to  be
    part of the routine and that their child has  that  continuous  support
    from his father as otherwise this could have an effect on  the  child's
    mental health due to his special needs.   In  addition  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had before it a letter from the  child,  indicating  that  the
    appellant spends time with him and helps him.

10.  is  clear  that  the  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  into
    consideration all of this evidence.  The fact  that  there  was  not  a
    letter from the school was not fatal to the Tribunal's  reasoning.   As
    recorded at paragraph [9]  the  appellant  had  been  quite  candid  in
    stating that his relationship with the child's  mother  fluctuated  and
    that it was "good" sometimes but that it depended  on  her  mood.   The
    judge took into consideration that  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    school but also noted  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  never
    collected this child from school and that  his  name  was  not  on  the
    child's school's record for contact although he had attended a  meeting
    with the head teacher on an occasion.

11. The First-tier Tribunal considered all the factors, including the  best
    interests of the child, as a primary  consideration  and  that  it  was
    normally in the best interests to have the support  and  care  of  both
    parents of a child of school age and in the present appeal no case  had
    been put forward by  the  child's  mother  which  would  indicate  that
    contact was contrary to those best interests.  The judge noted, at [24]
    that there was inadequate evidence from the child's school to  indicate
    a role in the education.  Nevertheless it was open to the judge to make
    the findings he did, that the letters from the mother and the  evidence
    of regular contact  including  photographs,  cinema  tickets  and  most
    notably in  my  view,  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,  'strongly
    suggests' the appellant maintains a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his son.

12. As already noted, it was a significant factor in the  judge's  findings
    that the respondent had accepted that the appellant had an ongoing role
    in his life when he granted leave to remain in 2013.  Although I accept
    that circumstances can change, it was open to the judge  to  find  that
    they had not for the adequate reasons he gave.  I have reminded  myself
    what was said in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 that  adequacy
    meant no more nor less than that. It was not a counsel  of  perfection.
    Still less should it provide an opportunity to undertake a  qualitative
    assessment of the reasons to see if  they  are  wanting,  perhaps  even
    surprising, on their merits. The purpose of the duty to  give  reasons,
    is in part, to enable the losing party to know why she has lost and  it
    is also to enable an appellate  court  or  tribunal  to  see  what  the
    reasons for the decision are so that they can be examined in case there
    has been an error of approach.  No arguable error has been  established
    in the approach of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not therefore  contain  an
    error of law, such that it should be set aside, and shall  stand.   The
    appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed
  Date:  11 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
