
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/17769/2018
                                                               HU/17771/2018
                                                               HU/17774/2018
                                                               HU/17779/2018
                                                               HU/17783/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 26 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      T
                                      A
                                      W
                                      S
                                      F
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    T (in person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
brought with the permission of a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal)  which  it  sent  to  the
parties on 11 February 2019. The tribunal, in making its  decision,  allowed
the appeals of all five claimants against  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of
State, all made on 31 May 2018, refusing to grant each  individual  claimant
leave to remain in the United Kingdom (UK) on human rights grounds.

2.    I have decided to grant anonymity to each claimant. The  tribunal  did
not do so and I was not invited to do so  at  the  hearing  before  me.  But
three of the claimants are minor children and I think there is  a  case  for
saying that their privacy, at least, ought to be  protected.  Further,  that
cannot be effectively achieved without my also affording similar  protection
to the adult claimants.

3.    By way of background, all of the claimants are nationals  of  Algeria.
B and A are married to each other. W, S and F are the children of T  and  A.
As to the adult claimants, T was born 14 January 1971,  and  A  on  27  June
1982. As to the child claimants, W was born on 15 August 2010,  S  was  born
16 May 2012, and F was born 25 March 2018. B and  A  entered  the  UK  on  7
March 2010. Each had leave to enter as a visitor,  such  leave  being  valid
from 12 February 2010 until 12 August 2010. Neither, however,  departed  the
UK upon expiry of leave and W, S, and Y were all  born  in  the  UK.  On  14
April 2015, T and A were served with immigration  enforcement  notifications
and, on 13 May 2015, T claimed  asylum  with  the  other  claimants  as  his
dependants. However, that claim was  refused  with  only  an  out-of-country
right of appeal. Since all the claimants remained in the UK no  such  appeal
was pursued. On 2 January 2018 applications were made by  or  on  behalf  of
all of the claimants for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds  on  the
basis of their family and private life in the UK. The  Secretary  of  State,
though, refused each application, concluding that none of  the  requirements
of what are sometimes referred  to  as  the  Article  8-related  Immigration
Rules were met and that none of the claimants were  able  to  succeed  under
Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  outside  the
rules.

4.    The claimants were unrepresented before the  tribunal.  The  Secretary
of State was represented by a Presenting Officer. It  appears  that  both  T
and A gave oral evidence.  It is clear and  unsurprising  that  the  primary
focus of the appeal was upon the situation of W who had, by the time of  the
hearing before the tribunal, been living in the UK for a  period  in  excess
of seven years. Since he had been born in the  UK  that  logically  followed
once he had passed his 7th birthday. That fact brought into play  two  legal
provisions one of which is contained in the Immigration  Rules  and  one  of
which is contained in statute law. I  shall  set  them  out.  Paragraph  276
ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules relevantly provides:

         'Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276 ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant: ...

             (iv)      is under the age of eighteen  years  and  has  lived
             continuously in the UK for at least seven  years  (discounting
             any period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable  to
             expect the applicant to leave the UK; ...'

5.    Section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
relevantly provides:

         '117B Article A: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      ...

         (3)      ...

         (4)      ...

         (5)      ...

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the persons removal where -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsistent   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the UK.'

6.    Section 117D of the same Act defines a "qualifying child" as a  person
under the age of eighteen who is a British Citizen or has lived  in  the  UK
for a continuous period of seven years or more. The key  composite  question
for the tribunal,  therefore,  was  whether  W  fell  within  the  terms  of
paragraph 276 ADE (iv) and, if so, whether  that  meant,  because  he  would
then be a qualifying child (since a person who satisfies 276 ADE (iv)  is  a
"qualifying child") the other claimants would be able succeed under  Article
8 outside the rules because the public interest would not then  require  the
removal of T and A (the parents) and  because  the  family  could  not  then
lawfully be split.

7.    The tribunal noted, in setting out the background circumstances,  that
T had used false documents in order to  secure  employment  in  the  UK  and
support his family. The tribunal noted that both T and A had  "an  extensive
family network" in Algeria. The tribunal accepted that such  family  members
would be able to at least provide emotional and  practical  support  if  the
family were to have to return to Algeria. The tribunal recognised that  both
T and A had spent the majority  of  their  lives  in  Algeria  and  so  were
familiar with life in that country. The tribunal then turned  its  attention
to the particular situation of W and the potential  knock  on  effect  if  W
could not be removed from the  UK.  It  paid  particular  attention  to  W's
response to the news that the claimant's applications for  leave  to  remain
had all been refused by the Secretary of State.  The  tribunal's  evaluation
as to that was as follows:

         "41.     The Appellant has also provided a letter from the  GP  and
         his eldest child's teacher date 22  June  2018  and  11  June  2018
         respectively. The GP recommended that the family be allowed to stay
         in the UK for the well being of all the children. The GP stated:

             "I saw  [the  child  with  the  Appellant]  on  13  June  2018
             regarding concerns regarding his mood and behaviour  over  the
             past 2 weeks coinciding with the family discovering  that  the
             application to remain in the  UK  has  been  rejected  and  is
             pending an  appeal.  [The  child]  being  the  oldest  of  the
             children is at the age where he  is  able  to  understand  the
             significance of the outcome. [The Appellant] being  originally
             from Algeria and living in the UK since 2010 with [the  child]
             being born  in  the  UK  and  living  his  entire  life  here.
             Understandably the prospect of being forced to leave his  home
             has caused him significant distress. The symptoms that his dad
             describes with [the child]  becoming  withdrawn  not  sleeping
             well, losing his appetite and having regular nightmares. These
             changes have also been confirmed and supported by  his  school
             who have contacted the family regarding a  significant  change
             in his behaviour at school where  he  was  once  engaging  and
             enthusiastic in class  he  has  become  quiet  and  withdrawn.
             Previously [he had been a] fit healthy and happy  young  child
             performing well at school and with  plenty  of  friends.  [The
             child] is clearly having a stress reaction to the consequences
             of the possibility of being removed from his home and  I  have
             referred him to the Child Psychiatry Team (CPT)  in  order  to
             help with extra support whilst  the  appeal  process  goes  on
             [sic]

             However, ultimately his mental health and well being will only
             deteriorate further unless the child unless the child and  his
             family are allowed to stay in the UK."

         42.      As  was  noted  by  the  Presenting  Officer,  the  GP  is
         primarily  reliant  on  information  provided  by  the   Appellant.
         However, significantly, the Appellant also provided the letter from
         child's teacher. The teacher stated that she was  advising  of  the
         impact of the decision on the 'life of this lovely little boy'. She
         said:

             "[The child] is a well brought up, fun-loving, intelligent boy
             who works hard in class. He is a friendly child who has a wide
             range of friends.

             However,  since  he  was  told  the  news  of  his   impending
             deportation, [the child] has become anxious and withdrawn.  He
             no longer plays as much with his friends and is much  quieter.
             Sometimes he exhibits irritability with his friends. He  still
             strives  to  work,  but  is  finding  it  very  difficult   to
             concentrate. His progress is subsequently being affected.

             I believe the decision is detrimental to the health  happiness
             and well being  of  the  child  who  is  exhibiting  signs  of
             childhood anxiety. I strongly urge to reconsider."

         43.      I note that in support of the application,  the  Appellant
         had provided a letter from the Headteacher of the school, dated  21
         July 2017. The head had stated that the child is  'happy  and  very
         well settled in school... he is very confident and is  making  good
         progress and has developed strong friendships with  other  children
         in the class". This is consistent with both the  teacher  and  GPs'
         assessment of the child, prior to the Respondent's decision.

         44.      The Appellant stated that prior to writing the letter, the
         child's teacher had spoken to him about a change in the  child  and
         asked him whether anything had happened  in  the  family.  He  then
         advised her that they had received the negative decision  from  the
         Home Office.

         45.      The Appellant also told me that the  child  has  not  been
         seen by the CPT and  he  now  seems  back  to  normal.  The  Second
         Appellant also told me that she had become very upset by the change
         in the child, but he does seem settled again now.  She  thought  it
         had helped him to attend a local community after school club.

         46.      The Presenting Officer appreciated that the  decision  may
         have caused the child some distress, but she submitted that it does
         not seem to have had an extreme  long  term  negative  impact.  She
         noted he is not on any medication and is not receiving any  ongoing
         treatment. The Presenting Officer submitted that, in any event, the
         child is only eight and his life will still be centred  around  the
         family unit. She concluded that it was  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to go to Algeria with his parents.

         47.      In my view the issues in this appeal are finely  balanced.
         Overall, I have no doubt the child has established strong  ties  to
         the UK, including close friendships  with  classmates.  However,  I
         agree with the Presenting Officer ultimately his life will still be
         centred round the  family  unit.  He  has  not  commenced  studying
         towards a recognised qualification, such as GCSEs and he is not  at
         a critical stage of his education or his own personal development.

         48.      Further, the child may not have any (or only very limited)
         cultural and social ties to Algeria. However, his parents will have
         retained knowledge of the life, language, and culture  in  Algeria.
         They will be to assist him to adapt and he is still young enough to
         be able to adapt.

         49.      On the other hand, I have evidence that  the  Respondent's
         decision had a significant impact on the child's well being. The GP
         letter is of limited  assistance,  as  it  is  based  primarily  on
         information provided by the Appellant. However, the letter from the
         child's teacher is compelling. She  would  have  been  his  teacher
         since September 2017 and would have seen him on a daily basis.  She
         was therefore very well placed to comment on any changes in him.

         50.      I appreciate that the child has settled again. In my view,
         it is to the Appellant's credit that he did not attempt to  bolster
         his case and suggest that the decision was still having an  adverse
         impact on the child.

         51.      I am satisfied the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
         family leave to remain in the UK  had  an  adverse  impact  on  the
         child. The impact may have been only short term, but it was clearly
         sufficiently serious to cause his  teacher  concern.  I  cannot  be
         sure, why he has improved, but,  in  my  experience,  children  are
         quite resilient. Especially, when they have the  love  and  support
         from caring parents, such as the First and Second Appellant in this
         case. Equally, as time went on, the immediate threat of removal  is
         likely to have dissipated and the child is likely to  have  thought
         he can stay in the UK.

         52.       In  conclusion  although  there  are  not  insurmountable
         obstacles to the First  and  Second  Appellants'  integration  into
         Algeria and,  as  such,  generally  the  young  children  would  be
         expected to go with them, I am satisfied that the  Third  Appellant
         cannot reasonably be expected to leave  the  UK.  I  have  attached
         significant weight to the teacher's letter. I appreciate  that  the
         evidence suggests that there has not been any long term  impact  on
         the  child's  well  being  following  the  Respondent's   decision.
         However, I am satisfied that a further negative decision is  likely
         to trigger a more profound and damaging emotional  response,  which
         might have a long term impact on the child's emotional  development
         and his education. I cannot be sure how likely this would be, but I
         am satisfied the risk is more than a mere possibility. As such, the
         Respondent's decision that the Appellant should leave the UK is not
         in the Third Appellant's best interests and I find that  the  Third
         Appellant cannot reasonably expected to leave the UK.

         53.      On balance, I am satisfied that the Third Appellant  meets
         the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules.

         54.      However, this is not determinative of all the appeals and,
         in accordance with section 117A of the 2002 Act,  I  confirm  that,
         when considering the public interest  question,  I  have  also  had
         regard to the factors listed in section 117B of  the  Act.  I  note
         that the  Appellants'  private  lives  have  been  established  and
         developed when they were unlawfully  in  the  UK.  As  such  little
         weight should be attached to their private lives.

         55.      On the other hand, the Respondent reused  the  Appellant's
         asylum claim in October 2015, but appears to have  taken  no  steps
         remove the family from the UK until after the Appellants lodged the
         application, which is the subject of this appeal (see paragraph  16
         of the Appellant's statement).  I  find  this  surprising,  as  the
         Respondent would  have  appreciated  that  as  time  goes  on,  the
         children are likely to develop stronger ties to the UK.

         56. In any event, the Third Appellant has been in the UK for over 7
         years. As such, he is qualifying child for the purposes of  section
         117B(6) and I have found that he cannot be reasonably  be  expected
         to leave the UK. Accordingly, the public interest does not  require
         his parents to leave the UK.

         57.      Further, I note that Section 117B(1) of the  2002  Act  as
         amended  states  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
         controls is in the public interest. I am satisfied that  'effective
         immigration control' includes recognising  that  those  individuals
         who meet the requirements of the  rules  ought  to  be  allowed  to
         remain in the UK. Especially as "the rules are  statements  of  the
         practice to be followed, which are approved by Parliament, and  are
         based on the Secretary of  State's  policy  as  to  how  individual
         rights under article 8 should be  balanced  against  the  competing
         public interests" (paragraph 46 of R (Agyarko) v SSHD; R (Ikuga)  v
         SSHD [2017] UKSC 11).

         58.      On balance, I am satisfied that the interference with  the
         Appellants' private  lives  is  unnecessary  and  disproportionate.
         Their rights outweigh  the  Respondent's  legitimate  interests  in
         ensuring economic and social order, whilst maintaining  a  coherent
         system of immigration control.  In  reaching  this  conclusion  the
         determining factor is my finding that the child  cannot  reasonably
         be expected to leave the UK."

         59.       Accordingly,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decisions  are
         incompatible  with  the  Appellants'  human  rights.  I  allow  the
         appeals.

8.    The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were, it seems to me,  not
entirely unfairly described by  the  granting  judge  as  "repetitive".  But
permission was nevertheless granted and the granting judge  relevantly  said
this:

         "2.      In brief, the rather repetitive  grounds  argue  that  the
         judge erred:

                  First, inadequately  reasoning  his  conclusion  that  the
                  appeals of the whole family  should  succeed,  based  best
                  interests of the sole qualifying  child,  such  conclusion
                  being inadequately  evidenced  and  reasoned;  second,  in
                  failing to consider the immigration history of  the  first
                  and second appellants (KO (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC
                  relied upon).

         3. It  is  arguable  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  evidence
         relating to the sole qualifying child is flawed,  for  the  reasons
         referred to in the grounds. It is also arguable that the judge  has
         failed to give adequate consideration to the public interest issue,
         bearing in mind the adverse immigration history of  the  two  adult
         appellants. Permission is granted on the grounds as pleaded."

9.    I should add that one of the contentions made in the grounds was  that
the tribunal's conclusions with respect to  the  likely  impact  of  further
enforcement action on W was speculative.

10.   Permission having been granted there was a hearing  before  the  Upper
Tribunal (before me) so that it could be decided whether  the  tribunal  had
erred in law and if it had what should flow  from  that.  The  Secretary  of
State was represented by Mr Diwnyzc and T represented himself and the  other
claimants. The thrust of Mr Diwnycz submission was  that  the  tribunal  had
reached conclusions, at paragraph 52 of its  written  reasons,  without  any
evidence at all to underpin them. T  sought  to  make  some  factual  points
regarding W and how he had  reacted  to  the  threat  of  removal.  He  also
asserted that the Secretary of State was attempting to punish him  (I  think
for overstaying) and that UK law confers a right upon children to  be  safe.
T also pointed about that another child claimant, S, had now been in the  UK
for seven years though that was not the position at the  time  the  tribunal
had heard and decided the appeals.

11.   The evidence before the  tribunal  was  that  W  had  had  an  adverse
reaction to the negative news regarding the claimant's  applications  (which
is understandable) but that having "become anxious  and  withdrawn"  as  his
teacher had put it in the letter referred to at paragraph 42 of the  written
reasons, he had seemed to be "back to  normal"  (see  paragraph  45  of  the
written reasons). Indeed, it is apparent from what is said at  paragraph  45
that both T and A had given evidence to the effect that W had, as A  put  it
"settled again". The tribunal went on to say it could not "be  sure  why  he
has improved" (see  paragraph  51  of  the  written  reasons)  but  observed
"equally, as time went on, the immediate threat  of  removal  is  likely  to
have dissipated and the child is likely to have thought he can stay  in  the
UK". Pausing there, it does not seem to  me  that  there  was  any  evidence
before the tribunal to suggest that W had thought that because  removal  had
not taken place straightaway it was not going  to  happen.  Perhaps  he  did
think that and it might not be surprising that a child would do  so.  But  I
cannot see any indication that any evidence to that effect was  given  by  T
or by A or that the tribunal asked about it. Nor is there any suggestion  to
that effect in, for example, any correspondence emanating from W's  teacher.


12.   The tribunal then went on to state  that  whilst  it  appreciated  the
evidence suggested there had "not been any long-term impact on  the  child's
wellbeing  following  the  respondent's  decision"   it   was   nevertheless
"satisfied that a further negative decision, is likely  to  trigger  a  more
profound and damaging emotional  response,  which  might  have  a  long-term
impact on the child's emotional development and  his  education".  It  added
that it could not be sure how likely that would be but it  was  nevertheless
"satisfied the risk is more than  a  mere  possibility".  Again,  though,  I
cannot see any evidence, medical or otherwise, to  suggest  that  there  was
any enhanced risk of  a  profound  and  damaging  emotional  response.  Nor,
indeed, does it appear that either T or A,  in  evidence,  had  raised  that
possibility at the  hearing.  I  would  also  observe  that  the  tribunal's
comment that such risk was "more than a mere possibility" might be taken  to
suggest it was applying a somewhat lower standard of proof than  that  of  a
balance of probabilities which is what it was required to apply.

13.   Of course, the claimants were all unrepresented. It  is  possible  had
they had legal representation some form of expert opinion  evidence  perhaps
from a social worker or a child psychiatrist might have been  obtained.  The
tribunal had to do its best with what it had. But, in my  judgment,  it  did
cross the barrier into unjustified speculation. Quite simply, there  was  no
evidential basis for its  key  conclusions  that  there  was  a  risk  of  a
profound and damaging emotional response on the  part  of  W,  or  that  any
response would be worse than the previous one  or  that  any  such  response
might have a long term impact  on  W's  emotional  development.  Indeed,  if
anything it might be thought, looked  at  from  one  perspective,  that  his
apparent relatively quick return to normality after  the  previous  reaction
suggested some form of permanent adverse emotional response was  not  likely
though I am not purporting to make any finding at all about that. I  suppose
the tribunal could have asked T and A what they had thought might happen  to
W if the appeal failed and, depending on what they had to  say,  might  have
been persuaded that there was such a risk bearing in mind  that  they  will,
of course, know their own child well. But I cannot  see  that  the  tribunal
did do that. Certainly, it did not say that it did. Accordingly, whilst  the
tribunal's decision is an otherwise careful and compassionate  one,  I  have
concluded that it did err in law through making  relevant  findings  without
any real evidential base for them and that  its  decision  with  respect  to
each claimant, must be set aside.

14.   My having set aside the tribunal's decision I  have  also  decided  to
remit for a complete rehearing. That is  because  it  may  be  that  further
useful evidence with respect to W can be given, because there  may  need  to
be findings of fact with respect to  S's  situation  as  another  qualifying
child and because, in my judgement, fairness demands that matters be  looked
at entirely afresh.

15.   My having decided  to  remit,  I  am  statutorily  obligated  to  give
directions for the rehearing of the appeal. But I need not  be  detailed  or
prescriptive. I simply direct that there be  a  complete  rehearing  of  the
appeal before a differently constituted  First-tier  Tribunal  (a  different
Judge) at the  Bradford  Hearing  Centre.  All  other  directions  regarding
listing arrangements may be left to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The tribunal's decision, with respect to each claimant, involved the  making
of an error of law. Accordingly, the tribunal's decision is set  aside.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination by  way  of
a complete rehearing.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated 25 June 2019

Anonymity

I grant anonymity to each claimant pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  Accordingly,  no  report  of  these
proceedings shall  identify  any  claimant  or  any  family  member  of  any
claimant.  This  grant  of  anonymity  applies  to  all   parties   to   the
proceedings. Failure to comply might lead to contempt of court proceedings.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated 25 June 2019
