
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17014/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 August 2020                            |On 7 September 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     F H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, instructed by Marsh and Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission against
the decision of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who dismissed his appeal
against the respondent's decision of 3 October 2019 refusing his
application for leave to remain on the basis of family and private life.

2.   The appellant said he came to the United Kingdom illegally in November
2013 and has remained here thereafter.  In March 2016 he said he began a
relationship with MS, an Albanian woman.  She was aged 17 at the time when
they met.  In around September 2016, when she was 5 months pregnant, she
ended their relationship.  Their son J was born on 23 December 2016 and the
appellant said he was present at the birth.

3.   On 2 October 2018 MS gave birth to a second son, R.  The appellant
said he was again present at the birth but said he was not R's father.  It
is said that R's father is AP, who together with MS registered R's birth on
9 October 2018.  On 30 October 2018 MS obtained a UK passport for R.

4.   The appellant claimed that a month after R's birth he and MS resumed
their relationship and he became R's de facto father.  Subsequently MS
obtained limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom, until 1 July 2021,
on the basis that she was the mother of a British citizen child.  J was
granted limited leave to remain in line with her.  J's birth was registered
by the appellant and MS on 21 May 2019.

5.   In the current application, which is dated 18 June 2019, the appellant
said that he and MS had been in a relationship from March 2016 and then
they had problems as she was going out with the father of her second child
but he abandoned them and she returned back to him and he was very happy
about this as he had always loved her.

6.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and the sponsor.  The
appellant confirmed the above account of the relationship and the timing of
events.  MS had ended their relationship because he did not have a job and
did not have leave to remain in the United Kingdom and also they were
living some distance apart.  MS had become pregnant with R unintentionally
as a result of a one-night stand.  The appellant had been at the hospital
when R was born and a month later he was helping to look after J and they
got back together.  MS had told him she was not in touch with R's father.
He did not live with MS but visited five to six times a week and helped her
to look after R.  They were not living together because he could not work.
MS and the children were in a one bedroom flat paid for by the local
authority.

7.   He was able to name R's father.  MS had told him that R's father was a
UK citizen and he had seen R's passport and the name of his father.  As far
as he knew, MS had not seen R's father since his attendance when the birth
certificate was issued and he had helped MS with the paperwork.

8.   In her evidence MS said that she had moved into her current flat in
December 2019 and it was paid for by Social Services and she was in receipt
of benefits.  She had been out with R's father a few times but they had not
been in a relationship as such.  After she discovered she was pregnant they
talked on the phone but had no interest in seeing each other and she
thought that he was probably in a relationship but was unable to say why
she thought this.  She had not seen R's father since R's birth has been
registered.  He had never provided any financial support or wanted any
contact with R and she had not asked him for money.  He had not shown any
real interest in R other than telephoning a few times to ask about his
health.

9.   The judge set out the relevant legal principles and then went on to
consider the evidence in the context of those principles.  He referred to
the fact that the appellant's representative had sent the respondent a
letter on 26 September 2019 which was said to contain further supporting
documentation but it did not say what further information was provided.
There was a reference to photographs with the child but the judge was not
provided with any explanation for this and it remained unclear whether the
respondent had been provided with the photographs.  The appellant produced
a large number of photographs at the hearing showing him with MS and the
children over time.  The judge accepted that the photographs he saw were
consistent with the appellant's account of being in a relationship with MS
but considered they could be equally consistent with him having separated
from her but continuing to take an active part in J's life.  He said there
was no independent evidence about the circumstances in which the
photographs were taken and photographs could show events that had been
staged.

10.  As the statements provided by both witnesses were brief the judge
considered that his assessment of their reliability as witnesses was based
to a significant extent on their oral evidence and other documentary
evidence.

11.  At paragraph 56 he said that when assessing the appellant's evidence,
he took into account that he had come to the United Kingdom unlawfully and
remained unlawfully.  He stated that the appellant's willingness to ignore
immigration law suggested he might be willing to lie in order to remain in
the United Kingdom and he therefore needed to treat his evidence with
caution where it was not supported by other reliable evidence.

12.  He noted that in evidence the couple gave broadly similar accounts
about when they met, when they separated, when they got back together and
where they were living during this time.  He commented that this was
consistent with their account being true but remarked that their
consistency was somewhat limited.  They gave similar accounts about the
specific times when specific events occurred but when asked to provide more
detail about what had happened and why, their evidence tended to be vague
and there were a number of implausible and inconsistent aspects to their
evidence.  Whereas initially the appellant said that MS had told him she
had no contact with R's father after she became pregnant, subsequently he
appeared to accept that there had been some contact.  The judge considered
the appellant's answers were vague with regard to the circumstances in
which R's father participated in registering R's birth, saying eventually
that as far as he knew, MS had not had any contact with R's father since
R's birth was registered.  He accepted that given the subject matter it was
possible that MS might not have been candid with him.  He considered that
although the evidence was very consistent with regard to the reason for the
ending of the relationship initially, given the fact that that was still
the situation and he now helped out with the children, the judge considered
their evidence about this to be limited and superficial and that neither
appeared to be able to give any real detail about the circumstances
surrounding this important event in their lives.  Overall, he found MS's
evidence in relation to her contact with R's father after she became aware
she was pregnant to be very vague and somewhat evasive.  He found it
implausible that she would not have asked R's father for some financial
assistance given that she initially ended her relationship with the
appellant because of a lack of money.  The judge found it very implausible
that MS's evidence of R's father was that although he was a person with
whom she had had a casual sexual relationship, on the basis of a single
phone call he accepted without question that he was R's father and agreed
to be registered as his father although having had virtually nothing to do
with MS or the child before or after the birth.

13.  The judge also found the independent evidence the appellant had
provided to support his claim that the relationship had resumed in around
November 2018 to be limited.

14.  The judge had a concern that there was limited evidence only from the
local authority which had supported MS throughout the time she had known
the appellant and given birth to her two children.  There was a letter of
16 October 2019 where the writer stated that she had met the appellant and
the father of the baby a few times at their regulated visits and the judge
found the letter to be somewhat ambiguous and did not feel able to give a
great deal of weight to it.  There was a also a lack of evidence in the
medical records to support the account of MS and that of the appellant.
The judge noted that J's nursery registration form showed he was named as a
person who could collect J and that was consistent with him taking an
active part in J's life but it postdated his application and did not really
assist him in respect of his claimed relationship with MS or R.  Looking at
the evidence as a whole, the judge did not find that the appellant had
shown that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with MS and had
not shown that he had a parental relationship or was taking an active part
in R's upbringing.

15.  As regards the appellant's relationship with J, the judge found that
he had a parental relationship with him and was taking an active part in
his upbringing insofar as he saw him regularly.  He did not consider the
appellant or MS had been honest with him and considered it was therefore
difficult to assess what the true situation was in respect of the children
and considered he could not make positive findings about this.  He said
that all he could say was that the appellant had not shown he had a genuine
and subsisting relationship with MS or R.

16.  At paragraph 81 the judge went on to say that he could not speculate
about what the true situation might be but looking at the evidence as a
whole there appeared to be a reasonable suspicion that either MS was still
in a relationship with R's father or alternatively the appellant was R's
father and the account of R's father being an Albanian born UK citizen was
a device to enable both MS and the appellant and their children to obtain
leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

17.  The judge went on to say that he repeated and emphasised that he did
not and could not make findings that either of these possibilities were in
fact the true situation and that it would be wrong and unfair to do so
merely on the basis of suspicions.  He noted that it had not been put to
the appellant or MS that R might be the appellant's child.  He did not
believe however that he was prohibited from identifying what he considered
to be reasonable suspicions particularly when they might impact on the
welfare of children.  He remarked that it was self-evident that if R's
birth certificate did not in fact reflect his true paternity there would be
a serious breach of his Article 8 rights and not in his best interests.  He
went on to reiterate that he did not take account of these suspicions when
reaching his conclusions and proceeded on the basis that R was a genuine UK
citizen as evidenced by his birth certificate.  The judge went on to
consider whether the appellant met the requirements of the Immigration
Rules and concluded that he did not.  This was on the basis that his
relationship with J could not meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of
Appendix FM nor did he have a genuine and subsisting relationship with MS
and therefore no family life with her within the meaning of Article 8.  He
went on to consider the effect on R and J of his removal and concluded that
he did not find that requiring the appellant to return to Albania would
adversely affect R sufficiently to compromise his best interests and that J
would be able to maintain a relationship with his father via modern means
of communication and visits.  He considered there was no or no sufficient
evidence to suggest that MS would be unable to cope without the appellant's
regular visits to J and that she appeared to have family support in the UK
as she was currently working for her cousin and J's nursery application
form showed that there was at least one other individual whom she trusted
to collect J from nursery on her behalf.  The judge concluded that the
adverse consequences to J's best interests caused by separating him from
his father could be significantly mitigated and the consequences for J and
the appellant would not be unduly harsh.  At paragraph 108 of his
determination he stated that although the suspicions he had identified
regarding R's paternity had played no part in his decision he was under a
duty to take reasonable steps to promote and safeguard the welfare and best
interests of children affected by his decision and given these concerns he
requested the respondent to give serious consideration to making a
safeguarding referral to the local authority regarding this concern and to
provide the local authority with a copy of his decision.  In his view the
respondent's duty under section 55 of the 2009 Act required this to be
done.

18.  The appeal having been dismissed, the appellant sought permission to
appeal on the basis that at paragraph 56 the judge's remarks about the
appellant's willingness to ignore Immigration Rules suggested that he might
be willing to lie in order to remain in the United Kingdom was based on no
authority and vitiated the determination.  It was also argued that regular
references to "suspicion" and "suspicions" at paragraphs 81 to 83 and 108
were based on pure speculation rather than evidence.  It was not accepted
that the suspicions played no part in the judge reaching his conclusions
and it was argued that on any rational view manifestly they did and at the
very least the suspicions infected the reasoning process.  Consistent with
this was the request to the Home Office made at paragraph 108.

19.  It was also argued that the rejection of the appellant's relationship
with his partner was irrational and unsustainable and the judge's comment
that the photographs could have been "staged" was irrational and betrayed
his flawed approach to the evidence in general.  The judge had failed to
factor into his assessment of credibility the various points for example at
paragraphs 54, 58 and 62 of consistency in the evidence.

20.  It is also argued that the judge had not properly reasoned his
conclusions about the appellant's relationship with R and also in failing
to address it properly he had not considered the reasonableness of the
impact on R of the appellant leaving the United Kingdom.  The fact that the
judge accepted that the appellant and his partner were clearly telling the
truth about the relationship with J had not been properly taken into
account in assessing the credibility of the other aspects of the claim.

21.  In his submissions Mr Collins relied on and developed the points made
in the grounds.  The comment at paragraph 56 was indicative of apparent
bias and was indefensible and gave rise to real concerns and vitiated the
decision.  The points of suspicion that were not part of the Home Office
case had not been put to the appellant and had clearly infected the
reasoning process, hence the paragraph 108 request.  A fair-minded observer
would consider it was part of the process of reasoning.

22.  In his submissions Mr Melvin relied on and developed the points made
in his Rule 24 response.  He argued that paragraph 56 was to be read
holistically.  The appellant had not said what he had been doing for the
last six years and there was sparse evidence of the relationship.  It was
open to the judge to consider the appellant's evidence and when it was not
corroborated to treat it with caution.  As regards the suspicions the judge
referred to, these were qualified by the judge and played no part in his
findings of fact.  The suspicions with regard to the second child were open
to the judge.  It was for the appellant to make his case and his claim was
parasitic on the sponsor, who herself was parasitic on the British citizen
child and the claimed relationship with the child.  The claim could only
succeed by showing a subsisting relationship with the partner, who had
limited leave, and the child on whom she relied for her leave.  As regards
points made about the photographs, matters of weight were for the judge and
he had not ignored the evidence but relied on it, as could be seen at
paragraph 79.  It was open to the judge to conclude as he did.  He had
given reasons for the findings he made about the relationship with the
second child.  The judge had considered the evidence and the decision was
fully reasoned.  There was no evidence of family members.  The findings
were sound.  As regards the point about contact with the local authority
for the Home Office, the Home Office did not encourage such observations
and it was not a direction but it seemed the local authority was satisfied.

23.  By way of reply Mr Collins argued that with regard to the appellant's
activities while in the United Kingdom this was a Home Office application
and he had not been interviewed so he had not had an opportunity to state
what he had been doing.  His application was based on his relationship with
his partner and the two children.  If the evidence was sparse then it was
all the more important to give objective consideration to the evidence.
The point being made about the claim being parasitic betrayed the Home
Office's approach and the question was, was it a decision lacking merit.
It was not just a matter of the photographs but the consistency of the
evidence also and the judge had speculated and conjectured.  Looked at
holistically ground 3 had force.  Ground 4 had not been addressed and it
was not clear what the judge thought about that issue, which was undecided.
 There was a need for a fair balance.

24.  I reserved my decision.

25.  The judge's decision is a detailed and thorough one.  However, it
seems to me that there is a particular difficulty with it and that is the
matter identified at ground 2.  This concerns the judge's views about the
potential true situation with regard to the appellant's relationship with
R.  Although the judge repeated and emphasised that he was not making
findings on the possibility that either MS was still in a relationship with
R's father or that the appellant was R's father, these are matters not
having been put to the parties, nevertheless he considered they were
reasonable suspicions albeit he insisted he did not take them into account
when coming to his decision.  However, there is the point at paragraph 108
where, expressing his concerns, he requested the respondent to give serious
consideration to making a safeguarding referral to the local authority
regarding his concern.

26.  In my view that is fatal to the judge's determination.  It would have
been better had he not speculated at all about this matter, particularly
when, as he noted, it was not a point that had been put to the appellant or
to MS, and the fact that he took it sufficiently seriously to make the
recommendation that he did at paragraph 108 is indicative of a real risk
that it played a material part in his thought process in coming to the
adverse credibility findings that he did.  As I say, in my view that
vitiates the entire decision because it indicates that the judge in
assessing the credibility of the witnesses speculated unduly and
inappropriately on a material matter.  Accordingly, I consider there is a
material error of law by the judge in the decision.  To a lesser extent I
see force in the points concerning his failure to factor in the various
stages at which he identified consistency in the evidence to his overall
findings on credibility as a whole, but it is essentially in respect of
that central point that I consider the decision must be set aside, and
there will have to be a full rehearing before a different judge at Taylor
House.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 21 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
