
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17717/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2018                          |On 18th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                paramjit [b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rehman, Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated  8  July  2016  to
    refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
    her private and family life. First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell dismissed
    the appeal in a decision promulgated on 10 July  2018.   The  Appellant
    now appeals to this Tribunal  with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keane on 26 September 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  entered  the  UK
    illegally in 2007. She made an application for leave to remain  in  the
    UK on 17 July 2012 but that application was rejected  as  invalid.  She
    applied again on 10 September 2012 and then, following her marriage  to
    her husband (a British citizen) on 18 September  2012  she  varied  her
    outstanding application on  28  September  2012.  The  application  was
    refused on 22 April 2013. After the birth of her first  child  in  June
    2013 the Appellant applied for reconsideration of that decision but the
    application was rejected  on  1  April  2014.  The  Appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the basis of her private and  family
    life on 22 May 2015. The refusal of that application is the subject  of
    this appeal. The Appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Povey on 12  November  2017.  The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    against that decision was allowed by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
    on 18 December 2017 and remitted it to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard afresh. Thus it came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell.

 3. The judge's findings begin at  paragraph  32  on  page  11.  The  judge
    considered the allegation that the appellant obtained her TOEIC English
    language certificate by deception  noting  at  paragraph  71  that  the
    Appellant has been inconsistent in her accounts of taking the test  and
    concluding at paragraph 77 that the Appellant did not take the  English
    language test as she had claimed and that she knowingly used  deception
    by submitting a fraudulent certificate as part of her  application  for
    leave to remain. The judge went on to consider the Appellant's  private
    and family life with her British husband and son. The judge noted  that
    the Appellant's husband has two other children from his first  marriage
    and has regular contact with them every two weeks. The judge found that
    the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her  husband   is   genuine   and
    subsisting, that she has been the primary carer for her son  since  his
    birth and that he has known no other care regime and  has  not  visited
    India. The judge found that there is no evidence to  show  that  either
    the Appellant or her husband have family in India  and  that  her  last
    connection with India is  when  she  left  there  in  2007.  The  judge
    accepted that the Appellant's parents did not approve of  her  marriage
    to her husband and that this explains the lack of contact between  them
    [85]. The judge considered the appeal under the Appendix FM  and  found
    that the Appellant could not meet the suitability  requirements  of  S-
    LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM because her  action  in  obtaining  the  English
    language certificate by deception was criminal in nature  and  evidence
    of criminality.

 4. The judge went on to consider the appeal under Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. He  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  established
    family life with her husband and son  [106].  He  considered  the  best
    interests of the child, who was 5 years old and in his  first  year  at
    school, finding that there is 'a very  real  possibility  that  if  the
    appellant is removed to India, [the child] will have  to  go  with  her
    because his  father  is  not  able  to  look  after  him  due  to  work
    commitments'. The judge found that this would 'significantly impact' on
    the child's welfare because 'it is undoubtedly in his best interests to
    receive the direct parenting from his father' and that it is not in his
    best interests to lose a meaningful relationship  with  his  father  by
    going to India [108]. He found that it  is  not  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain in the UK  with  his  father  if  his  mother  were
    removed. The judge acknowledged that if the child and his  father  were
    to accompany the Appellant to India this would have an  impact  on  the
    father's relationship with his other children. The judge concluded that
    it is in the child's best interests to remain in the UK, ideally in the
    care of both mother and father [111].

 5. The judge went on to consider factors in  the  Appellant's  favour  and
    those which weigh in the public interest. The judge set out a number of
    factors in the Appellant's favour. At paragraph 121 the judge  set  out
    significant factors which weigh  in  the  public  interest  namely  the
    Appellant's poor immigration history, she entered the UK unlawfully  in
    2007 and never had leave to be in  the  country,  and  she  engaged  in
    deception and as a consequence does not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.  The  judge  took  into  account  the  Respondent's
    guidance which provides that 'save in cases involving criminality'  the
    decision maker must not take a decision in relation to  the  parent  or
    primary carer of a British citizen  child  where  the  effect  of  that
    decision would be to force the child to leave the EU [126].

 6. At paragraph 128 the judge said; "I must and do take into  account  the
    Upper Tribunal's reasons for remitting this  appeal.."  and  took  into
    account that other First-tier  Tribunal  decisions  "have  survived  an
    appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  where  a  judge  has  found  that  the
    suitability requirements were met despite similar  deceptive  behaviour
    regarding the English language test certificates having been alleged or
    where the judge has found  that  the  section  117B(6)  test,  if  met,
    outweighs the public interest". At paragraph 129  Judge  Powell  quoted
    from the Upper Tribunal's analysis of Judge Povey's decision where  the
    Upper Tribunal said that Judge Povey had not  properly  considered  the
    proportionality of the decision and in particular had  failed  to  take
    into account factors weighing in the public interest. At paragraph  130
    he set out another extract from the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  where
    consideration was given to  circumstances  where  the  conduct  of  the
    parent could give rise to considerations of such weight as  to  justify
    separation of the parent and the child. The judge went on to  recognise
    at paragraph 131 that the Upper Tribunal's statements are  not  binding
    on him but said "I must and do take them into account".  The  concluded
    at paragraph 139:

         "This  is  a  finely  balanced  case.  In  light  of  the  detailed
         discussion in this part of my judgement, I find  that  I  persuaded
         (sic) that it would not be unreasonable to expect  [the  child]  to
         leave the United Kingdom because the public interest in immigration
         control outweighs his best interests and the other factors  on  the
         appellant's side of  the  equation.  Her  conduct  and  immigration
         history provides a powerful reason  for  me  to  find  that  it  is
         reasonable to expect [the child] to leave the United Kingdom"


Error of Law

 7. I make an initial observation in relation to Judge  Powell's  decision.
    In a lengthy decision of 27 pages, almost 9 pages are devoted  to  case
    law. Whilst this does not amount to an error, it is unnecessary and  is
    a distraction from the resolution of the issues in dispute in the case.
    It is of course important to identify relevant case law and  apply  it,
    but it is not necessary to set  out  lengthy  extracts  from  cases  of
    general interest.

 8. The grounds of appeal put  forward  seven  grounds.  The  first  ground
    contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  that,   in
    considering  whether  the  English  language   certificate   had   been
    fraudulently obtained, he relied on a marriage interview carried out on
    9  December  2015.  It  is  contended  that  this  was  in   error   in
    circumstances where it was an interview carried out in connection  with
    the marriage rather than the English language certificate; it  was  not
    read back to the Appellant and was not  signed;  no  clarification  was
    sought in the interview; and the Appellant was not given an opportunity
    to respond to adverse matters. In my view this ground has not been made
    out. The judge took account of the  objections  to  the  interview  but
    concluded that the Appellant had  ample  opportunity  to  identify  and
    correct errors or omissions in the interview  record  [50].  The  judge
    took into account frailties in the interview evidence but gave adequate
    reasons at paragraphs 50 and 51 for attaching weight to  the  interview
    record.

 9. I deal next with grounds 3 and 4 which are interconnected and relate to
    the judge's consideration of the  TOEIC  English  language  certificate
    issue as it is appropriate to determine this issue  before  considering
    the  second  ground.  I  do  not  accept  the  contention  that  it  is
    inconsistent for the judge to find that the Appellant attended the test
    centre [66-67] but did not take the test. The judge analysed all of the
    evidence and gave very detailed reasons for accepting (just)  that  the
    Appellant attended the test centre. He went on to  give  very  detailed
    reasons, identifying significant inconsistencies, for deciding that the
    Appellant did not take the English language test as claimed  [77].  The
    judge undertook a detailed analysis of  the  facts  and  evidence.  The
    judge identified that the Secretary of State had the initial evidential
    burden and, that having been discharged [41] the burden switched to the
    Appellant [42] who raised a  plausible  explanation  [67],  before  the
    burden shifted back to the Secretary of State. The judge found that the
    Appellant's  innocent  explanation  was  to  be  rejected.  The   judge
    accordingly followed the guidance  in  SM  and  Qadir  v  SSHD  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and MA (ETS - TOEIC
    testing) [2016] UKUT 00450(IAC). I am satisfied that the judge followed
    the correct approach, examined  all  of  the  evidence  and  reached  a
    finding open to him on the evidence. Accordingly grounds 3 and  4  have
    not been made out.

10. I turn to ground 2 in which it is contended that the  judge  failed  to
    engage with arguments  concerning  S.LTR.1.6  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. It is contended that the Appellant's  behaviour,  in
    submitting a  false  document  with  a  previous  application,  is  not
    sufficient to engage S.LTR.1.6.

11. The judge dealt  with  this  issue  at  paragraphs  91-99.   The  judge
    considered the circumstances taking into account that the Appellant had
    not been convicted of any offence and that there is no  other  evidence
    of her being involved in undesirable behaviour or behaviour that  could
    reasonably indicate that her presence is not conducive  to  the  public
    good. The judge considered the case law and the Home Office guidance. I
    am satisfied that the judge gave adequate reasons for finding that  the
    Appellant's act of deception was sufficient to  bring  her  within  the
    provisions of S.LTR.1.6.

12. I deal with the remaining  grounds  of  appeal  together  as  they  are
    interconnected and  go  to  the  judge's  approach  to  the  Article  8
    assessment, in particular the assessment of the best interests  of  the
    child and the application of section 117B (6).

13. It is contended in the fifth ground that the judge failed  to  properly
    take account of the best interests of the child. At  paragraph  11  the
    judge concluded that it is in the best interests of the child to remain
    in the UK "ideally in the care of both  his  mother  and  father".  The
    sixth ground alleges that the judge erred in relying  on  the  previous
    findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Mailer who remitted the appeal. It is contended in the  seventh  ground
    that the judge erred in his  approach  to  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

14. It is clear from  reading  the  judge's  assessment  of  Article  8  at
    paragraphs 105 - 144 that the factor which tipped the scale  in  favour
    of the public  interest  in  the  proportionality  assessment  was  the
    Appellant's conduct in exercising deception in relation to the  English
    language test  and  her  poor  immigration  history  [135].  The  judge
    concluded that the child's interests are prejudiced by the  Appellant's
    conduct and the public interest therefore outweighs  the  prejudice  to
    the child's interests [140].

15. In his submissions Mr Rehman contended that it is obvious from  reading
    the decision that Judge Powell took into account the decisions of Judge
    Povey and that of Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer and that  this  inhibited
    his assessment of the appeal when his task had  been  to  consider  the
    appeal afresh. He contended that the judge further erred  at  paragraph
    116 where he said that if he found that it would  be  unreasonable  for
    the child to go with the Appellant to India this would also satisfy the
    insurmountable obstacles test for the purposes  of  EX1  and  paragraph
    276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Mr  Rehman  submitted  that  this
    demonstrates a confusion of the two tests. He  further  submitted  that
    the judge erred at paragraph 135 where he said that in  his  assessment
    of reasonableness he must  take  account  of  the  Appellant's  conduct
    including the findings he had made against her,  her  poor  immigration
    history and the Secretary of State's view that the Appellant's presence
    in the  UK  is  undesirable  in  light  of  her  behaviour.  Mr  Rehman
    acknowledged that the judge took account of the cases of MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450,  but
    contended that he failed to take account of ZH (Tanzania)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 and KO (Nigeria) & Ors v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.
    He contended that the circumstances in ZH are on  all  fours  with  the
    situation in this appeal and that Judge Powell failed to  consider  the
    child's nationality and the benefits he will lose if made to leave  the
    UK.

16. On the other hand  Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  judge  properly
    applied the guidance in KO contending  that  at  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision in KO the Supreme Court accepted that a British citizen  child
    can be expected to relocate outside the UK. She  contended  that  Judge
    Powell acknowledged that the child is British at paragraph 107, that he
    acknowledged that  there  is  a  very  real  possibility  that  if  the
    Appellant is removed the child will have to go  with  her  because  his
    father cannot look after him due to work commitments, or that he  could
    stay in the UK and be looked after by someone else, which would not  be
    in his best interests  [108-109].  Ms  Isherwood  accepted  that  Judge
    Powell made reference to the previous First-tier Tribunal decision  and
    to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in this case but  submitted  that
    the judge recognised that the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  was  not
    binding but considered that it defined the issues to be determined. She
    submitted that this was not a material error in circumstances where the
    Appellant relied on the same  skeleton  argument  as  that  before  the
    previous judges and  the  arguments  were  exactly  the  same.  In  her
    submission the judge's reference at paragraph 133 to  the  decision  of
    Judge Povey did not affect his consideration of the issues  because  at
    paragraph 134 he referred to the decision in MA. She submitted that the
    judge looked at Judge Povey's decision at paragraph 88 where  he  noted
    that the Presenting Officer in the hearing before Judge Povey  conceded
    that, but for the alleged deception, the Appellant's appeal would  have
    met the requirements of Ex1 of Appendix  FM.  He  noted  that  no  such
    concession was made before him. She submitted that paragraph  122  goes
    to the heart of the case and that there the judge went through  all  of
    the factors and made findings open to be made.  She  acknowledged  that
    there had been a shift in the case law but submitted that this did  not
    dislodge the decision in this appeal.

17. In response Mr Rehman submitted that paragraph  133,  where  the  judge
    considered the concession made before Judge  Povey,  is  sufficient  to
    amount to a material error. He submitted that the judge had  failed  to
    properly consider that the child and his father are British citizens as
    are the father's two other children.

18. Judge Powell's decision is lengthy but I  have  considered  all  of  it
    carefully in the light of the criticisms made. I acknowledge that Judge
    Powell  did  consider  all  factors  in  the  case  in  assessing   the
    proportionality of the decision  and,  in  particular,  in  considering
    whether it is reasonable to expect the British citizen child  to  leave
    the UK under section 117B (6). However I  have  an  overriding  concern
    about how Judge Powell dealt with the  decisions  of  Judge  Povey  and
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer.

19. Judge Powell made a number of  references  to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Povey. However that decision had been set aside due to  errors  of  law
    and, in referring to that decision, Judge  Povey  risked  falling  into
    error himself. Further, the decision had been set  aside  so  that  the
    appeal could be heard afresh. In hearing the appeal afresh it  was  not
    appropriate to have regard to the previous decision.

20. I have concerns about a number  of  the  references  to  Judge  Povey's
    decision.  For  example,  at  paragraph  88  Judge  Powell  outlines  a
    concession made before Judge Povey noting that the same concession  had
    not been made before him. It is  not  clear  how  this  influenced  his
    decision.

21. Again, at paragraph 133 Judge Powell discussed the  approach  taken  by
    Judge Povey before going on to cite from MA and then going  on  to  set
    out his approach at paragraph 135. It is not clear why  the  judge  set
    out the previous judge's approach here. In my view it raises  questions
    about how the judge approached the issues  to  be  determined  and  may
    indicate that he believed that he had to make a different decision from
    that reached by Judge Povey.

22. Judge Powell made reference to Judge Mailer's decision on a  number  of
    occasions throughout the decision. However on occasion these references
    were not accurate. For example at paragraph 97 Judge Powell set out  an
    extract from paragraph 13 dealing with the English language certificate
    and said at paragraph 98; "These observations do not  determine  how  I
    should decide the  case  but  they  serve  as  a  clear  reminder  that
    obtaining an English language certificate by deception is  criminal  in
    nature. It is evidence of criminality". However paragraph 13, which  is
    cited at paragraph 97, does not contain 'observations'  made  by  Judge
    Mailer but is simply  a  rehearsal  of  the  submissions  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing before Judge Mailer.

23. Although Judge Powell said that he was not bound  by  the  decision  of
    Judge Mailer I consider that a number of his comments indicate that  he
    was in fact influenced by the outcome of  the  Upper  Tribunal  appeal.
    Significantly he said this at paragraph 127-128:

         "127.    The qualification is an important one because I have found
         that the appellant's conduct is properly  classed  as  criminality.
         This approach is seemingly in line with the comments  made  by  the
         Upper Tribunal in remitting the case for a fresh hearing before me.
         As such, the [Home Office] Guidance is of limited  value.  However,
         in cases involving criminality, the Home Office  also  publishes  a
         separate guide but this  only  applies  to  foreign  criminals  and
         deportation, which does not arise in this case.


         128.     I must and do  take  into  account  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         reasons for remitting this appeal to me. In doing so,  I  recognise
         that there are other First-tier decisions  that  have  survived  an
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal where  a  judge  has  found  that  the
         suitability  requirements  were  met  despite   similar   deceptive
         behaviour regarding the English language test  certificates  having
         been alleged but not proved or where a judge  has  found  that  the
         section 117B(6) test, if met, outweighs the public interest"


24. The judge went on at  paragraphs  129-130  to  set  out  extracts  from
    paragraphs 28-29 of the decision of Deputy Judge Mailer.

25. In my view it is clear from paragraphs 127-130, and in particular  128,
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Povey  was  unduly  influenced  by  the
    decision of Judge Mailer. Judge Mailer was considering  errors  in  the
    decision of Judge Povey and not giving guidance to the next  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. However it appears from  paragraph  128  in  particular
    that Judge Powell thought that the  fact  that  this  appeal  had  been
    remitted indicated that he should reach  a  decision  other  than  that
    reached by Judge Povey.

26. In is clear reading the decisions of Judge Povey and Judge Mailer  that
    Judge Mailer set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  because  no
    findings had been made as to whether the  Appellant  had  obtained  the
    English language test by deception  and  that  the  proportionality  of
    removal had not been properly  considered  with  reference  to  whether
    leave had been obtained by deception. Judge Mailer gave  clear  reasons
    for setting aside Judge Povey's decision. In this context he  discussed
    the approach set out in MM and the  Home  Office  policy.  Judge  Povey
    properly identified these issues at paragraph 14. He did  not  need  to
    make further reference to Judge Mailer's decision.

27. I have considered all of the references to the decision of Judge  Povey
    and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer and I conclude that Judge Powell
    erred in his approach  to  this  appeal.  The  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Povey was set aside and the appeal was remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under section  12  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement  Act  2007  with  directions  that  it  be  heard   afresh.
    Accordingly the judge erred in his approach to the appeal in failing to
    consider it afresh and erred in taking  account  of  the  decisions  of
    Judge Povey and being unduly influenced by the decision of Judge Mailer
    which were immaterial matters.

28. As set out above I do not find that the judge's findings in relation to
    the TOEIC  certificate  were  infected  by  similar  error.  The  judge
    approached that matter afresh and made findings  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence. I have not upheld the challenge to the finding in relation to
    S.LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM. Accordingly those parts of the  decision  are
    preserved. There has been no challenge to the judge's other findings of
    fact and I preserve those too. That leaves the assessment under Article
    8 which I set aside due to the errors identified above. I indicated  to
    the parties that if I reached the conclusion that there is an error  in
    relation to Article 8 I would remake it on the basis  of  the  evidence
    before me. They both agreed with that approach.

Remaking the decision

29. I approach the remaking of the Article 8 assessment in accordance  with
    the guidance in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. I am satisfied
    that the Appellant has established a family life in  the  UK  with  her
    husband and child. As they are British citizens  and  do  not  have  to
    leave the UK, I  am  satisfied  that  removal  of  the  Appellant  will
    interfere  with  that  family  life.  Such   interference   will   have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    article 8. The decision is in accordance with the Immigration Rules and
    therefore is in accordance with the law.

30. I deal with the fourth and fifth Razgar questions together.  I  firstly
    consider the best interests of the child. The child was born on 23 June
    2013 and is 5 years old. He is a British citizen. The child was born in
    the UK and has always lived here, his mother has been his primary carer
    from birth and he has never visited India. His father is British and so
    are his two half sisters who live in the UK too.   The  child's  father
    has access to his older children on foot of a court order. The  child's
    father works in the UK. On the basis of all of  this  evidence  I  find
    that it is in the child's best interests to remain in the UK with  both
    of his parents.

31. I take into account the guidance given by the Supreme Court in the case
    of ZH where Lady Hale said:

         "33.     We now have a much greater understanding of the importance
         of these issues in assessing the overall well-being of  the  child.
         In making the proportionality assessment under article 8, the  best
         interests of the child must be a primary consideration. This  means
         that they must  be  considered  first.  They  can,  of  course,  be
         outweighed by the cumulative effect  of  other  considerations.  In
         this case, the  countervailing  considerations  were  the  need  to
         maintain firm  and  fair  immigration  control,  coupled  with  the
         mother's appalling immigration history and  the  precariousness  of
         her position when family life was created.  But,  as  the  Tribunal
         rightly pointed out, the children were not to be blamed  for  that.
         And the inevitable result of removing their primary carer would  be
         that they had to leave with her. On the facts, it is  as  least  as
         strong  a  case  as Edore  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where Simon Brown LJ held that "there
         really  is  only  room  for  one  view"   (para   26).   In   those
         circumstances, the Secretary of State was clearly right to  concede
         that there could be only one answer."


32. I also take account of the guidance in the recent case of KO where Lord
    Carnworth said:

         "17.      As  has  been  seen,  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
         substance of the rule without material change, but this time in the
         context of the right of the parent to remain. I would infer that it
         was intended to have the same effect. The question again is what is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber) [2016]   EWCA   Civ
         705, [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the subsection
         to import a reference to the conduct of the  parent.  Section  117B
         sets out a number of factors relating to  those  seeking  leave  to
         enter or remain, but criminality is not  one  of  them.  Subsection
         117B(6) is on its face free-standing, the only qualification  being
         that the person relying on it is not  liable  to  deportation.  The
         list of relevant factors set out  in  the  IDI  guidance  (para  10
         above) seems to me wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the
         context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


         18.      On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
         seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where
         the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:


             "22.      In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."


         19.      He noted (para 21) that Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar
         point in considering  the  "best  interests"  of  children  in  the
         context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


             "58.      In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the
             best interests of the children must be made on the basis  that
             the facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has
             no right to remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"


         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."


33. Lord Carnworth reiterated this approach again at paragraph 51 where  he
    said that the context in which section 117B(6) has to be considered  is
    whether the parents, as a result of their conduct, have  to  leave  the
    UK.

34. The situation for the child in this case is that his father has a right
    to remain in the UK as a British citizen as does the child. The child's
    father works in the UK and, importantly, has contact with his two other
    children here. In his witness statement the  Appellant's  husband  says
    that he cannot relocate to India because of his work and older children
    here. He says that he needs his wife to help him raise  the  child.  In
    these circumstances the child will either be required to leave  the  UK
    with his mother, who has been his primary carer, or remain  in  the  UK
    with his father without his mother.

35. I take account of the other provisions in section 117B. In light of the
    findings of the First-tier tribunal Judge about the TOEIC certificates,
    there is no evidence that the Appellant speaks English. The Appellant's
    husband is working  so  the  family  is  financially  independent.  The
    Appellant developed her private life and family life whilst in  the  UK
    unlawfully.

36. I take account of the fact that the Appellant  used  deception  in  the
    TOEIC test. This is a significant factor to be weighed  in  the  public
    interest  in  this  case.  I  take  account  too  of  the   Appellant's
    immigration history, she entered the UK illegally and has not had leave
    to remain in this country.

37. However I consider the circumstances of this case in the light  of  the
    guidance in the case law set out above. The Appellant's  husband  is  a
    British citizen and is not required to leave the UK.  In  fact  he  has
    said that he cannot do so because he is settled and working  here  and,
    crucially, he has contact with his two older children who  are  British
    citizens and live in the  UK.   The  Appellant's  child  is  a  British
    citizen and is entitled to the benefits of residing in the  country  of
    his nationality. Further, if his mother leaves the UK it is likely that
    he would be required to leave the UK (and EU). In  these  circumstances
    it is my view that it is not reasonable for the child to leave the  UK,
    effectively ending his relationship with his  father  and  leaving  the
    country of which he is a national. It is equally not reasonable for him
    to stay in the UK without his mother, who has been  his  primary  carer
    since birth.

38. In these circumstances I am satisfied that it is not reasonable for the
    Appellant's British citizen child to leave the UK. It is not in dispute
    that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the child. Accordingly, applying  section  117B  (6),  the  public
    interest does not require the Appellant's removal.

39. Weighing all of these factors I am not satisfied that the  decision  to
    refuse the application is proportionate to the respondent's  legitimate
    aim of the maintenance of an effective system  of  immigration  control
    for the prevention of disorder or crime or to secure the economic well-
    being of the country.

40. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.

I set the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside  and  remake  it  by
allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date: 11 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee award has been  paid  I  have
decided to make a fee award of any amount paid.


Signed                                       Date: 11 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
