
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17812/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2019                   |On 31 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                               mr Hamza Brini
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I heard this appeal on 14 January 2019, following  which  I  considered
    the representations which had  been  made  and  reached  a  provisional
    decision.  Regrettably, the file was mislaid  before  my  decision  was
    perfected, but the decision I provisionally reached  has  not  altered.
    The file having now been located, I have  perfected  the  decision  for
    promulgation.  The Tribunal apologises to the parties for the delay.

 2. The appellant, who was born in May 1988, is a national of Tunisia.   He
    entered the UK with a spousal visa in August 2013, which  visa  expired
    on 22 November 2015.  Prior to the expiry of his leave, on 19  November
    2015 he applied for further  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    family/private life but this was refused  on  16  December  2015.   The
    appellant remained in the UK without leave and was served with  removal
    directions as an overstayer in August 2016.  A  subsequent  application
    for a derivative residence card as a non-EEA family member was  refused
    in May 2017; the appellant was without leave while this application was
    being considered.

 3. On 27 July 2017 the appellant  was  convicted  of  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm and for having an offensive weapon for which he  was
    sentenced to a total of sixteen months' imprisonment.

 4. Because of the length of his prison sentence, the appellant was  liable
    to automatic deportation pursuant to Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 (subject of course to such deportation not  being  subject  to
    any of the exceptions set out within Section 33) and accordingly on  26
    September 2017 the respondent wrote to the appellant notifying  him  of
    the obligation on the respondent to  make  a  deportation  order  under
    Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act unless the  appellant  could  demonstrate
    that one or more of the specified exceptions set out within Section  33
    of that Act applied.

 5. In response to that letter, the appellant submitted representations  on
    24 October 2017, in which it was submitted that because of his  Article
    8 rights his deportation  would  be  in  breach  of  the  ECHR.   These
    submissions were considered by the respondent, but in a  decision  made
    on 3 May 2018 the  respondent  rejected  the  submissions  and  made  a
    decision refusing the appellant's human  rights  claim  and  issuing  a
    deportation order against him.

 6. The appellant appealed against this decision but  following  a  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan sitting at Harmondsworth on 4
    October 2018,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22  October  2018  the
    appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 7. The appellant now appeals against this decision, permission having been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney on 28  November  2018.   As
    Judge Swaney states at paragraph 6 of the  reasons  for  decision,  the
    grant of permission is limited to issues relating  to  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights.

 8. Prior  to  the  appellant's  conviction  for  the  offence  of  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm, he had (about  a  month  earlier)  also
    been convicted of  possession  of  class  A  drugs  (cocaine),  driving
    without a licence and uninsured and failing to surrender  for  custody.
    The basis of his human rights claim  was  that  he  had  established  a
    family life in the UK because he was in a subsisting relationship  with
    his wife and one son.  The respondent noted  in  the  decision  letter,
    however, that the appellant  had  failed  to  submit  any  evidence  in
    support of this claim, beyond stating the names of his family  members,
    which included his son, a British national,  born  in  September  2011.
    The respondent, within the decision refusing his human rights claim and
    affirming the decision to deport  the  appellant,  had  regard  to  the
    respondent's duty to safeguard the  welfare  of  children  set  out  in
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  to
    the relevant Immigration Rules.  However, the respondent did not accept
    that the appellant had a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"
    with his son because "you have provided no evidence to  show  that  you
    have been in recent contact with him or  in  a  relationship  with  him
    prior to or since your imprisonment".  The respondent  in  this  regard
    noted that:-

         "A genuine and subsisting relationship means more than a biological
         relationship and more than presence in a child's life.  It requires
         a significant and meaningful positive involvement in a child's life
         with  a  significant  degree  of  responsibility  for  the  child's
         welfare".


    In this regard the respondent noted that the appellant had "provided no
    documentation showing joint custody of [his son] with his mother".

 9. The respondent also noted that the appellant was estranged from his son
    and that there was no evidence to show that he had had any contact with
    him since his imprisonment.  Furthermore, even should he be  reconciled
    with his estranged wife "it is nevertheless not accepted that it  would
    be unduly harsh for [his son] to join you".

10. In the alternative, the respondent did not  accept  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the appellant's son to remain in the UK  even  if  the
    appellant was deported.  The reason given for this conclusion was  that
    the appellant had:-

         "provided no evidence to show that he [that is the appellant's son]
         would face any hardship if he were to remain in  the  UK  with  his
         mother when you are deported.  He will be able to  access  all  the
         privileges and benefits granted to him as a British  national.   He
         will have his mother as his main carer.  He is  part  of  a  family
         unit which includes other extended family members who would support
         and guide him.  In addition he will attend school and  continue  to
         build up a network of friends and the support of teachers who would
         guide him ensuring that he has support with his education."


    The respondent also noted that the appellant's son could, if he  wished
    to maintain contact with the appellant, do so "by using modern means of
    communication".

11. With regard to whether or not the exception set  out  within  paragraph
    399(b) of the Immigration Rules  applied  (that  is  that  the  foreign
    criminal had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen  partner  which  was  formed  not  only  when   that   person's
    immigration status was not precarious but that it would also be  unduly
    harsh for the foreign criminal's partner to move with the  criminal  to
    where the criminal was going to be  deported  to),  first  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant was in a subsisting relationship  with  his
    wife because the parties were estranged, but in any event it would  not
    be unduly harsh for his wife to live in Tunisia with him.





Judge Khan's Decision

12. The judge considered the appellant's relationship with  his  son  under
    paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules which provides as follows:

         "399.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -


                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and


                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or


                    ... and ...


                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and


                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported".


13. This provision mirrors what is set out  now  in  Section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  sets  out  the
    additional  considerations  which  apply  in  cases  involving  foreign
    criminals as follows:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         ...


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         ..."


14. Judge Khan did not consider that Exception 2 applied with regard to the
    appellant's relationship with his child because he  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    son.  His reasons are set out at paragraph 37 of his Decision:

         "37. In this case paragraphs [sic] 399 is not engaged, although the
             appellant has a qualifying, British citizen child residing  in
             the United Kingdom, there is no corroborating evidence  before
             the Tribunal that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship
             with his son.  The appellant's son is 7 years old and  resides
             with his mother.  The appellant claimed  that  he  had  direct
             contact with his child before he was sent to prison but  there
             is no independent evidence.  He stated that  he  has  indirect
             contact with his wife by telephone.  I find that  his  claimed
             contact with his son is also by telephone, on  add  [sic]  hoc
             basis  and  not  direct  contact  as  he  claimed.    In   the
             circumstances, I find that paragraph 399 and 229A [again  sic,
             presumably  the  judge   had   in   mind   399A]   exceptional
             circumstances do not apply in this case".


15. Although the judge then refers to Section 117A and  117B  of  the  2002
    Act, he does not specifically mention 117C, although as  already  noted
    above, the statutory provisions within 117C effectively mirror what  is
    set out in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules, to which  the  judge
    did have regard.

Grounds of Appeal

16. The grounds are contained in  one  handwritten  page,  settled  by  the
    appellant in person.  It is as follows:

         "I have lived in the UK since 2013.  I  have  been  granted  spouse
         visa from 2013 until 2015.  I married to British citizen but we are
         separated.  I got a 7 year's son.  He means the world to me.  I got
         a big network to family and friends.  I worked and contributed  tax
         like every British taxpayers."

17. The appellant then sets out various Articles of the ECHR  on  which  he
    presumably relies,  being  "Article  2:  Right  to  life  and  freedom.
    Article 3: No torture, inhuman  or  degrading.   Article  5:  Right  to
    liberty and security.  Article 6: Right to a fair trial.  Article 7: No
    punishment without law.  Article 8: Right of family and private  life".
    It is not clear as to what relevance any of  the  Articles  other  than
    Article 8 might have, and as already noted  permission  to  appeal  was
    only granted with  regard  to  arguments  founded  on  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights.  The appellant does not anywhere within  his  grounds
    identify any error of law in Judge Khan's decision relied upon.

18. Judge Swaney, when setting out the reasons for granting  permission  to
    appeal, states as follows, at paragraph 4:

         "The judge refers  to  having  carried  out  a  balancing  exercise
         applying the five stage Razgar test.  There are however no specific
         findings  made  in  relation  to   each   stage   of   that   test.
         Notwithstanding the finding that the appellant had  not  enjoyed  a
         genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  his  son,  the
         judge  accepted  some  contact  was  taking  place.   The  parental
         relationship itself was not in dispute.   It  is  entirely  unclear
         from the decision whether or not the judge  accepted  that  Article
         8(1) of the ECHR was engaged and if not, why not.  The judge failed
         to mention the best interests of the appellant's child,  much  less
         identify what they are  or  factor  them  into  the  assessment  of
         proportionality".

The Hearing

19. At the  hearing  before  this  Tribunal,  the  appellant,  representing
    himself, expressed his view that he had "really been  punished  for  my
    mistake.  Sixteen months".  He said he was not an habitual offender and
    had never been to prison before and wished to continue life as a family
    member.  He had worked and paid  tax  as  any  other  person.   He  was
    separated from his wife, but still in contact and although he  had  not
    seen his son since he went to prison, he called him three to four  days
    a week.

20. The appellant told the Tribunal that he wanted an adjournment in  order
    to put in further evidence about the tax that he had paid and the birth
    certificate of his son, but the Tribunal informed him that  he  had  no
    need for this because it was accepted that he had paid tax and that his
    son was British.

21. When asked by the Tribunal as to whether there was anything which  made
    his position more difficult  than  that  of  any  other  person  facing
    deportation, who had a child, he replied  that  he  was  being  "double
    punished" and that he would appreciate a chance to  continue  with  his
    life.

22. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Cunha submitted first of  all  that  in
    order to succeed  the  appellant  had  to  establish  that  there  were
    compelling factors which would render his deportation  disproportionate
    because of his Article 8 rights.  The judge had  considered  his  son's
    best interests but had not gone into them in any depth because  he  had
    found there was no genuine relationship between the appellant  and  his
    British citizen son; at paragraph 19 the judge had noted  that  he  did
    not have a court order for contact with his son and  that  he  was  now
    separated from his wife, while at paragraph 37 he had noted that  there
    was no corroborating evidence before the Tribunal  that  the  appellant
    had a genuine subsisting relationship with his son.   The  judge  noted
    within paragraph 37 that the son was 7 years old  and  lived  with  his
    mother and there was no independent evidence that the appellant had had
    direct contact with his child before he had been sent to prison  as  he
    had claimed.  In that  paragraph  the  judge  found  that  his  claimed
    contact with his son was by telephone on  an  ad  hoc  basis  "and  not
    direct contact as he claims".  Ms  Cunha  submitted  that  this  was  a
    finding open to the judge on the evidence before him.

23. So far as the judge's failure to mention Section 117C of the  2002  Act
    was concerned, this was not a  material  error  because  the  appellant
    would still have to establish that the effect of deportation on his son
    would be "unduly harsh".  The factors advanced by the appellant clearly
    did not establish that his deportation would  be  disproportionate  and
    the judge reached the decision he was bound to reach.

24. In reply, the appellant told the Tribunal that he had stopped his child
    seeing him in the last two weeks because he did not wish him to see him
    in the state he was in in prison.

Discussion

25. Although, as already noted above, Judge Khan did not  specifically  set
    out the  provisions  of  Section  117C  of  the  2002  Act,  which  are
    applicable in all cases involving foreign criminals,  this  was  not  a
    material error, as he did  have  regard  to  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules, which mirror what is set out within 117C.  In particular he  had
    regard to paragraph 399 of the Rules and  the  circumstances  in  which
    that paragraph will apply.  By paragraph 398, it is provided that it is
    in circumstances where that paragraph does not apply that  "the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraph 399 and 399A".  The judge's reason  for  considering  that
    paragraph 399 did not apply was  that  he  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence  which  had  been  put  before  him  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
    child.

26. Although another judge on this point might have arrived at a  different
    conclusion and considered that  such  contact  as  he  had  might  have
    amounted to such a genuine and subsisting relationship, there was  such
    little evidence before him that Judge Khan was,  in  the  judgement  of
    this Tribunal, entitled to reach that conclusion.

27. No other relationship is relied upon, because his marriage is no longer
    subsisting, and there is nothing  particularly  compelling  about  this
    appellant's circumstances, absent such relationship as  he  might  have
    with his child, as  could  possibly  outweigh  the  very  large  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.

28. Even if it might just be arguable  that  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his son could be said to amount to family life, on any view it  is
    not a particularly strong one.  Any Tribunal now  would  have  to  have
    regard to the recent guidance given by the Supreme Court in  KO  [2018]
    UKSC 53, and in particular to what is  said  within  that  judgment  at
    paragraph 27 with regard to  the  meaning  of  "unduly  harsh"  in  the
    context of the exception provided both  within  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules and  also  within  Section  117C  of  the  2002  Act,
    whereby, as noted above, it is provided that "Exception 2 applies where
    [the foreign criminal] has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of  the  "foreign  criminals
    deportation  on  the  partner  or  child  would  be  unduly  harsh  [my
    emphasis]".

29.  At paragraph 27 of KO, the Supreme Court set  out  with  approval  the
    guidance previously given by this Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v  SSHD
    [2015] UKUT  223,  where  at  paragraph  46  a  Presidential  Tribunal,
    referring to the "evaluative assessment" required of the  Tribunal  had
    stated as follows:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."


30. On the facts of this case, even taking the  appellant's  claim  at  its
    highest, there was simply  no  evidence  upon  which  any  fact-finding
    Tribunal could have  concluded  that  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
    removal on his child, who currently does not even  see  him,  could  be
    said to be "severe" or  "bleak"  let  alone  beyond  severe  or  bleak.
    Understandably, the appellant would like to have  a  relationship  with
    his son, but his case is no different from that of  any  other  foreign
    criminals with children who are faced with the prospect of  deportation
    in circumstances where the consequences of their removal is  that  such
    relationships as  they  have  with  their  children  will  be  severely
    disrupted, or even effectively terminated.  As Sedley LJ noted  in  his
    well-known dictum in A D Lee, "that is what deportation does".

31. Having regard to the high threshold which is imposed  by  the  need  to
    establish that the effect on a child will be "unduly harsh"  there  was
    simply no basis on which Judge Khan or any other judge could have found
    this threshold was reached on the facts of this case.  It follows  that
    his conclusion to this effect was inevitable; there was accordingly  no
    material error of law in his making this  finding  and  dismissing  the
    appeal.  The appellant was required to do more than establish  that  he
    had some private or family life in this country; he  had  to  establish
    further either that the effect on his child would be so severe or bleak
    as could truly be said to be "unduly harsh" or that there were  factors
    in his case which were so compelling as to outweigh  the  large  public
    interest in his deportation.  This he has manifestly failed to do.   It
    follows that this appeal must be dismissed.

32. For the avoidance of doubt, even had  I  concluded  that  Judge  Khan's
    decision was sufficiently poorly reasoned that it needed to  be  remade
    (which I have not) I would in any event have been obliged when remaking
    the decision to dismiss the appeal  for  the  reasons  I  have  already
    given.

Decision

There being no material error of law in Judge Khan's decision,  this  appeal
is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 23 May 2019

