
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17715/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2020                 |On 9th November 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                HARNEK SINGH
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Remote Hearing


 1. The hearing before me on 3rd November 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
    appellant joined the hearing remotely. I sat at the Birmingham Civil
    Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the
    same way as I would have been if the parties had attended the hearing
    together.  I was satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open
    court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no party
    has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
    proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice
    and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a
    remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions against
    the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a
    remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly
    in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
    complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
    resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
    that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
    proceedings.


The Background


 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 14th
    October 2019 to refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK on
    private life grounds, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-
    Harry for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 16th January
    2020.


 3. The appellant is a national of India. He arrived in the UK on 11th May
    1999, and upon arrival at Gatwick, he claimed asylum. That claim was
    refused in July 1999. It appears that no appeal was lodged against that
    decision and in September 1999 he was recorded by the respondent as an
    absconder.  According to the immigration history set out in the
    respondent's decision, on 19th April 2016 the appellant applied for
    leave to remain outside of the immigration rules. That application was
    rejected in July 2016. In March 2017 he submitted a further application
    for leave to remain outside the rules.  That application was refused by
    the respondent in November 2017. An appeal by the appellant against
    that decision appears to have been dismissed and the appellant had
    exhausted his rights of appeal by 29th November 2018. On 11th June 2019
    the appellant submitted a further application for leave to remain on
    private life grounds.


 4. In the respondent's decision dated 14th October 2019, the respondent
    considered whether the requirements set out in paragraph 276ADE(1) are
    met by the appellant.  The appellant claims he has lived in the UK
    continuously for over 20 years and therefore met the requirement in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules. The respondent
    sought evidence to show that the appellant had lived in the UK
    continuously between 2000 and 2005 and during 2009. The respondent was
    not satisfied the appellant had provided sufficient evidence to
    substantiate his claim that he lived in the UK continuously during
    those periods.


 5. The appellant's appeal was heard on 30th December 2019. There was no
    appearance at the hearing by or on behalf of the respondent.  Judge
    Young-Harry heard evidence from the appellant and two witnesses.  At
    paragraph [5] of her decision she also noted that she had been provided
    with a bundle of documents from the appellants representatives which
    included, inter alia, the appellant's witness statement dated 16th
    December 2019, a statement from the appellant's cousin, and various
    witness statements from supporting witnesses.


 6. At paragraphs [10] and [13] of her decision Judge Young-Harry recorded
    that the respondent does not accept the appellant has been in the UK
    continuously since 1999. She noted the respondent contends that there
    are gaps in the appellant's residence between the years 2000 and 2005
    and also during 2009.


 7. At paragraph [14] of her decision the Judge refers to the evidence of
    the first witness, the appellant's cousin. He is referred to in the
    decision as "Mr Singh".  I refer to him in this decision as Mr Jagjit
    Singh Sandhu.  Having considered his evidence, the judge accepted that
    it is likely that the appellant was in the United Kingdom in January
    2000.  She appears to have rejected his evidence that the appellant
    attended a family wedding in 2005.  She felt unable to attach weight to
    a photograph relied upon by the appellant to show his presence at that
    wedding because it was not clear when the photograph was taken and when
    the event occurred.


 8. At paragraph [16] of her decision the Judge refers to the evidence of
    the second witness that was called to give evidence.  He too, is
    referred to in the decision as 'Mr Singh', but I shall refer to him as
    Mr Jaswant Singh.  His evidence is briefly set out at paragraphs [16]
    and [17] of the decision.  At paragraphs [18] and [19], Judge Young-
    Harry said:


         "18. Contrary to Mr Singh's evidence (this appears to be a
         reference to the evidence of Mr Jaswant Singh), the appellant
         relies on tenancy agreements in the bundle dated January 2003 and
         January 2004 signed by the appellant and Mr Singh. I find the
         production of these documents questionable, especially considering
         Mr Singh (I can only assume that this is again a reference to Mr
         Jaswant Singh) appeared to know nothing about them.


         19.  I find it is entirely possible that the documents were
         produced and signed with backdated dates, for the purpose of
         supporting the appellant's appeal. Further, given Mr Singh did not
         have a single record of the appellant's presence in his property or
         the rent he paid, it seems strange the tenancy agreements were
         available. I attach no weight to these documents."


 9. Judge Young-Harry went on to consider other documents before the
    Tribunal including two NHS medical cards, GP records and bank
    statements.  At paragraphs [22] and [23] of her decision, the judge
    concluded:


         "22. I find the appellant has provided reliable documentary
         evidence to show that it is likely he was present in the UK in
         2009. This is confirmed by activity shown on the TSB bank
         statements provided covering March and October 2009 in the
         appellant's name.


         23.  Although I accept and acknowledge that those who have attained
         20 years in the UK by living clandestinely, are not expected to
         have documentary proof of their presence throughout the 20 year
         period, given they have had to remain under the radar, it is
         telling that the appellant does have some documents covering a
         large proportion of the 20 years. However, he has failed to provide
         cogent, reliable documentary or oral evidence, to show that he was
         present in the UK between February 2000 and December 2004."


10. Having concluded that the requirements for leave to remain on the
    grounds of private life set out in the immigration rules cannot be met,
    Judge Young-Harry concluded that the decision to refuse the application
    for leave to remain does not disproportionately interfere with the
    appellant's Article 8 rights.





The appeal before me


11. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal. The first is that the
    decision of Judge Young-Harry is vitiated by procedural unfairness. The
    appellant relied upon the evidence of a number of witnesses to
    establish his continuous presence in the UK between 2000 and 2005 and
    during 2009.  The appellant claims that procedural fairness demands
    that if the evidence of a witness is to be rejected, the witness must
    clearly be told that their evidence is in doubt, so that they may offer
    an explanation.  Here, the respondent was not represented at the
    hearing of the appeal before the FtT, and neither the appellant nor Mr
    Jaswant Singh were asked about the tenancy agreements relied upon by
    the appellant or to address any concerns the judge may have had,
    regarding those documents. The second ground of appeal is that Judge
    Young-Harry failed to appropriately consider the evidence that was
    before the Tribunal. Several criticisms are made by the appellant.


12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 24th
    June 2020.  The matter comes before me to determine whether the
    decision of Judge Young-Harry is infected by a material error of law.


13. Mr Jesurum on behalf of the appellant submits that  in her
    consideration of the evidence of the appellant and the two witnesses,
    Judge Young-Harry rejects evidence based on her concerns about the
    evidence that were not raised by the respondent, nor raised with the
    witnesses during the course of the hearing of the appeal. In short, the
    appellant and his witnesses were not given an opportunity to address
    the concerns the judge may have had regarding the evidence, or any
    opportunity to provide any explanation, before the judge reached her
    conclusion that the tenancy agreements relating to 2003/4 were
    produced, signed and backdated the purposes of supporting the appeal.


14. There are a number of strands to the second ground of appeal.  The
    appellant claims Judge Young-Harry erroneously proceeded at paragraph
    [24] to conclude that the appellant, having entered the UK illegally
    once, may well have re-entered the UK a second time in a similar way.
    Mr Jesurum submits that is a mistake of fact. The appellant had in fact
    entered the UK lawfully with entry clearance as a visitor, and claimed
    asylum on arrival. It is therefore erroneous to suggest that the
    appellant is someone that is quite capable of entering the UK
    unlawfully, leaving the UK at some unknown point, and re-entering the
    UK unlawfully.  Furthermore, as the judge noted at paragraph [5] of her
    decision, the appellant relied upon various other written statements,
    and those statements are not addressed at all in the decision. Mr
    Jesurum drew my attention, in particular, to the witness statements
    made by Mr Gurpal Singh (page [C/16]), Hardeep Kandola (page [D/60]),
    Harbhajan Singh Sandhu (page [C/7] and [D/70) and Harpreet Kaur Badesha
    (page [D/66]).  The witnesses attest to the appellant's continuous
    presence in the UK since 1999 but do not appear to have been considered
    by the judge at all.  Mr Jesurum was not entirely sure whether any of
    those witnesses had attended the hearing of the appeal, or why they
    were not called to give evidence. He submits the evidence was relevant
    to the issues being considered by the Tribunal and although he quite
    properly and candidly accepts that it may have been open to the Judge
    to attach little weight to their evidence provided adequate reasons for
    doing so were given, the position here is that the judge does not refer
    to that evidence at all in reaching her decision.


15. Finally, Mr Jesurum submits that in considering the evidence adduced to
    support the appellant's claim that he had attended a family wedding in
    2005, Judge Young-Harry referred at paragraph [15] of the decision to
    the photograph, but attached no weight to the photo because it was not
    clear when the photo was taken and when the event occurred.  There was
    however a copy of the relevant invitation to the wedding at pages
    [E37/38] of the appellant's bundle.


16. In reply, Mrs Aboni relied upon the respondent's rule 24 response dated
    26th August 2020.  The respondent confirms that the appeal is opposed
    and submits that the grounds of appeal amount to no more than a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge that were open to her on
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent submits
    the evidence of the appellant's residence in the UK "is very thin" and
    there was nothing that arose in the judge's consideration of the
    evidence before the Tribunal, that required the judge to put any
    concerns to the witnesses for clarification.  Mrs Aboni submits the
    decision is not tainted by any procedural unfairness.  The judge
    carefully considered the evidence of the appellant and the two
    witnesses called, and it was open to her to have concerns about the
    tenancy agreements relied upon by the appellant that the witness, Mr
    Jaswant Singh, who is said in the tenancy agreements to be the
    landlord, appeared to have no knowledge of.    She submits the judge
    was not required to address each and every one of the witness
    statements or documents that were before the Tribunal, and, the judge
    gave proper and adequate reasons for her conclusion that on balance,
    the appellant has failed to show continuous residence in the UK for 20
    years.


Discussion


17.  I am satisfied that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-
    Harry is vitiated by material errors of law and must be set aside.


18. Mr Jesurum refers to the rule in Browne v Dunne (1893) 6 R 67, HL which
    may be summarised in this way. Where the court is to be asked to
    disbelieve a witness, the witness should be cross-examined; and failure
    to cross-examine a witness on some material part of his evidence or at
    all, may be treated as an acceptance of the truth of that part or the
    whole of his evidence.  He also refers to the decision of the Court of
    Appeal in MS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1548, in which the
    Secretary of State's representatives had declined to cross examine the
    appellant in the FtT and the UT. Maurice Kay LJ, with whom Munby and
    Tomlinson LJJ agreed, stated, at [14], that this had 'the necessary
    consequence that the Secretary of State must be taken to accept, or at
    least not to dispute, the appellant's factual account.'.  In Markem
    Corp v Zipher Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 267, Jacob LJ (with whom Mummery and
    Kennedy LJJ agreed) characterised the rule in Browne v Dunn as one of
    procedural fairness where a key witness had given evidence before the
    trial judge but had not been cross-examined on various matters which
    the judge had proceeded to hold against him.


19. Judges of the First-tier Tribunal are all too frequently required to
    determine appeals in the absence of any appearance on behalf of the
    respondent.  What are now commonly referred to as the 'Surenderan
    guidelines', as they have subsequently evolved, provide guidance as to
    the conduct of hearings in which the respondent is unrepresented.
    Failure to cross-examine, will not always amount to an acceptance of
    the evidence, particularly where the witness has had prior notice of
    the intention to challenge that evidence.  However, the Tribunal must
    undoubtedly act fairly and should give a witness an opportunity to
    comment on any adverse material in the evidence. Although the
    requirement of fairness does not impose a requirement that every point
    that may be decided against the appellant should first be put to the
    appellant or witness, where the judge considers a point to be important
    to the decision but it was not obvious, it is generally better to raise
    the point so that the appellant or witness has an opportunity to
    address the concerns the judge may have. In short, I accept that a
    party should be given an opportunity to deal with any issue that the
    judge may consider to be determinative, or considers calls for some
    explanation.  I accept, as Mr Jesurum submits, that in this context,
    the Tribunal has a reasonable inquisitorial function, and in the
    absence of the respondent, is entitled to put questions to a witness in
    order to clarify issues that the judge will need to deal with in the
    determination. The judge is entitled to ask questions either directly
    or through the appellant's representative, intended to seek an
    explanation for inconsistencies or to address points of concern, that
    become apparent on reading the papers or during the course of the
    hearing.


20. The issue for me is whether the findings of Judge Young-Harry are
    unsafe or unsustainable on the basis that the requirements of natural
    justice and procedural fairness have not been met.  In my judgement,
    the requirement for procedural fairness was not met here.  In paragraph
    [3] of his witness statement dated 13th December 2019, Jaswant Singh
    had claimed that following the refusal of the appellant's application,
    the appellant had contacted him to ask whether he had any record of the
    appellant living at his address. He claims that he looked through old
    paperwork and found 2 old tenancy agreements which he sent to the
    appellant to send onward to the court.  Although the appellant did not
    make express reference to the tenancy agreements in his witness
    statement, the tenancy agreements were plainly before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  At paragraph [16] of her decision, Judge Young-Harry records
    the evidence of Mr Jaswant Singh.  When questioned he had stated that
    the appellant resided in his property in 2003.  She goes on to state
    that ".. however unusually he did not have any landlord records or
    documents to show who was occupying his property or that rent was
    paid.".  Mr Jaswant Singh was not given any opportunity to explain why
    he had claimed in his witness statement that he had found two old
    tenancy agreements that he had sent to the appellant, but in his
    evidence before the Tribunal, claimed that he did not have any landlord
    records or documents to show who was occupying the property or the rent
    that was paid. The judge was plainly concerned as to the provenance of
    the tenancy agreements relied upon by the appellant, but neither the
    appellant nor Mr Jaswant Singh appear to have been given any
    opportunity to address the anomaly in the evidence.  The evidence was
    relevant to the appellant's presence in the UK during a material time.


21. There is in my judgement also force in the submission made by Mr
    Jesurum that Judge Young-Harry appears to have had no regard to other
    statements that were plainly before the Tribunal.  I accept, as Mrs
    Aboni submits that at paragraph [5] of her decision, the judge refers
    to the bundle of documents from the appellant's representatives that
    included various witness statements.  I also accept that a Judge is not
    required to address every piece of evidence that is before the
    Tribunal, but the authors of the witness statements in broad terms,
    attested to the appellant's continuous presence in the United Kingdom
    since 1999. I quite accept that it may well have been open to the Judge
    to attach little weight to those witness statements, given that they
    are in very broad terms, and the authors do not appear to have attended
    the hearing, but the difficulty is that the judge simply does not
    engage with that evidence at all, and makes no reference to it in her
    decision. I cannot in the circumstances be satisfied that the judge
    considered that evidence.


22. In my judgement, the procedural unfairness and failure to have regard
    to material evidence is sufficient to establish that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by material errors of law and I do
    not in the circumstances, need to say anything further regarding the
    other matters relied upon by the appellant in the grounds of appeal
    settled by Mr Jesurum.


23. As to disposal, the assessment of a human rights claim such as this is
    always a highly fact sensitive task, and the appellant is entitled to
    have his claim properly considered by the FtT.  The decision is tainted
    by procedural unfairness.  In all the circumstances, as I am urged to
    do by the parties, I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this
    appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh with no findings preserved,
    having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
    Statement of 25th September 2012.  The nature and extent of any
    judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.





Notice of Decision


24. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Young-Harry
    promulgated on 16th January 2020 is set aside, and I remit the matter
    for re-hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings
    preserved.


25. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing in due course.


Signed   V. Mandalia                Date: 4th November 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

