
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17023/2018
                                                HU/17026/2018, HU/17032/2018
                                                HU/17034/2018, HU/17038/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 May 2019                     |On 10 June 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              M, G, A, U and H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Brown (counsel) instructed by Arshed & Co,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    To preserve the anonymity direction deemed  necessary  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal, I make an anonymity order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any
information regarding the proceedings which would be likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellants.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Meyler,  promulgated  on  27  February
2019, which allowed the Appellants' appeals on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The second appellant is the first appellant's wife. The third,  fourth
and fifth appellants are their children. All five appellants  are  Pakistani
nationals.  On 31 July 2018 the Secretary of State refused  the  Appellants'
applications for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Meyler  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  29  March  2019
Judge Beach granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

         "2.      The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
         made a material error of law by considering the facts at  the  date
         of the decision rather than at the date of the hearing. The grounds
         further state that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  taking
         account of  future  potential  circumstances  by  finding  that  in
         September 2019 the third appellant would have lived in the  UK  for
         at least half of his life and would be 18 years old.

         3.  The  first  and  second  appellants  could   not   fulfil   the
         requirements of the immigration rules because the parent route does
         not allow for the family unit to rely on  the  parent  route  under
         appendix FM. The appellants were relying on  section  117B(6).  The
         appeal was a human rights appeal and it is arguable that  the  date
         of the hearing was therefore the relevant date by which  stage  the
         third appellant was 18 years old and had not lived at least half of
         his life in the UK. The  other  appellants'  appeals  were  allowed
         primarily on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
         that it was not reasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave
         the UK and that he was a qualifying child.

         4. Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."

The Hearing

5.    Mr McVeety, for the  respondent,  declined  to  move  the  grounds  of
appeal. The respondent has always accepted that the  third  appellant  is  a
qualifying child because he is under the age of 18 years and  has  lived  in
the UK for more than seven years at  the  date  of  application.  The  Judge
makes a clear and unchallenged finding that it is  not  reasonable  for  the
third appellant to leave the UK. There is therefore no  public  interest  in
the third appellant's removal. Mr McVeety told me  that  it  is  now  agreed
that the decision does not contain a material error of law.

6.    On joint motion I am asked to dismiss the appeals.

7.    It is now a matter of agreement that the decision does not  contain  a
material error of law. The respondent no longer insists in  his  appeal.  As
no material error of law is identified I dismiss the appeals.

8.    The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

9.    The appeals are dismissed. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 27 February 2019, stands.

Signed
                   Date 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

