
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17540/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Via Skype For Business               |On 21st April 2021                   |
|On 12th March 2021                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               Mrs RAJ BHATIA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Hassan instructed by S Satha & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Haria and Moon promulgated  on  4th  March  2020.   The
    appellant is a citizen of India born on 12th October 1937  and  applied
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds  but  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on  11th  October  2019.   She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 8th March 2013 as a visitor, and promptly,  on  14th  August
    2013 applied for leave to remain but  was  refused  on  10th  September
    2013.  Her application on 17th September 2013 was again refused on 19th
    December 2013 with no right of appeal.  On 1st September 2015  she  was
    served with a notice as an overstayer, and on 16th September  2015  the
    appellant submitted an application for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules  on  compassionate  grounds;  this  application  was
    refused some four years later by the respondent on  11th  October  2019
    and is the subject of this appeal.  It would appear that the respondent
    was making attempts to secure  updated  medical  information  from  the
    appellant.

 2. Judges Haria and Moon dismissed the appeal, and the appellant  made  an
    application to appeal on  the  ground  that  there  was  a  failure  to
    consider material evidence.  It was submitted at  paragraph  4  of  the
    grounds, that the  judges  had  failed  to  engage  with  and  consider
    material evidence that went to the heart of the appeal.  At paragraph 5
    the judges were said to have misunderstood the evidence relating to the
    appellant's son Basudev, and at paragraph 32 stated that "the issue  is
    whether there has been a deterioration  in  the  condition  of  Basudev
    since 2013 that would make it more difficult for his wife to  care  for
    the appellant".

 3. However, the evidence before the judges was  that  Basudev  was  looked
    after by nurses.  He  had  no  wife.  That  was  the  evidence  in  the
    respondent's bundle as acknowledged at paragraphs  31  and  64  of  the
    determination.  It was also the oral evidence of Mr Raj Bhatia that his
    brother was looked after  by  nurses  (paragraph  64).   There  was  no
    suggestion anywhere that Basudev had a wife.  At  paragraph  6  of  the
    grounds it was stated that the question as to  whether  Basudev  had  a
    wife was not asked at the hearing and it was not  put  to  the  witness
    that Basudev's wife could care for the  appellant.   Had  the  question
    been asked the Tribunal would have been informed  that  Basudev's  wife
    was deceased, and he was cared for full-time by nurses.

 4. At paragraph 7 of the grounds it was stated that the Tribunal heard the
    applicant's  grandson's  wife   looks   after   the   appellant.    The
    misunderstanding was material and went to the heart of the appeal.

 5. At paragraph 8 of the grounds it was asserted that an error also  arose
    because at paragraph 64 the  Tribunal  stated  there  was  "no  witness
    statement or any  other  evidence  before  us  as  to  the  appellant's
    daughter Anju and her circumstances and why she would not  be  able  to
    assist the appellant".  However, the respondent's  bundle  contained  a
    letter  from  Anju  dated  9th  September  2015  which  set   out   her
    circumstances.  The failure to consider  this  constituted  a  material
    error of law and further, as stated at paragraph 9 of  the  grounds,  a
    declaration from Anju was handed in on the day of the court hearing.

 6. At paragraph 10 of the grounds  it  was  advanced,  thirdly,  that  the
    judges  misstated  the  applicant's  circumstances  since   2013.    At
    paragraph 39 the judges set out the factors which had changed as  being
    that the appellant was now incontinent, her mobility was  reduced,  and
    she was now depressed.  This was a significant misstatement given  that
    all the doctors had carried out home visits and consistent evidence was
    that the appellant's health had deteriorated to such an extent that she
    required full-time care and the evidence was that she had not left home
    for the previous two  years  and  these  constituted  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration in India.

 7. At paragraph 11 of the grounds it was further contended that the  judge
    had materially erred in failing to adequately consider the  appellant's
    medical evidence.  The First-tier Tribunal stated at paragraph 25  that
    Dr Dhumad took all the evidence from the appellant's family  but  given
    the appellant's inability to speak it was  submitted  that  it  was  an
    error to give less weight to the report on account  of  the  informants
    and Dr Dhumad additionally applied his own expertise.  The Tribunal was
    referred to the determination of the Upper Tribunal in RR Sri  Lanka  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKUT 000274.

 8. On 28th April 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes  granted  permission
    for ground 1 specifically at paragraphs 8 and 9 of the grounds only  in
    relation to the evidence supplied by the daughter Anju  which  was  not
    taken into account by the First-tier Tribunal Judges because it  stated
    that even if the judges did, for example, make an error with regards to
    the wife it was immaterial and irrelevant.

 9. In a decision dated 29th August  2020  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan
    extended the grant of permission and found that all grounds  of  appeal
    were arguable.

10. I am not persuaded that there was any error of law in relation  to  the
    assessment of the appellant's health conditions.   The  Tribunal  quite
    clearly took into account all of the  medical  evidence  including  the
    elderly medical evidence but made specific  reference  to  the  updated
    evidence of Dr Sadherua, a locum GP from Yeading Court Surgery based in
    Hayes dated 27th January 2020 and specifically  identified  the  twelve
    conditions detailed in the letter.  The Tribunal gave  sound  reasoning
    for its approach to the assessment of the  medical  conditions  of  the
    appellant and it was open to the Tribunal to make  the  conclusions  it
    did at paragraph 29.

11. That said, the key issue in this matter was  whether  the  support  and
    care required by the appellant would be available to her on her return,
    and at paragraph 64 the judges had this to say:

         "64.     The appellant's health, her cognitive limitations and  her
             vulnerabilities render her dependent upon the care and support
             provided by others.  Dr Dhumad states at paragraph 8.4 of  his
             report that the appellant needs social care by her  family  in
             the UK but he has not explained why her family  in  India  are
             not able to care for the appellant.  Dr Dhumad has taken  into
             account the background recorded at paragraph 5 of  the  report
             in particular paragraph 5.3 where he records the following:

                  'Her son told me that he has a brother and a sister,  both
                  in India, his brother is disabled and bedbound,  paralysed
                  from the waist.  His sister is moving to Canada,  He  told
                  me there is no one to look after his mother.'

             However, Dr Dhumad has not taken into account that appellant's
             son Basudev Bhatia who lives in India  currently  receives  24
             hour care from nurses.  Whilst the  appellant's  daughter  may
             have plans to move to Canada in the future we have  to  assess
             the evidence as at the date  of  the  hearing.   There  is  no
             witness statement or  other  evidence  before  us  as  to  the
             appellant's daughter Anju and her circumstances  and  why  she
             would not be able to assist the appellant.

             Dr Dhumad at paragraph 8.6 of his report specifies the support
             required by the appellant as '...support during  the  day  and
             during the night to attend to  medication  routines,  personal
             care routines, to meet fluid and nutritional needs,  to  offer
             comfort and reassurance,  to  maintain  a  safe  and  hygienic
             environment  and  to  access  medical  support  as   or   when
             necessary.'

             On the evidence we find that the support and care required  by
             the appellant would be available to her on her return to India
             from a combination of her daughter, her son's  wife  and  from
             nurses or carers and that any necessary financial support  for
             any nurses or carers required could continue to be provided by
             Rajinder Bhatia as it  is  now.   Having  considered  all  the
             evidence including the appellant's  particular  circumstances,
             for the reasons given we are unable to  find  that  there  are
             compelling or exceptional circumstances in this case for leave
             to be granted outside the Immigration Rules.   Taking  all  of
             the above facts and factors  into  account  and  performing  a
             balancing exercise we find that the removal of  the  appellant
             to India would not be unjustifiable harsh and would not amount
             to a disproportionate interference with her right  to  respect
             for her family life".

12. Critical to an assessment was the evidence of those said to  be  caring
    for the appellant.

13. I inspected the Record of Proceedings and file and pointed out  at  the
    hearing that contrary to the grounds of application for  permission  to
    appeal, there appeared to be no statement or letter before the Tribunal
    to enable it to assess whether the appellant's daughter  Anju,  in  her
    particular circumstances, would be able to assist  the  appellant.   Ms
    Hassan, however, advised that on the day of the hearing she had  handed
    the clerk a letter/statement from Anju which clearly had not found  its
    way to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Without an updated statement before the First-tier  Tribunal  (although
    one was subsequently sent  through  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  post  the
    hearing  before  me),   I  consider  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    treatment  of  her  evidence  stemming  from  2015  together  with  the
    observation that there was no updated witness statement as at the  date
    of hearing, on the face of it, adequately  addressed  the  evidence  of
    Anju.  However, the updated statement remains an issue.  I  find  there
    may have  been  a  procedural  irregularity  unbeknown  to  the  judges
    themselves amounting to an error of law. Mr Kotas made clear he did not
    question Ms Hassan's explanation that a statement from  Anju  had  been
    handed to the First-tier Tribunal clerk. Counsel perhaps  may  wish  to
    ensure in future that anything handed to the clerk on  the  morning  of
    the hearing is indeed forwarded to the judge as intended.

15. Mr Kotas also conceded at the hearing the  Tribunal  proceeded  on  the
    basis that Basudev had a wife and that was an error of fact.  There was
    no evidence to the effect that Basudev had a wife and the  phrasing  of
    the finding at the last paragraph  on  page  13  of  the  determination
    clearly indicated that the judges found that support and care would  be
    available "from a combination of her daughter, her son's wife and  from
    nurses or carers".  The son's wife did not exist and  the  finding  was
    based on an error.

16. In all the circumstances, I therefore find that was a material error of
    law and the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  owing
    to the nature and extent of findings to  be  made.  Notwithstanding  my
    observations above, owing to the medical condition  of  the  appellant,
    which was said to be deteriorating, I set aside the determination as  a
    whole and preserve no findings.

No anonymity direction is made.

Notice of decision
The Judges erred materially for the reasons  identified.  I  set  aside  the
determination pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and  extent  of
the findings to be made the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2  (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Signed           Helen  Rimington                          Date  12th  April
2021.
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




