
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 11 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                              mr ayan ali malik
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by ATM Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  18  March  1992.  He
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of his private life on 19 June
    2018. The application was refused on  10  August  2018.  Judge  Cameron
    ("the Judge") heard the appeal on 11 March 2019.   He  found  that  the
    Appellant had taken the ETS test himself and had not used deception  in
    either a previous application or in the current application.  The Judge
    went on to dismiss the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth on 14 May  2019,
    in essence saying it was arguable the Judge had  attached  insufficient
    weight to the consequences of the previous incorrect refusal bearing in
    mind the Appellant had not cheated.

 3. The Respondent issued a Rule 24 notice on 17 June 2019  saying  he  did
    not oppose the application for permission to appeal.

 4. It is clear to me that the representatives are correct that  the  Judge
    materially erred in the way he dealt with the relevance of the fact the
    Appellant had not cheated. I am satisfied there is a material error  of
    law and I need say no more about that.

 5. The issue is whether I  should  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the matter to be considered afresh or to hear  the  matter
    or determine the matter again now.  Mr Bramble submitted that it should
    be remitted because the balancing exercise has not been undertaken.  Mr
    Lee submitted that remittal is not required  because  as  explained  in
    Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 the starting point is that if a  person  had
    not cheated it inevitably means the Section 10 decision had been  wrong
    and the Respondent was obliged to deal with him thereafter  so  far  as
    possible as if that error had not been made.

 6. I raised the relevance of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]
    UKUT 00112 (IAC).  The representatives agreed that it may provide  some
    useful guidance on the ability to satisfy the rules  being  capable  of
    amounting to a weighty  factor  when  deciding  whether  a  refusal  is
    proportionate  bearing  in  mind  the  legitimate  aim   of   enforcing
    immigration control.

 7. I am not satisfied the  balancing  exercise  that  is  required  within
    Article 8 has been undertaken, as the only ground of appeal  is  within
    an Article 8 context.  The only factor that was considered in any depth
    was whether or not the ETS issue had been made out.   There  is  little
    about any other element of the Appellant's circumstances.  It  is  only
    referred to in [41] where it deals with a lack  of  dependency  on  his
    sister going beyond normal emotional ties, and in [48]  when  it  notes
    the precarious nature of his status, the Appellant saying he  does  not
    want to return to Pakistan without completing his  education,  and  the
    Judge finding he had the ability  to  establish  his  private  life  in
    Pakistan on return.

 8. That in my view is an inadequate assessment of the factors that have to
    be considered in an Article 8 claim.  It is a proportionality balancing
    exercise  and  the  balance  has  not  been   undertaken.    In   those
    circumstances I am not satisfied either party had a fair hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The matter will be remitted to be heard at  Taylor  House  but  not  by
    Judge Cameron. Any further consequential directions will be  issued  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

10. No anonymity direction is made.

11. No fees order of costs order is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
5 July 2019
