



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: HU/17976/2016

                                                      HU/17978/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre                        Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
On 13th August 2018
     On 21st November 2018

|                                                  |                               |
|                                                  |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                    KTMM
                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:          -
For the Respondent:    Mr A.McVeety,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are both nationals of Malawi. They are husband and wife.


 2. On the 23rd May 2018 the First-tier Tribunal dismissed, in two separate
    decisions, the appeals of both Appellants. The First-tier Tribunal also
    dismissed, on the same day, the appeals  of  both  of  the  Appellants'
    adult sons. By my decision dated 24th May 2018 I set all four decisions
    aside. The decisions in the appeals relating to  the  Appellants'  sons
    were re-made, and the  appeals  allowed  with  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v) of the Immigration Rules.  This is the 're-made'  decision
    in respect of the Appellants.   Their  appeals  are  brought  on  human
    rights (Article 8) grounds only.




    Anonymity Order

 3. The appeal turns in part on medical evidence. Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify any of the Appellants or  any
        member of their family.  This direction applies to, amongst others,
        both the Appellants and the Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with
        this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Factual Matrix


 4. The First Appellant was born in Malawi in 1986. She came to the  UK  in
    December 2002 in possession of a valid student visa. She has  therefore
    lived in this country for approaching 16 years.  She thereafter  varied
    that leave so as to extend it, but it is common  ground  that  she  has
    been without leave to remain in the UK since 30th November 2003.


 5. The First Appellant was diagnosed as HIV+ shortly in  2003,  after  her
    arrival. She had not been aware that she carried the virus  before  she
    came here. She has been receiving anti-retrovirals from  the  NHS  ever
    since: her current prescription is for 'Triumeq', a  triple-combination
    therapy. She suffers from various medical issues all connected  to  her
    HIV infection. She has had her gall bladder removed, she  was  recently
    admitted  to  hospital  with  problems  with  her  liver/pancreas,  has
    hypertension  and  lupus.  She  also  suffers  from  chronic  digestive
    problems including a hernia and intense  heartburn.  She  is  currently
    waiting for an operation to have the  hernia  removed.  Notwithstanding
    these personal difficulties she has managed to work  for  12  years  in
    this country. She worked as a care assistant but stopped  when  advised
    that she did not have permission to do so from  the  Home  Office.  She
    told me at hearing that she would resume that work  if  she  was  given
    permission, her health permitting.  As far  as  her  mental  health  is
    concerned she has been diagnosed with depression.  She  was  prescribed
    anti-depressants but these were withdrawn due to side effects. She  has
    continued to receive talking therapies.  She  attends  counselling  and
    receives additional support from the church that  she  worships  at  in
    Glasgow.


 6. The First Appellant has a brother in this  country  who  is  a  British
    citizen. He lives in Glasgow. He long-term sick and is  now  unable  to
    work. He receives benefits as a result and he gives some of his  income
    to the Appellant.  She helps him out by doing housework and cooking for
    him. She describes their relationship as close, particularly  since  he
    has fallen out with his own children: he has come to rely on her. He in
    turn has always supported her.    I have been sent  a  letter  by  this
    brother who confirms that he suffers from serious spinal  stenosis.  He
    states that his sister and her family are a "cornerstone"  to  him  and
    that if they were to leave the  United  Kingdom  it  would  affect  him
    psychologically. He suggests that he might face mental  breakdown,  and
    points out that this would create an additional burden for the NHS.  He
    expresses his concern for his nephews and states that they have  always
    lived as a close family unit. As well as helping her  brother  out  the
    Appellant volunteers at her local church and for a care organisation in
    Glasgow.


 7. The First Appellant told me that she has a sister who lives in Blantyre
    in Malawi. Although they have not seen each other since 2002 they  have
    remained in contact by telephone and more recently using social  medias
    such as 'whatsapp' - for instance she called the  Appellant  the  other
    day to ask how she got on in hospital. She and her  husband  both  work
    but the Appellant does not think that they would be able to  offer  her
    and her husband any significant support since she has 5 children of her
    own who are all still in full-time education.


 8. The Second Appellant was born in Malawi in 1974.  He  arrived  in  this
    country in July 2004 with leave to enter as a visitor; that  leave  was
    subsequently varied and he was given leave to remain as a student until
    2008.   He is a chemistry graduate and as a student  here  undertook  a
    Masters degree. He overstayed that visa and has had no basis to  remain
    in this country since then.   He has been here 14 years.  He worked for
    8 of those years as a care assistant but like his wife  was  forced  to
    give up that employment when it came to light  that  he  did  not  have
    permission to work.    He is currently supported by the state  (section
    4) and his brother-in-law helps them out. He volunteers  at  his  local
    church and through his work with 'Waverley Care' he has been  delegated
    to attend meetings of 'HIV Scotland -  National  Involvement  Standards
    (HIV) to help in implementing policies for people  in  Scotland  living
    with HIV.

 9. The Second Appellant is HIV+.  It appears from his medical  notes  that
    this was diagnosed in 2006. He is prescribed anti-retrovirals:   Kivexa
    and Efavirenz.   He continues to  have  a  number  of  serious  medical
    complaints.  On the 4th February this year he suffered a heart  attack.
     He was taken by ambulance to hospital  where  he  underwent  emergency
    surgery and a stent was inserted. He has been advised that he  will  be
    on 'heart failure medication'  for  the  rest  of  his  life.    He  is
    currently attending a specialist cardiac clinic  at  Glasgow  Infirmary
    every four weeks and his HIV consultant has planned  a  review  of  his
    medication regime in light of the heart attack.  I  have  before  me  a
    letter from Dr S MacKenzie, the family GP.  Dr MacKenzie confirms  that
    the Second Appellant has a moderate degree of heart  failure  following
    his myocardial infarction. He has been placed on medication to  improve
    his prognosis and limit the likelihood  of  further  heart  attack.  If
    these medications were to be stopped abruptly the risk would  increase.
    Likewise any break in his anti-retroviral medication would increase the
    chance of a further heart attack.

10. The Second Appellant also has a sister in Blantyre. She is married with
    four children and although he has  maintained  contact  with  her,  she
    would not be in a position to assist him: he told me that she has  four
    children of her own and also cares for their nephew who was orphaned.

11. The Appellants' sons, now aged 24 and 22, have both lived in the United
    Kingdom since 2005. This Tribunal has determined that  both  sons  meet
    the requirements of the rules so that they should be granted  leave  on
    'private life' grounds.   At the  date  of  the  resumed  hearings  the
    Appellants' sons had not been granted any leave pursuant to my  earlier
    decision, but Mr McVeety was able to indicate  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not appealed my decision.  Before me  the  Appellants  stated
    that it was worry about their sons which gave them greatest  cause  for
    concern. The boys still live  at  home  with  them  and  have  not  yet
    embarked on independent lives. The First Appellant spoke movingly about
    her wish to be able to remain with  her  children.  Although  they  are
    technically adults they still have a  lot  to  learn  about  life;  she
    believes that they still need her guidance and support.    However  she
    also candidly admitted that this care and support goes both  ways:  she
    is fearful that if returned to Malawi her and her  husband  would  face
    their declining age and health  without  the  support  of  their  sons.
    They are the ones who understand their parents' needs best, since  they
    have grown up with, and always known about, their  various  conditions.
    The Second Appellant also expresses great concern about the prospect of
    family break-up. He believes that the trauma of separation would have a
    very negative impact upon him and his wife as well as the boys, and  is
    concerned about his own ability to cope with it, in light of his  heart
    issues.

12. The boys themselves have written in support of  their  parents'  cases.
    Their son K writes that he would be  "devastated"  if  he  were  to  be
    separated from them: "we have been through a lot as a  family,  and  we
    have relied upon each other throughout  this  difficult  journey".   He
    agrees with his mother's  assessment  that  he  still  needs  her  help
    transitioning  into  adulthood.  The  whole  situation  is   incredibly
    stressful for the whole family and he desperately hopes that they  will
    be allowed to stay so that they can  continue  to  guide  him  and  his
    brother as they embark upon their adult lives.

13. Both Appellants speak Chichewa, a language widely spoken in Malawi  and
    admit to being familiar with the culture and  norms  of  that  country.
    They both candidly admit that they have close family members there  and
    that they would be happy to see them again.  This is however  a  factor
    that is outweighed, in their minds, by their fear that they  would  not
    be able to access the medication they  both  require  to  manage  their
    complex medical needs. The Appellants' real  fear  is  that  they  will
    become sick and infirm and their sons will not be there to assist them.



14. I have been sent a number of letters  in  support  of  the  Appellants'
    appeals. These uniformly speak of the Appellants  in  warm  terms,  and
    attest to their community involvement. I summarise the most significant
    of these below: I intend no disrespect to the authors who  I  have  not
    referred to.

15. A Mr 'EM' of Leven is a university friend of the Second  Appellant.  He
    writes that his family  are  close  to  the  Appellants  and  see  them
    regularly. He describes the Appellants as hardworking and warm. To  his
    knowledge they volunteer for a number of organisations in Scotland  and
    have good friends in Dundee and Fife as well  as  Glasgow.   They  have
    been a great source of personal support  to  him.  His  wife  has  been
    battling mental illness for some time and has twice  been  hospitalised
    in the last 4 years, for periods of between 2-3  months.  During  these
    periods the Appellants have stepped in and assisted Mr  EM  by  looking
    after his children  and  provided  him  with  an  "amazing"  amount  of
    emotional support.

16. Pastor Philip Everitt of the Destiny Church in  Glasgow  confirms  that
    the Appellants are part of his congregation. He writes that the  Second
    Appellant has had various voluntary roles within the  church  and  that
    the First Appellant has also helped out by  running  kids'  groups  and
    helping numerous young mothers.  Both have recently been "instrumental"
    in helping one young family who  have  tragically  lost  their  father.
    Pastor Everitt describes the assistance offered by  the  Appellants  to
    the grieving mother - taking the children to school, looking after them
    and putting food  on  their  table  -  as  the  "act  of  heroes".  The
    Children's Pastor Ilona Witoszek confirms this and describes the  First
    Appellant as a "great asset" for the  community  in  Glasgow.    A  Mrs
    Gertrude Kadzuwa, a member of the same  church,  speaks  of  the  First
    Appellant in similarly glowing terms but  also  speaks  to  her  mental
    health issues: Mrs Kadzuwa runs counselling sessions at the  church  as
    well as bible study  groups  and  expresses  concern  about  the  First
    Appellant's emotional and psychological wellbeing.

17. Ms Mariegold Akomode, Support and Outreach Co-ordinator  for  'Waverley
    Care' has  written  to  confirm  that  the  First  Appellant  has  been
    receiving the support of that organisation since 2011, to help her deal
    with her HIV diagnosis but more particularly with her depression.   The
    First Appellant has, under the auspices of Waverley Care, engaged  with
    community integration projects. She provides babysitting and  care  for
    other mums, she teaches children at Sunday school and has befriended  a
    number of elderly people  suffering  from  dementia.   She  remains  an
    active member of the 'Waverley Care'  team.  The Second Appellant is an
    active member of the Service Users Involvement team. He is involved  in
    planning, organising and contributing to meetings and  policy  planning
    and like his wife volunteers in the community integration projects.

18. Neither party provided me with any particularly  up  to  date  evidence
    about the availability of drugs  in  Malawi.    Mr  McVeety  relied  on
    information provided in the refusal letter. This cites a report by AIDS
    charity 'AVERT', who state that the Malawian  government  has  shown  a
    strong commitment to  providing  ARVs,  with  almost  200,000  citizens
    receiving prescriptions by 2009.   The same  report  acknowledges  that
    this programme is not without its difficulties. There is a shortage  of
    medical workers to  administer  treatment.  The  drugs  themselves  are
    relatively old  and  buying  more  developed  therapies  will  be  more
    expensive, meaning that less people will be able to get them.  Even  in
    areas where ARVs  are  available,  food  shortages  have  raised  other
    issues, with the confluence of HIV  infection  and  lack  of  nutrition
    causing particular concern.  There is commonly a lack of  medicines  to
    treat the opportunistic infections that arise at later  stages  of  HIV
    infection.  Other reports cited  in  the  refusal  letter  discuss  the
    dilemma faced by the Malawian government, who faced a tripling in costs
    with the introduction of new-line  therapies.  The  infection  rate  in
    Malawi stood at 11% in 2011.   Medicins  Sans  Frontieres  2012  report
    congratulates the Malawian government for its  progress  but  expresses
    concern that the ARV programme is entirely donor-funded. The  Secretary
    of State points to evidence that the  particular  drugs  taken  by  the
    Appellants are available in Malawi.   The  Appellants  bundles  contain
    newspaper reports from  2013-2017  discussing  the  acute  shortage  of
    drugs, healthcare  workers  and  medical  supplies  faced  by  Malawian
    hospitals.    These articles do  not  refer  explicitly  to  ARVs,  but
    rather to basic items such as swabs and syringes. Where  drugs  are  in
    short supply there have been cases of doctors requiring  an  additional
    'fee' - payable over and above the actual cost - in order  to  dispense
    them.




    Legal Framework

19. The applicable rule relating to  'private  life'  under  Article  8  is
    paragraph 276ADE(1). It is common ground that the  only  part  of  that
    rule that could possibly avail the Appellants is sub-paragraph (vi):


         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.


20. That test contains three limbs.  It is agreed that the Appellants  meet
    the first two: they are both aged over 18 years and have lived in  this
    country for less than 20 years. The third limb, whether there are "very
    significant obstacles to integration" has been described by  the  Upper
    Tribunal   as   a   "stringent"   test:   see    Bossade    (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC).  In  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 Lord Justice
    Sales described it in the following terms:


         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life".


21. In his own guidance, published to coincide  with  the  introduction  of
    this version of the rule, the Secretary of State focuses on the  extent
    to which it would be possible for the individual concerned to  enjoy  a
    private life in the country of destination. The presumption  should  be
    that integration will be possible, and  it  is  for  the  applicant  to
    introduce evidence to demonstrate that it is not. A number  of  factors
    can be considered, for  instance  linguistic,  familial,  cultural  and
    social ties to the destination country:


        A very significant obstacle to integration  means  something  which
        would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
        into the country of return. The decision maker is looking for  more
        than obstacles. They are looking to see  whether  there  are  "very
        significant" obstacles, which is a high threshold. Very significant
        obstacles will exist where the  applicant  demonstrates  that  they
        would be unable to establish a  private  life  in  the  country  of
        return, or where establishing a private  life  in  the  country  of
        return would entail very serious hardship for the applicant.


    From Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent)  and  Private
    Life: 10-Year Routes August 2015.

22. Mr McVeety accepted that if I could not be satisfied  that  there  were
    "very significant obstacles to integration"  it  would  nonetheless  be
    open to me to allow the appeal with reference to Article 8 'outside  of
    the rules'. He acknowledged that the rule, with its exclusive focus  on
    the prospects of life in Malawi, left open the question of  the  weight
    to be attached  to  the  Appellants'  Article  8  rights  as  they  are
    exercised in this country. In the cases of the Appellants this included
    their relationships with close friends in  Scotland,  and  importantly,
    their relationships with their sons. Given that the boys still live  at
    home, and have not embarked on independent lives, Mr  McVeety  accepted
    that these relationships fell within the rubric of 'family' rather than
    simply 'private'  life.   He  therefore  invited  me  to  make  my  own
    assessment of proportionality,  attaching  appropriate  weight  to  the
    public interest  in  maintaining  immigration  control  and  the  other
    factors identified in s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.




    Discussion and Findings


23. I find that each Appellant before me has established both a family  and
    private life in the United  Kingdom.  Although  their  sons  have  both
    passed the age of majority, I accept, as did Mr McVeety, that there  is
    no 'bright line' between childhood and adulthood, and that where  young
    adults remain in the family home they may continue to  be  emotionally,
    financially and practically dependent upon  their  parents  until  such
    time  as  they  are  ready  to  embark  on  independent   lives.    The
    relationship between parents and sons continues to be a 'family  life'.
    I accept that the Appellants are both hardworking and  sociable  people
    who have, through their  friendships,  membership  of  the  church  and
    voluntary work, actively contributed to the community in  Scotland,  as
    well as creating valuable private lives of their own.


24. I accept that the decisions to refuse them leave would  in  due  course
    lead to their removal from the United Kingdom  and  that  this  removal
    would constitute  an  interference  with  their  Article  8  rights.  I
    therefore find Article 8 to be  engaged  on  the  facts  of  the  case,
    bearing in mind the relatively low threshold for  engagement  (see  for
    instance Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR [at 3940], AG (Eritrea) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  801  [at
    28]).

25. The decisions were lawful in that the Secretary of State has the  power
    to take them, and I accept that they are rationally connected with  the
    legitimate aim of protecting the economy.

26. The question remains whether the decisions are proportionate.

27. I begin my assessment of proportionality  with  an  assessment  of  the
    applicable rule, paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

28. The Appellants have been honest and open with me about  the  extent  to
    their ties to their country of origin. Both speak Chichewa, so there is
    no linguistic barrier to integration. Both grew up in Malawi and remain
    familiar with that country's culture and social norms. Whilst I  accept
    that Malawi will  have  changed  in  the  15  years  or  so  since  the
    Appellants  left,  there  are  no  obvious  social  barriers  to  their
    understanding or ability to 'fit-in'.  Both  Appellants  have  retained
    contact with their siblings  who  live  in  Blantyre.    It  is  clear,
    applying the test as it was perceived by Lord Justice Sales in  Kamara,
    that each Appellant would be enough of  an  "insider"  to  be  able  to
    operate on a day-to-day basis  in  Malawi;  it  is  likely  that  in  a
    reasonable  period  of  time  they  will  be  able  to  establish   new
    friendships and other relationships capable of constituting  a  private
    life.   That remains the case whatever difficulties and hardships  they
    might face in obtaining treatment for their various medical conditions.
    I therefore consider that the test under the rules is  not  met.  I  am
    nonetheless satisfied that it is  appropriate  to  go  on  to  consider
    Article 8 'outside the rules'. That is because there are two  important
    facets  of  the  Appellants'  case  that  lie  outwith  the  bounds  of
    consideration in 276ADE(1)(vi): the impact on  the  Appellant's  health
    (physical and mental) and the rupture in their existing relationships.


29. In my assessment of whether the decision to refuse leave is an unlawful
    breach of Article 8 'outside of the rules' I must have  regard  to  the
    public interest, in particular those factors set down in s117B  of  the
    2002 Act.

30. The maintenance of immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest.
    Neither Appellant has had leave to remain  in  this  country  for  some
    time.  Both are educated and intelligent people and knew full well that
    they were acting unlawfully when they chose to remain in  this  country
    when their visas expired in, respectively, 2003 and 2008.   That  is  a
    long time to be an overstayer. They could have chosen to leave  at  any
    time. That they did not weighs heavily in the balance against them, and
    I recognise that it is strongly in  the  public  interest  to  maintain
    immigration control.   Neither Appellant currently qualifies for  leave
    to remain 'within the Rules'. That is  a  matter  that  weighs  heavily
    against them in the balancing exercise.

31. Neither Appellant is financially independent. I accept that  they  have
    both worked and supported their family, and that given the  opportunity
    would do so again, but I must bear in mind that  at  present  they  are
    wholly dependent upon the state, either directly  through  'section  4'
    payments or via the Second Appellant's brother, himself in  receipt  of
    state benefits.  This is a matter that must weigh against them  in  the
    balancing exercise.

32. Both Appellants speak fluent English and this is not therefore a factor
    that weighs against them. Nor is it, however, a  matter  that  can  add
    weight to their side of the scales.

33. I accept that the family life that the Appellants seek to preserve, and
    that which they share with each other, existed before the  family  came
    to the United Kingdom and to that extent s117(4) has no application.

34. I am satisfied that the Appellants each  enjoy  a  significant  private
    life outside of the home. I have no reason to doubt the evidence of the
    various church members, charity workers, volunteers and family  friends
    who have written to the Tribunal in support of the Appellants. I accept
    that they play an active role in their local church and that they  also
    contribute to the community in Scotland by their work in a HIV charity.
    I note that the Appellants are close to the Second Appellant's  brother
    who depends upon her for company and practical support, since he is  on
    long-term sick leave from work with back problems and is now, he  says,
    unable to perform basic tasks such as housework himself. I  have  taken
    into account the evidence that the Appellants have a  number  of  long-
    term and close friendships that could not  easily  be  replicated.    I
    must however attach only little weight to these factors, since this  is
    a private life  established  when  the  Appellants  residence  in  this
    country was either precarious, or latterly unlawful.

35. Section 117B(6) has no current  relevance  to  this  application  since
    neither Appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a child. I do however note that from at least 2012  to  2013  they
    arguably met the requirements of this provision, since  the  boys  were
    then 'qualifying', that is to say they had lived in the United  Kingdom
    for a continual period of seven years. On the facts it is hard  to  say
    that it would have been reasonable for them  to  leave  at  that  time,
    given their long residence, the terms of the  Respondent's  policy  and
    the health concerns of their parents.  I therefore find that  at  least
    at that time it would not have been in  the  public  interest  for  the
    Appellants to be removed from the United Kingdom. I attach only minimal
    weight to this factor.

36. There is in this case one obvious and important additional facet of the
    public interest in refusing the Appellants  leave.  That  is  that  the
    Appellants are both receiving extensive medical treatment on  the  NHS.
    The Appellants are both infected with the HIV virus and that this leads
    to numerous complications and health complaints.  The  First  Appellant
    has very recently suffered a serious heart attack and is now  receiving
    treatment  for  heart  failure.  The  Second  Appellant   has   various
    intestinal problems and lupus.   I find that both have been a drain  on
    the public purse for a number of years, and that this burden will  only
    increase as they get older, and  their  conditions  deteriorate,  as  I
    think it is accepted,  they  must.   I  have  not  been  provided  with
    estimates of the cost, but it is  likely  to  be  substantial.  I  have
    weighed that in the balance against the Appellants.

37. Against these public interest factors, I weigh those matters that go to
    the Appellants' case that it would be  unjustifiably  harsh  to  remove
    them from this country.

38. I am satisfied that the Appellants and their sons  enjoy  a  close  and
    supportive  relationship  that,  as  Mr  McVeety  acknowledges,   could
    properly be described as a 'family life'.  Like  any  family  the  boys
    look to their parents for support and guidance,  whilst  their  parents
    look to their children for  security  and  assistance  in  the  future.
    Unlike other families, however, this is a family whose bonds have  been
    strengthened by  necessity,  since  they  have,  over  a  long  period,
    endured two very stressful challenges: insecure immigration status, and
    living with HIV.

39. As to the first of these  challenges,  the  blame  for  that  must  lie
    squarely with the adult Appellants before me in this appeal (see  above
    at �30). That blame cannot, however, rationally be  attached  to  their
    sons, who were young boys when they arrived to join  their  parents  in
    2005.  I doubt that either had any notion of  what  immigration  status
    was,  or  when  it  expired.    Although  they  clearly  did  have   an
    understanding of their situation  once  they  had  reached  majority  I
    accept that since that time they were waiting for a decision  from  the
    Home Office (they made their applications for leave to remain in  2014)
    and subsequently for the outcome of their  appeals.  I  have  therefore
    borne in mind that insofar as the Respondent's decisions in the instant
    appeals impact upon the family life of the Appellants' sons, that is  a
    matter that  can  properly  be  given  weight  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise. These young men have  built  their  lives  in  this
    country to the extent that their right to  remain  here  is  recognised
    under the Immigration Rules. The removal of their parents presents them
    with an unpalatable choice.  Leave  behind  their  friends,  education,
    prospects and entrenched private lives, or allow their  terminally  ill
    parents to return to Malawi alone.


40. As to the HIV infection of the Appellants, I  accept  that  this  is  a
    matter that has weighed heavily on each member of the family.   It  has
    resulted in regular crises, such as the First Appellant's recent  heart
    attack.  It has given all of them a significant degree of  stress,  and
    has  resulted  in  the  Second  Appellant's   long-term   anxiety   and
    depression. I have no hesitation in accepting that all  of  the  family
    feel very worried  and  frightened  about  what  might  happen  to  the
    Appellants should they be forced to return to Malawi.  It  has  further
    strengthened the already solid bond between sons and parents.

41. Had the boys embarked on independent lives I would have been  satisfied
    that the decisions to refuse  the  Appellants  leave  would  have  been
    proportionate.  That is not however the situation. They are both  still
    living at home, and are in full time education. They  remain  dependent
    upon their parents. I am therefore satisfied that the detriment to them
    of their parents leaving would be immediate and significant. The  shock
    of being thrust into  the  adult  world  would  however  be  of  little
    consequence compared to the anxiety that they would  likely  experience
    about  their  parents  returning  to  Malawi.  I  accept  Mr  McVeety's
    submission (made in reliance on the information in the refusal  letter)
    that at least one of the ARV drugs taken by each Appellant is available
    in Malawi. What is less clear is whether they are readily available  in
    the same combination therapy format as the Appellants  currently  take.
    The objective material speaks of regular shortages and interruptions in
    the supply  of  all  medications,  of  a  lack  of  trained  staff  and
    equipment. I have already rejected  the  Appellants'  case  that  their
    removal would place the United Kingdom in  breach  of  its  obligations
    under Article 3 ECHR, but I accept that there is a real likelihood that
    their conditions would deteriorate if their medical treatment - for all
    conditions - is interrupted by removal. I  accept  that  this  will  be
    extremely  difficult  for  the   Appellants'   sons   to   deal,   both
    psychologically and practically.    This is a single  composite  family
    unit of which two members qualify for leave to remain in this  country.
    On the facts I am persuaded that it would be  unjustifiably  harsh  for
    the remaining two to be removed.




    Decisions


42. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal have been set aside.


43. I re-make the decisions in the appeals as  follows:  "the  appeals  are
    allowed".

44. There is a direction for anonymity.

                                       [pic]
                                                   Upper Tribunal Judge
Bruce
                                                 24th September 2018


