
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17586/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2019                     | On 15 May 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 korale [a]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Emma Harris, Counsel instructed by NAG Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Aziz sitting in Birmingham on 4 December  2018)  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Department") made  on  1  March  2018  to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain on the basis of family life established
    in the UK with his wife and two children, who were not persons  present
    and settled in the UK at the date of the decision or at the date of the
    hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction,
    and I do not consider that the appellant requires anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  27
    November 1981.  He is married to [DD], who is also  a  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.  She has been lawfully residing in the UK in various immigration
    categories since 7 May 2006.  The appellant first arrived in the UK  on
    24 April 2013 as a dependant of his wife under the points-based system.
     At the time of entry, his wife was a Tier 1 migrant.  She subsequently
    applied to extend her leave as a Tier 2 migrant until 1 September 2016.
     Her application was successful, and the appellant was granted leave to
    remain in line with her as her dependant partner.  The couple have  had
    3 children in the UK: [A] born on 2 March 2014;  [S]  born  on  25  May
    2015; and [K] born on 18 October 2018.

 3. On 10 June 2016 the appellant's wife applied for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of 10  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   Her
    application for ILR was refused, but she was granted limited  leave  to
    remain for 24 months.  At the hearing before Judge  Aziz,  Counsel  for
    the appellant informed the Tribunal that the reason for the application
    for ILR being refused was because she had a recent conviction for theft
    for which she had received a fine.  So this disqualified her from being
    issued ILR at that time.

 4. On 1 September 2016 the appellant made his  application.   He  declared
    that he and his wife had been convicted of shoplifting on 13 June 2016,
    for which they had received a fine.  They had "extended family/parents"
    in Sri Lanka.  In answer to the question as to whether there  were  any
    obstacles to family life with his wife continuing outside  the  UK,  he
    said that he did not have a home in Sri Lanka or any employment  there.
    Although they had extended family members in Sri  Lanka,  it  would  be
    very  difficult  for  them  to  integrate   due   to   their   personal
    circumstances.

 5. On 1 March 2018 the Department gave  their  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's application.  It had been placed on hold following a  pause
    in Appendix FM decision-making.  The temporary hold was to  enable  the
    Home Office to consider the implications  of,  and  to  make  necessary
    changes to, the Immigration Rules and Guidance to reflect, the Judgment
    of the Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon) & Others -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC 10.

 6. His application fell  for  refusal  on  grounds  of  suitability  under
    section S-LTR because he had  had  a  previous  conviction  for  theft.
    Accordingly, S-LTR.1.6 applied.  Consideration had  been  given  as  to
    whether there were exceptional circumstances in his case.  It  was  not
    credible that he and his partner  had  lost  all  ties  in  Sri  Lanka.
    Furthermore, no reasons had been offered as to why they would be unable
    to apply the skills they had obtained in the UK to thrive in their home
    country.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Only the appellant was legally represented before  Judge  Aziz.   There
    was no Presenting Officer. At the outset of the hearing,  Counsel  made
    an application to adjourn.  The application was made  on  two  grounds.
    The first was that the appellant's wife had an outstanding  application
    for ILR with the Home Office.  The application had been submitted on 12
    October 2018.  She said that the appellant's two  older  children  were
    also included in that application.  If the application was  successful,
    then the wife would be granted indefinite  leave  to  remain,  and  the
    children would be entitled to register as British citizens.  The second
    reason was that the appellant's wife was not in attendance.  While  she
    had submitted a witness statement, due to some oversight  she  had  not
    been informed by the solicitors that she should attend the  hearing  to
    give evidence.

 8. The Judge refused the application on both grounds.  The fact  that  the
    appellant's wife had an outstanding application with the  Home  Office,
    and it was not known when the application would be decided, was not  in
    itself  a  good  enough  reason  for  the  appeal  to   be   adjourned.
    Furthermore, he held that the Tribunal should not pre-judge the  merits
    of the application.  As to the fact that the appellant's wife  had  not
    been able to attend to give "live evidence", he did not  consider  that
    the appellant was prejudiced.

 9. In his subsequent decision, the Judge explained why he had refused  the
    adjournment application, and why he had gone on to dismiss  the  appeal
    on its merits. He noted Counsel's concession that the application could
    not succeed under the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM,  as  his
    wife was not a settled person.  He noted that the application was  also
    refused under the suitability  requirements,  although  Counsel  stated
    that the conviction was disputed by the appellant, "who argues that  it
    was his wife who received the conviction for theft."  He noted that the
    essence of the appellant's case was that he should be  granted  limited
    leave to remain to enable him to remain in the UK  with  his  wife  and
    children, pending the outcome of his wife's application.

10. The Judge set out his findings of fact at paragraphs [26] onwards.   He
    found that at the time of his wife's ILR application made  on  10  June
    2016, the appellant had existing leave  to  remain  until  1  September
    2016.  He had hoped that the Department would make a  decision  on  his
    wife's application prior to the expiry  of  leave;  but  when  no  such
    decision was made, in  order  to  avoid  becoming  an  overstayer,  the
    appellant had made a further application for leave to remain.  Although
    the wife's application for ILR was refused, she had  been  granted  two
    years' discretionary leave to remain on 21 September 2016.

11. At paragraph [27], the Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    lawfully resident  in  the  UK.   Counsel  asserted  that  it  was  her
    understanding that it was the appellant's wife who had  been  convicted
    for theft - not the  appellant  himself.  As  the  Department  had  not
    adduced evidence in support of the assertion that the appellant  had  a
    criminal conviction, he found in the appellant's  favour  that  it  was
    only his wife who had been convicted of theft by shoplifting.

12. But despite these findings in the appellant's favour, the Judge was not
    persuaded  as  to  the  appellant's   claimed   family   and   personal
    circumstances in Sri Lanka.  He was not persuaded  that  the  appellant
    and his wife's respective families would be unwilling or unprepared  to
    assist the appellant and his family if they returned to Sri Lanka.

13. The Judge went on to consider the application outside  the  Rules.   He
    observed that the application was inconsistent with the evidence  which
    had been  given,  including  the  assertion  in  paragraph  14  of  the
    appellant's witness statement that he was  a  named  dependant  on  his
    wife's application of 12 October 2018, along with the children: "It  is
    difficult to see how he can, on the  one  hand,  argue  that  he  wants
    limited leave outside the Immigration Rules so that he  can  remain  in
    the country with his family whilst they await the outcome of a recently
    submitted application for indefinite leave to remain, and, on the other
    hand, state that he is a dependent family  member  in  that  very  same
    application."

14. The Judge concluded, at paragraph [40],  that  the  appellant  had  not
    brought forward a good reason to consider an  application  outside  the
    Rules.  In case he was wrong about that, in paragraphs [41] to [47], he
    addressed an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  His conclusion, having
    applied section 117B of the 2002 Act, was that the appellant's  removal
    from the UK would be proportionate in all the circumstances: "There  is
    nothing preventing the appellant returning to Sri Lanka whilst his wife
    awaits the outcome of the immigration application.   His  children  are
    still very young.  They can return to  Sri  Lanka  with  him.   In  the
    alternative, they can remain here and be looked after by  their  mother
    in this country.  In the event that their applications are allowed, the
    appellant can apply for entry clearance to join  them.   In  the  event
    that the application is refused, his wife and children  can  return  to
    Sri Lanka.  Family life will only be disrupted on  a  temporary  basis.
    Removal  is  not  disproportionate  given  the  basis  upon  which  the
    appellant seeks to remain here."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. Counsel, who appeared  at  the  hearing,  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal raising four grounds.  Ground 1 was that the Judge
    erred in law in failing to grant an adjournment.  Ground 2 was that the
    Judge had wrongly asserted that only the appellant's wife  had  section
    2C leave at the date of the hearing.  Ground 3 was that the  Judge  had
    made an unreasonable finding in respect of the appellant's behaviour in
    the autumn of 2016.  Ground 4 was  that  the  Judge  had  conducted  an
    erroneous  assessment  of  family  life  considerations  and  the  best
    interests of the children.  Clearly, no regard could be had to the fact
    that his  wife  was  currently  on  maternity  leave  as  a  Buyer  for
    Poundstretcher.   She  and  the  children  currently  relied  upon  the
    appellant to maintain the family financially.  Thus, the  family  would
    be adversely affected by the appellant's removal  from  the  UK,  which
    would not be in the best interests of the children.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

16. On 14 March 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher granted permission to
    appeal in respect of Grounds 2-4 for the following reasons:

         "I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to use an  exercise  of
         his discretion to refuse an adjournment.  The appellant's wife  had
         an outstanding application with the Home Office, but there  was  no
         indication as to when it  might  be  decided.   The  appellant  was
         certainly not deprived of a fair hearing as  the  grounds  suggest.
         However, it is argued that the Judge erred in his belief that  only
         the appellant's wife had extant leave.  By failing to query why  he
         had made his application if named as  a  dependant  on  his  wife's
         application, it is argued that the appellant and his representative
         were deprived of the opportunity to explain the issue.  Whilst  the
         Judge made reference to s.55 in paragraph 29 of his decision, it is
         argued that he failed to give adequate consideration  to  the  best
         interests of the children, and it is also arguable that he ought to
         have made further findings under section 117B(4) in  terms  of  the
         family life considerations."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Harris (who did not appear below) developed the  case  advanced
    in the grounds of appeal.  She produced  a  copy  of  the  Home  Office
    Guidance on applications to settle in the UK on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence, which showed that an applicant could not include his  family
    members as dependants in his or  her  application.   For  that  reason,
    although the  appellant's  wife  had  recently  been  granted  ILR  (as
    evidenced by a letter from the Home Office dated 6  March  2019,  which
    her instructing solicitors had forwarded to the Upper  Tribunal  on  25
    April 2019), neither the appellant nor the children  had  been  granted
    leave to remain in line with her.  As the guidance also indicated,  the
    appellant was now eligible to apply for leave to remain in the UK as  a
    partner of a settled person, and  to  include  their  children  in  his
    application.

18. It also  emerged  in  the  course  of  the  hearing  that  Counsel  had
    inadvertently misled the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  asserting  the
    belief that only the appellant's wife had been convicted  of  theft  by
    shoplifting.  In fact, the appellant had also  been  convicted  of  the
    same offence, as indeed  he  had  admitted  in  his  application  form.
    However, Ms Harris submitted that this did not change the fact that the
    decision was legally flawed for the reasons given  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

19. In reply, Mr Lindsay submitted that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately, and that no error of law was made out.   The  Judge  had
    disbelieved the evidence that the family in Sri Lanka would not support
    them on return, and it was open to him to find that the maintenance  of
    the refusal decision was proportionate.

Discussion

20. Although Judge Fisher did not consider that Ground 1 was  arguable,  Ms
    Harris submitted that it was, and that the Judge's failure to accede to
    the adjournment request had meant  that  the  hearing  was  unfair.   I
    consider that the Judge's decision to  refuse  an  adjournment  request
    constituted a reasonable exercise of his discretion, and  that  it  did
    not engender an  unfair  hearing.   Firstly,  the  appellant  was  only
    entitled to have his human rights claim assessed at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  He was not entitled to have his human rights  claim  assessed
    on the basis of a possible future state of affairs.  Secondly, the case
    put forward on the appellant's behalf did not require the attendance of
    his wife to give oral evidence.

21. It is convenient to deal with Grounds 2 and 3 together,  as  they  both
    arise from inaccurate information given by the appellant in his witness
    statement.  In his witness statement for  the  hearing,  the  appellant
    said that he had been included in his wife's ILR application of 10 June
    2016, as had been the  children;  and  that  they  had  been  named  as
    dependants of his wife in her pending application for ILR submitted  on
    12 October 2018.  I infer from Ms Harris' submissions that  it  is  now
    accepted that this  information  was  incorrect.   No  dependants  were
    included in the application for ILR in 2016 or in the  application  for
    ILR in 2018,  as  this  was  not  permitted.    Insofar  as  the  Judge
    proceeded on the mistaken premise that what the appellant said on  this
    issue was true, the mistake is the fault of the appellant. Accordingly,
    the appellant is not entitled to relief on the grounds that  the  Judge
    has made a material mistake of  fact.  In  order  to  be  eligible  for
    relief, neither he nor his representatives must be responsible for  the
    error. This requirement is plainly not met.

22. On the case as it was presented to the Judge, it was reasonable for the
    Judge  to  take  the  view  that  there  was  little  or  no  objective
    justification for the appellant's appeal being allowed on  the  limited
    basis that he should have further leave pending the outcome of the  ILR
    application,  since  he  was  named  as  a  dependant  in  the   wife's
    application of 12 October 2018.  If  this  was  true,  the  relief  was
    unnecessary, in that even if his present appeal failed, he still had an
    outstanding application as a dependant which remained to be decided.

23. The Judge did not, in any event, commit himself to a finding  that  the
    appellant  was  correct,  either  about  his  inclusion  in   the   ILR
    application of June  2016  or  in  his  inclusion  in  the  recent  ILR
    application.  The  Judge's  frequent  refrain  was  that  if  what  the
    appellant was saying was  true,  certain  consequences  followed  which
    undermined the merits of  the  application  made  on  his  behalf.   In
    particular, at paragraph [36], the Judge made the following  legitimate
    observation, based on the (false) information given in the  appellant's
    witness statement: "If the appellant was  indeed  a  dependant  on  his
    wife's application of 10 June 2016 and when the Home  Office  responded
    to the application by granting the appellant's wife  2  years'  limited
    leave but omitted to even mention the appellant, then  the  appropriate
    course of action would have been to challenge the Home Office decision.
     This appears not to have been done and the appellant has not  properly
    explained why he did not chase the Home Office  in  an  application  in
    which he was a main dependant  in  circumstances  where  his  wife  was
    granted leave and it appears his "dependant application" was  not  even
    considered."

24. Ms Harris submits that the Judge's finding that  only  the  appellant's
    wife had section 3C leave was wrong and productive of unfairness, as it
    meant that the Judge conducted the proportionality  assessment  on  the
    premise that the appellant was not lawfully in the  UK.   However,  the
    Judge accepted at paragraph [33] that the appellant had section 3 leave
    by virtue of his application submitted on 1 September 2016.  The  Judge
    also accepted that  the  appellant  had  at  all  material  times  been
    lawfully present in  the  UK.   When  the  Judge  said  that  only  the
    appellant's wife had section 3C leave, this was in the context  of  her
    most recent application for ILR. His finding that the appellant did not
    have section 3C leave as a result of  this  application  was  factually
    correct.

25. Turning to Ground 4,  the  necessary  starting  point  is  the  Judge's
    sustainable finding that the requirements of EX.1 were not met.   There
    were no insurmountable obstacles to family life being carried on in Sri
    Lanka.  The sole issue was whether it was reasonable and  proportionate
    for the appellant, who did not qualify for leave to  remain  under  the
    Rules, to return to  Sri  Lanka  pending  the  outcome  of  his  wife's
    application for ILR, leading to a temporary  interference  with  family
    life, whether the outcome was positive or negative. While the Judge did
    not expressly direct himself to consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    children as part of  the  proportionality  assessment,  he  took  their
    interests into account when  assessing  proportionality.   He  observed
    that the children were still very young, and he found that  they  could
    return to Sri Lanka with him, or they could remain here and  be  looked
    after by their mother.

26. Given that the youngest child had only been born on 18 October 2018, on
    analysis the only realistic option was for the youngest child to remain
    with his mother, and prima facie it was in the best  interests  of  the
    older children to remain with their mother also for the time being.  On
    the other hand, the Judge did not err in not  failing  to  address  the
    issue of funding while the appellant was abroad. The witness  statement
    evidence did not indicate that the family would face financial hardship
    as a consequence of this. In addition, if the Judge had not been misled
    about the appellant's conviction, he would have been bound to  take  it
    into account as a matter  which  fortified  the  proportionality  of  a
    temporary interference with family life, following the  Chikwamba  line
    of jurisprudence. So I am not persuaded that any  deficiencies  in  the
    Judge's reasoning on proportionality are material.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

