
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Hu/17351/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th March 2019                    |On 3rd April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR ASIF AHMED BAIG
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar (Counsel)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an error of law hearing. The SSHD  is  the  appellant  in  this
    matter and Mr Baig is  the  Claimant.  The  SSHD  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fox)  (FtT)  promulgated  on
    9th January 2019 in  which  the  Claimant's  human  rights  appeal  was
    allowed under Article 8 outside of the rules.



Background

2.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student.  On 9.2.2018 he applied for ILR on the  grounds  that  he  had
    lived in the UK for a continuous period of 10  years  lawful  residence
    (under paragraph 276B(i-v)).   In the refusal letter the SSHD contended
    that the Claimant failed to establish  the  period  of  residence.  His
    leave expired on 6.4.2016 and  thereafter  he  submitted  a  number  of
    further in time applications which had  not  resulted  in  leave  being
    granted.  He became appeal rights exhausted on 31.1.2018.  There was  a
    gap of 8 days from 1.2.2018 until 9.2.2018  when  the  application  for
    leave was submitted. The SSHD accepted that the Claimant's  application
    was submitted within 14 days of being appeal rights exhausted  on  31st
    January 2018 and that the requirements of paragraph 39E were  met.  The
    Claimant met 276B(v) and was not treated as  being  in  breach  of  the
    Immigration rules. However, the SSHD refused the application because it
    was made out of time and there was no 3C leave applicable. The Claimant
    failed to establish 10 years continuous  residence,  only  9  years  10
    months and 29 days. Paragraph 276B(i)(a) was not met.

Consideration by the FtT

3.   The FtT determined as a preliminary issue that  Rule  39E  applied  and
    stated that "it was agreed that Rule 29E (sic) of the Immigration rules
    applies in relation to the respondent's discretion to disregard a break
    in leave of less than 28 days."  [10]  The  FtT  then  found  that  the
    Claimant had made a valid application for settlement 8  days  after  he
    was appeal rights exhausted and further that the application  had  been
    made within the period of 28 (sic)  14  days  prior  to  his  residence
    qualification under the Rules [17]. The FtT was aware that  it  had  no
    power to allow an appeal on the basis  that  the  SSHD  ought  to  have
    exercised a discretion differently. The FtT  found  that  the  Claimant
    established exceptional circumstances by reason of the fact that he met
    the substance of the immigration rules under  paragraph  276B[22].  The
    FtT further found that the SSHD failed to exercise  his  discretion  in
    terms of a flexible approach [23]. The FtT recognised that there was no
    near miss principle [21] and allowed the appeal under Article  8  ECHR.
    Although the Claimant's representative made  the  submission  that  the
    Claimant had not received notice of being appeal rights exhausted,  the
    FtT was unaware of any jurisprudence on this point and did not consider
    the submission was relevant to the decision.

 Grounds of appeal

4.   In grounds of appeal the SSHD argued that the FtT erred by  determining
    that the claimant had 10 years  continuous  residence  relying  on  the
    clarification in R (on the application of Ahmed) v SSHD (paragraph 276B
    - ten years lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 000010. The Claimant  had  no
    lawful leave after 31.1.2018. The fact that the Claimant had  made  the
    application within the 28 day period (coming under  para  267B(v))  did
    not bestow any form of leave. The SSHD  argued  that  the  FtT  further
    erred in concluding that the  fact  that  the  Rules  were  met  was  a
    significant factor under Article 8 and given that  the  assessment  was
    fundamentally wrong, the Article 8 decision was flawed.   There  was  a
    material misdirection in law and  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons.
    There was no consideration of exceptional circumstances and the factors
    under section 117B were not properly considered.

Permission to appeal

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    Haria on 29.1.2019.  In  granting  permission  the  FTJ  considered  it
    arguable that the FtT erred in determining that  the  Claimant  had  10
    years continuous lawful residence.

Submissions

6.   At the hearing before me Mr Gajjar produced a copy of the  Respondent's
    guidance on long residence  published  3.4.2017  which  confirmed  that
    early applications for settlement could be made 28 days  prior  to  the
    required qualifying period being met, provided that all the other rules
    for long residence were met.  The guidance at page 15 covered breaks in
    lawful residence and confirmed that an application may be granted if an
    applicant "has short gaps in lawful residence on or after  24  November
    2016 but leave was granted in accordance  with  paragraph  39E  of  the
    Immigration rules."

7.   Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds of appeal and  argued  that  the  FtT
    erred by placing weight on the degree to which the Claimant had met the
    Immigration rules in terms of his long residence and that the Article 8
    decision was in effect a "near miss"  under  the  Rules  and  that  the
    judgment in Patel & 0rs v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72  applied.  The  Claimant
    needed to satisfy  paragraph  276B(i)  following  paragraphs  47-48  of
    Ahmed.

8.   Mr Gajjar contended  that  the  facts  in  this  appeal  were  entirely
    distinct from Ahmed where the Claimant was an over stayer and there was
    a significant gap in leave.  In any event Ahmed was  published  some  2
    days after the FtT decision was promulgated. The FtT  was  entitled  to
    find that the Claimant met the rules given  that  the  application  had
    come within paragraph 39E and the application was made  within  the  28
    day period prior to the qualification of leave.  As this  was  a  human
    rights appeal the FtT was  entitled  to  take  into  account  that  the
    immigration rules had been met when considering Article 8.  The FtT was
    correct in its approach at [17] and so there was no near miss  argument
    as the Claimant met the rules.  To that extent the section 117B factors
    were not relevant.

Discussion and conclusion

9.   The head note in Ahmed states "if there  is  no  ten  years  continuous
    lawful residence for the purpose of para 276B(i)(a) of the  Immigration
    rules, an applicant cannot rely on  para  276B(v)  to  argue  that  any
    period of overstaying (for the  purposes  of  276B  (i)(a))  should  be
    disregarded.  Para  276B(v)  involves  a  freestanding  and  additional
    requirement over and above 276B(i)(a)."

10.  I find that the decision in Ahmed is applicable  as  it  clarifies  the
    existing law and in any event the points raised therein were set out in
    the refusal letter.   The  FtT  proceeded  erroneously  by  misapplying
    paragraph 39E. It concluded that had it been applied  this  meant  that
    the Claimant could be treated as having leave because he would  not  be
    regarded as an over  stayer.   What  Ahmed  makes  clear  is  that  the
    provisions  under  paragraph  276B  are  entirely  separate  and   that
    paragraph 276B(v) is a freestanding and additional requirement over and
    above 2276B(i)(a).  So the Claimant to whom 39E was applied by the SSHD
    would not to be treated as having breached of the Immigration Rules but
    the period of time could not be  treated  as  part  of  the  period  of
    continuous lawful residence.  The definition of lawful residence is set
    out in paragraph 276A(b).  In  this  instance  the  Claimant  made  his
    application  after  he  was  appeal  rights  exhausted.  There  was  no
    difficulty in terms of his making his application prior to meeting  the
    required period  but  the  proviso  to  that  is  that  all  the  other
    requirements of the rules are met.   I am satisfied that the FtT  erred
    in law in misapplying paragraph 39E [23] and taking the view  that  the
    SSHD failed to apply any discretion. The SSHD applied paragraph 39E but
    nevertheless concluded that paragraph 276B(i) was not met in  terms  of
    continuous lawful residence which amounted to a misdirection of law.

11.  Having regard to the Article 8 assessment I am satisfied that  the  FtT
    's approach was wrong.  The FtT ought to have made findings as  to  how
    Article 8(1) and (2) were engaged. The FtT found that there was private
    life by reason  of  the  length  of  residence  [19]  and  because  the
    substance of the immigration rules were met.  The  FtT  did  in  effect
    treat the matter as a "near miss". There were no other  grounds  relied
    on or evidence adduced by  the  Claimant  under  Article  8  family  or
    private  life  [26].   The  FtT  made  no  decision   under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) nor did it fully consider section 117B  factors  such  as
    the Claimants' precarious status.

12.  There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.

Future disposal

13.  Mr Gaffar submitted that in the event of an error in law there  was  an
    unresolved issue on the facts  as  to  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    received the notice informing him that he was appeal rights  exhausted.
    Mr Whitwell submitted that the Claimant's appeal ought to be dismissed.



14.  I have set aside the decision and concluded that the FtT erred  by  way
    of a misdirection in law.  On the evidence before me it is  clear  that
    the Claimant cannot meet the 10 year continuous lawful residence period
    under paragraph 276B(i)(a) even though paragraph 276B(v) is met.  Given
    that there was no other argument or evidence relied on  in  support  of
    Article 8(1), I see no merit in any further hearing of  the  Article  8
    claim. The Claimant's failure under the rules, in the  absence  of  any
    other evidence to show private and family life, fails under  Article  8
    on the grounds that it would be "a near miss" to which Patel applies.

         56.  Although the context of the  rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
         consideration of proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ that this
         cannot be equated with a formalised "near-miss" or "sliding  scale"
         principle, as argued for by Mr Malik. That approach is  unsupported
         by Strasbourg authority, or by a proper reading of  Lord  Bingham's
         words. Mrs Huang's case for favourable treatment outside the  rules
         did not turn on how close she had come to compliance with rule 317,
         but on the application of the family  values  which  underlie  that
         rule and are at the heart also of article 8.  Conversely,  a  near-
         miss under the rules cannot provide substance  to  a  human  rights
         case which is otherwise lacking in merit.

         57.  It is important to remember that article 8 is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8.

15.  Even if Article 8 was engaged and the length of  residence  did  amount
    to an exceptional circumstance, then the decision was not in accordance
    with the law.  In terms of proportionality section 117B(5) (2002 Act as
    amended) provides that  little  weight  is  given  to  a  private  life
    developed while immigration status is precarious.

16.  I acknowledge that the FtT made no findings in respect of  the  service
    of the  notice  that  the  Claimant  was  appeal  rights  exhausted  as
    indicated by Mr Gaffar. Whilst this may be the  case  I  consider  that
    this is not a material issue.  The Claimant has not raised this or  any
    other issues by way of  cross  appeal.  The  FtT  failed  to  determine
    paragraph 276ADE but that was not  a  material  error  given  that  the
    appellant was pursued on Article 8 outside of the rules.

17.  I remake the decision by substituting a decision to dismiss the  appeal
    under Article 8.

Decision

18.  The appeal of the SSHD is allowed.  The Claimant's appeal is  dismissed
    on human rights grounds.


                               Signed   Date 28.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



NO ANONYMITY ORDER

NO FEE AWARD

                               Signed   Date 28.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
