
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17580/2018
                                                               HU/17582/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2019                    |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             CHERRY CHUA PLACER
                               DALJINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Anzani, instructed by Nag Law solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and the  respondents
    as the 'appellants', as they appeared respectively  before  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.  The  appellants  are  respectively  citizens  all  the
    Philippines and India. They appealed on human rights grounds (Article 8
    ECHR) against decisions of the respondent refusing  their  applications
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom. By a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 25 June 2019, the  appeals  were  allowed.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal. The first concerns the judge's finding
    [22], based on evidence adduced by the appellants from the  Embassy  of
    the Philippines dated 31 May  2009,  that  there  exist  no  reciprocal
    arrangements between the Philippines and India regarding the  issue  of
    permanent residence visas. The grounds assert that the Republic of  the
    Philippines Bureau of  Information  website  indicates  that  temporary
    residence  visas  may  be  converted  to  visas   providing   permanent
    residence. The judge therefore erred in law by finding otherwise.

 3. I find the ground has  no  merit.  The  extract  from  the  Philippines
    government website was never put before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    so he may hardly be criticised for having had  no  regard  to  it.  The
    judge was required to determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence
    which was before him and I find that he has done exactly that. I  agree
    with Ms Anzani's submission that the respondent is  now  attempting  to
    challenge  parts  of  the  appellant's  evidence  which  he   had   the
    opportunity to challenge before the First-tier Tribunal but  chose  not
    to do so.

 4. The second ground of appeal asserts that the  judge  wrongly  concluded
    that the first appellant could not relocate to India,  the  country  of
    origin of  her  partner,  the  second  appellant,  on  account  of  her
    Christian faith. I find the ground has no merit.  At  [24],  the  judge
    made the observation that there would be 'different societal norms  and
    cultural dynamics  for  each  appellant  seeking  to  reside  in  their
    partner's country.'  I  do  not  consider  that  this  observation  was
    intended to be a finding that the first appellant  could  not  live  in
    India because she is a Christian. Indeed, in the  same  paragraph,  the
    judge goes on to repeat  his  finding  on  the  evidence  that  neither
    appellant would be able secure  permanent  status  in  the  country  of
    origin of the other because the evidence before him  clearly  indicated
    that there were no reciprocal  arrangements.  The  obvious  consequence
    would be  that  if  either  appellant  returned  to  their  country  of
    nationality, they would have to do  so  alone  and  their  relationship
    would suffer interference accordingly. That was a finding available  to
    the judge on the evidence before him.  In  particular,  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that the family life of the appellants could  only  be
    continued within the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom.




    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

