
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17208/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2021                    |On 04 October 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               Dr ISHTIAQ AHMED
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant appeals with permission a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Dainty ('the Judge') who in a decision promulgated on  22  December
   2020 dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  State's
   refusal of his application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.
2. The appellant, born on 10 November 1980, is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  He
   has a dependant partner born on 19 February 1988, Miss Khalid,  and  they
   have a child who lives with them in the United Kingdom.



Background


     3. Having had the benefit of  considering  the  documentary  and  oral
        evidence the Judge sets out findings  of  fact  from  [30]  of  the
        decision under challenge.
     4. The appellant had claimed he was eligible for leave under paragraph
        276B of the Immigration Rules on the basis he arrived in the UK  in
        January 2019 more than 10 years before his  application  for  leave
        was made. The Judge  noted,  however,  that  the  appellant  became
        appeal rights exhausted on 26 October 2017. Since when his time  in
        the United  Kingdom  has  not  been  lawful.  The  Judge  gave  the
        appellant additional time  after  the  hearing  to  file  documents
        relating to a Court of Appeal application, but  those  showed  that
        permission had been refused on  14  October  2017,  supporting  the
        Judge's finding that the appellant did not  have  the  required  10
        years continuous law residence required by the  Rules.  This  is  a
        finding within the range of those available to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
     5. The Judge records that the  appellant's  primary  concern  was  his
        wife's illness and in  particular  her  urticaria  and  depression.
        There is reference  to  the  appellant's  daughter  having  medical
        issues of her own, but the finding of the Judge is that a number of
        those matters had been resolved and that the required threshold  of
        establishing article 3 suffering leading to a  grant  of  leave  on
        medical grounds had not been made out.  This is  a  finding  within
        the range of the evidence available to Judge at the hearing.
     6. The Judge considers the position of the  appellant's  partner  from
        [44] by reference to both the documentary and  oral  evidence.  The
        Judge also notes at [52] that there  is  a  dermatology  clinic  in
        Islamabad, and it was found there was no reason why  the  appellant
        and  his  family  could  not  move  closer  to  Islamabad  or   why
        arrangements could not be made to travel by car for treatment.
     7. For the reasons set out between [44 - 53] the Judge concluded  that
        the article 3 medical claims in relation to  the  appellant's  wife
        and daughter must be dismissed.
     8. The Judge went  on  to  consider  the  question  of  insurmountable
        obstacles pursuant to paragraph 276ADE but for the reasons set  out
        between  [55  -  60]  found  no  very  significant   obstacles   to
        integration into Pakistan had been made out, and that the appellant
        and his wife could lead a normal  fulfilling  life  in  their  home
        country.
     9. The Judge also considered  exceptional  circumstances  outside  the
        Rules, including consideration of section 55 and the best interests
        of the child.
    10. In relation to the proportionality of  the  decision,  pursuant  to
        article 8(2), the Judge writes at [68]:


        68.  Turning to proportionality on the one hand I take into account
             the length of time that  the  Appellant  has  been  here,  his
             private life and the associations he has made.  On  the  other
             hand, I take into account my findings above that  there  is  a
             clear  basis  for  him  to  live  normal  fulfilling  life  in
             Pakistan. Crucially he is returning with  his  nuclear  family
             into a support network of extended family. It is enshrined  in
             IR 117B that the maintenance of effective immigration  control
             is in the public interest. There is also a deterrence  element
             to this since appellants should not be permitted to enter on a
             visit or study Visa and stay because they  envisage  a  better
             life for themselves and their family. Unless, of course, there
             are some very powerful obstacles showing why they  should  not
             return, which I  have  found  are  not  present  here.  It  is
             certainly not sufficient, to argue as the Appellant did,  that
             there are exceptional  circumstances  because  the  system  in
             Pakistan is not similar to the NHS.  I  have  dealt  with  the
             health issues above and it would be  wrong  to  go  behind  my
             conclusions on art 3 and 276ADE by finding that the  illnesses
             breach the article 8 rights to family and private life in some
             way unless there is some special exceptional  factor  in  this
             case. There is not. This is a case of illnesses which  do  not
             reach the article 3 threshold, and in respect of  which  there
             is a functioning health system in the country of  origin  even
             if the NHS is preferable to that system. Weighing up all those
             factors I find that balance falls  in  favour  of  maintaining
             immigration control.

    11. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, which was initially
        refused by a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  but  granted  on  a
        limited basis on a renewed application by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal. The operative part of the grant being  in  the  following
        terms:


        2.   The grounds assert that:


             a. Ground (1) - the FtT erred in refusing to consider evidence
                which post  dated  the  hearing  that  predated  the  FtT's
                decision  relating  to  the  appellant's   wife's   medical
                treatment;
             b. Ground (2) - the FtT had erred in failing to  consider  the
                appellant's long residents of 12  years  and  his  family's
                integration in the UK;
             c. Ground (3) - the FtT had cherry picked  evidence  regarding
                the  family's   ability   to   integrate   into   Pakistan,
                particularly in light of further evidence adduced after the
                hearing, including correspondence from  the  University  of
                Lahore, requiring the appellant to return to  work  at  the
                University as part of contractual obligations with them;
             d. Ground (4) - the respondent ought to withdraw a  notice  of
                liability for removal, issued in January 2017 on the  basis
                that the appellant was pursuing an appeal to the  Court  of
                Appeal (permission was later refused).


        3.   Ground (2) discloses no arguable error of law. The FtT plainly
             considered at [35] whether the appellant has 10  years  lawful
             residence (as opposed to merely presents  with  appeal  rights
             exhausted) in the UK. The FtT considered the Court of Appeal's
             order refusing permission dated 14 October 2017. The FtT  also
             considered in detail. The appellant's integration in the UK at
             [62-67], in the context of  the  precariousness  of  leave  to
             remain. The FtT's findings were  unarguably  open  to  her  to
             reach on the evidence before.


        4.   Ground (4) is not a challenge to the FtT's decision at all but
             instead a request that the respondent  withdraw  a  notice  of
             liability to removal in 2017.  Permission  on  ground  (4)  is
             therefore refused.


        5.   In relation to grounds (1) and (3), whilst the  appellant  may
             not eventually succeed in his appeal, it is at least  arguable
             that the FtT's refusal to consider evidence in relation to the
             appellant's wife's medical condition, (correspondence dated  3
             December 2020, which refers her condition  severely  affecting
             the quality of her life) was an  error  of  law  (ground  (1).
             While the substance of the ground may ultimately prove  to  be
             weak,  on  the  basis  that  treatment  may  be  available  in
             Pakistan, the ground is at least arguable.


        6.   The arguable  error  in  relation  to  ground  (1)  also  then
             arguably impacted on the FtT's consideration of  obstacles  to
             the appellant's family's ability to  integrate  into  Pakistan
             (ground (3). While the  appellant's  challenge  to  the  FtT's
             findings on his ability to find work or study in Pakistan, and
             have the benefit of family support in Pakistan, appear  to  be
             weak, I do not refuse permission in  respect  of  them  and  I
             grant permission in respect of ground (3) on  the  basis  that
             the medical issues may arguably have an impact  on  the  FtT's
             wider analysis of obstacles to integration.


        7.   Permission is therefore granted only in respect of grounds (1)
             and (3). Permission is refused, in respect of grounds (2)  and
             (4).




Error of law


    12. The chronology shows that the appeal was heard on 8  December  2020
        and the decision promulgated on 22 December 2020.
    13. Directions had been given in the  course  of  the  appeal  for  any
        documentary evidence upon which the appellant was seeking to  reply
        to be filed by a specified date prior to the  hearing,  which  also
        included the following direction:


        "No additional witnesses, documentation; or other evidence  may  be
        called or relied upon by either party  without  the  leave  of  the
        tribunal unless full details, together with witness statements  and
        copies of the documentation or other evidence to be relied upon  is
        filed  and  served  no  later  than  5  clear  days  prior  to  the
        substantive hearing."


    14. These directions do not prevent an  individual  providing  all  the
        evidence they seek to rely upon but set out  a  framework  enabling
        such evidence to be provided to  the  opposing  party  and  to  the
        decision-maker prior to the hearing to ensure it is  available  for
        consideration at  that  time.  Natural  justice  dictates  such  an
        approach to prevent "ambush" or a denial of a fair trial.
    15. The Judge's record  of  proceedings  shows  that  as  part  of  the
        introduction the Judge checked with the parties whether she had all
        the documents. The Judge specifically  records  following  exchange
        with the appellant:


        -further medical evidence? - say on WS  that  report  from  Dr  and
        going to post? What did you expect it to say? What efforts made  to
        obtain it


        Still don't have it  -  we  are  waiting  for  that  before  filing
        evidence.


    16. The Judge sets out a summary of the events at the hearing from [18]
        in which reference is made to  the  evidence  that  was  available.
        Between [24 - 29] the Judge writes:


        24.  I pause to note that during closing  arguments  the  Appellant
             talked  on  a  number  of  occasions  of  forwarding   further
             documents to the Tribunal for consideration.  I  explained  to
             the Appellant that the time  had  passed  for  submitting  his
             evidence as that should have  been  before  (in  the  case  of
             documents) and during (in the  case  of  oral  testimony)  the
             hearing. The reasons were that this would not be fair  to  the
             Respondent as she would have no opportunity to  cross  examine
             on any documents sent after the  hearing.  Furthermore,  there
             were clear  directions  and  sufficient  time  for  submitting
             documents. I note that, given the Appellant  was  representing
             himself, and I noticed that no  Appellant's  bundle  had  been
             submitted, I had caused an email to be sent on the day  before
             the hearing by the Tribunal's clerk to the  Appellant  stating
             that any evidence that was to  be  served  must  (for  reasons
             pertaining to Covid-19 transmission) to be sent by email.  Any
             documents could at the latest have been sent that  evening  by
             email. Finally, the Appellant had been before the tribunal and
             the Upper Tribunal before and so can be  taken  to  understand
             that if he could not proceed without a document, he could have
             asked me for an adjournment, and he had not.


        25.  I made one exception to this. The Appellant stated that he had
             appealed the previous appeal to the Court of Appeal and wanted
             to provide evidence of this to me. I allowed  any  order  from
             the Court of Appeal refusing permission to appeal to be served
             and lodged by 12 noon on the day after  the  hearing.  I  then
             gave a further 1.5 days to the Respondent to respond by email.
             I allowed this because a  Court  of  Appeal  order  is  short,
             clearly recognisable document and would either support or  not
             support  the  Appellant's  assertion  that  it  became  appeal
             rights, exhausted in January 2019 and not 2017, as alleged  by
             the Respondent. Miss Kayani had no objection to this on behalf
             of the Respondent.


        26.  On 9/12/20 at 22:00 the Tribunal received an  email.  Included
             in the attachments were a short second witness statement and a
             letter from the University of Lahore. The Respondent by  email
             of 10/12/22 to the Tribunal objected to those documents  being
             adduced into evidence as no permission had  been  granted  for
             this - the only permission was for the Court of Appeal  order.
             I agreed that they should not be considered  for  the  reasons
             stated above.


        27.  Also attached to the 9/12/20 22.00  email  referred  to  above
             were orders of the Court of Appeal and  Upper  Tribunal  dated
             14/10/17 and 21/11/16 respectively.  The  latter  was  already
             before this Tribunal save for some immaterial covering letters
             from the Tribunal Office.  The  former  I  admitted  and  have
             considered below.


        28.  I was also forwarded to further documents, appearing from  the
             names of the attachments on 15/12/20 from the Tribunal  Office
             emailed from the appellant. I did not consider those  for  the
             same reasons as stated above at paragraph 24. I requested that
             the Tribunal office emailed the  Appellant  to  state  that  I
             would not be opening the  attachments  as  I  have  not  given
             permission for anything other than the Court of Appeal  orders
             to be filed. It will be open to the Appellant to make  further
             submissions on those directly to  the  Respondent  outside  of
             this appeal if he wishes to do so.


        29.  All of the documentary and oral evidence and argument has been
             taken into consideration by me and (insofar as oral) is  fully
             set out in the Record of Proceedings and referred to  in  this
             decision insofar as it is relevant. At the conclusion  of  the
             hearing, I reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.


    17. Despite the appellant being aware of  the  specific  terms  of  the
        direction relating  to  the  limited  nature  of  the  post-hearing
        evidence that the Judge was  willing  to  admit,  and  despite  the
        Judges refusal to consider evidence not falling  within  the  same,
        there was no application by  the  appellant  for  relief  from  the
        sanction restricting the  post-hearing  evidence  and  no  specific
        application made to ask the Judge to reopen the hearing  to  enable
        the additional evidence to be considered.
    18. It must remember that not  only  has  the  appellant  had  previous
        experience of hearings before the First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunals
        but both he and his partner are very intelligent individuals.  This
        is not a case in  which  it  was  made  out  there  is  any  likely
        misunderstanding in what was expected or what was permitted.
    19. Within Ground 1 the  appellant  acknowledges  having  received  the
        Notice of Hearing and the directions requiring him to file  further
        evidence. The appellant claims that  an  appointment  was  made  in
        relation to his partner's medical condition and on 1 December  2020
        a request was made for her specialist doctor to  prepare  a  letter
        describing her latest condition, which could be  presented  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal. That letter, which refers to a clinic visit of
        2 December 2020 and being typed on 3 December 2020 is addressed  to
        the appellant's partner's GP and is in the following terms:


        Re   Sahar Khalid d.o.b 19/02.1988
             [address]


        Clinical problems:
        Urticaria and angioedema


        I reviewed this lady in a  face-to-face  consultation  at  Trafford
        General Hospital. Unfortunately,  her  symptoms  of  urticaria  and
        angioedema are not settling down even with  being  on  the  maximum
        dose of antihistamine which is taking Fexofenadine 180 mg 4 times a
        day and also Montelukast. She has frequent episodes of swelling  of
        the lips and also her cheeks and chin along with urticaria  on  the
        rest of her body.  The episodes of urticaria  are  occurring  daily
        although they are slightly less frequent. She has had this  problem
        for a number of years and she is very upset and limited  with  this
        problem. It is affecting  severely  her  quality-of-life.  She  has
        shown me again the photographs of her angioedema episodes involving
        her lips and around the eyes. Luckily she has an appointment on  13
        December  in  a  specialist  urticaria   and   angioedema   clinic.
        Considering she is already on the maximum second-line treatment.  I
        suspect she will require  3rd  line  treatment  which  may  include
        immunosuppressive treatment or biological treatment.


        I would appreciate if you would keep  supplying  the  fexofenadine,
        which is the higher dose than recommended in the BNF. She will also
        need to continue the Montelukast. Considering her long  history.  I
        think that she is at the end of her tether, and I am  hopeful  that
        wants. She has been seen in Salford shall  be  offered  third  line
        treatment.


        Yours sincerely


        Dr Tariq Razzaq
        Trafford Dermatology Department


    20. There is attached to the  grounds  of  appeal  confirmation  of  an
        appointment with the Renal Outpatients  Department,  Salford  Royal
        NHS Foundation Trust Hospital, on 14 January 2021 for Miss Khalid.
    21. It is not the case of the  Judge  having  no  evidence  at  all  in
        relation to the appellant's medical  condition  as  the  Judge  had
        within the bundle a letter from  Manchester  University  NHS  Trust
        typed on 25 July 2019 relating to the appellant's  partner  in  the
        following terms:


        To whom it may concern
        ...


        I have been requested to provide a letter to the  Home  Office  for
        Sahar Khalid.  She  has  been  under  our  Dermatological  care  at
        Manchester University NHS Hospital Trust  since  2016.  She  has  a
        condition called chronic  spontaneous  urticaria  which  can  cause
        severe itching, swelling is of the skin,  sometimes  mucosa  areas.
        Heat  tends  to  aggravate  this  condition  and  warm  places  are
        generally not encouraged as the warm weather can potentially worsen
        her condition.


        She was treated initially  with  oral  antihistamines.  She  had  a
        period of relief when she was pregnant, but her  symptoms  seem  to
        have returned and worsened in March 2019. This  was  when  she  was
        last reviewed by us. We were planning to start her  on  a  systemic
        immunosuppressant  to  control  this  condition  better.  We   have
        arranged for some baseline investigations before she could start on
        the medication. In terms of prognosis, about 11% of  patients  with
        urticaria continue to suffer from this condition after 5 years.  If
        we were to start her on an oral immunosuppressant, she will require
        regular blood tests, after 2 weeks of  starting,  monthly,  then  3
        monthly until she is stable on the medication. Ideally,  she  needs
        regular blood monitoring in the first few months  of  starting  the
        medication until she is stable on the medication. We are unable  to
        tell whether she will respond fully to  this  medication  until  we
        have started her on this.


        ...


        Dr N Chiang
        Consultant Dermatologist.


    22. It Judge also had the benefit of the  witness  statements  and  the
        oral evidence. The letter from Dr Chiang appears  at  [45]  of  the
        determination in full. At [44] the  Judge  refers  to  having  been
        provided with the appointment  letter  for  the  appointment  on  1
        December 2020 and the forthcoming appointment on 11 December  2020.
        In that paragraph. The Judge writes:" I also heard from  Ms  Khalid
        about how her urticaria manifests itself and affects her life.  She
        told me that it comes several times per month.  It  causes  her  to
        itch uncontrollably. She cannot sleep with it. She  is  on  regular
        medication -  Fexofenadine  and  montelukast.  It  has  caused  her
        breathing difficulties and she sometimes has to go to hospital. She
        does however keep steroids at home which can be  used  if  it  gets
        particularly bad and breathing difficulties occur. She has  noticed
        the heat exasperates her condition.  In  terms  of  the  historical
        evidence there is a GP record from 2018 that evidences  medication,
        fact of needing an admission to A and E and consultation  frequency
        of 4 - 6 months with a specialist. There are also other appointment
        letters,  the  latest  being  January  2019  at  the  Pharmacy  Led
        Respiratory Clinic within the Dermatology department at Withington.
    23. The Judge concludes that the appellant had  not  shown  substantial
        grounds  for  believing  that  Ms  Khalid  would  (a)  rapidly  (b)
        experience intense suffering (to the article, 3 standard,  so  akin
        to torture/inhuman or  degrading  treatment)  (c)  because  of  her
        illness  and  (d)  because  the  nonavailability  of  treatment  if
        returned to Pakistan. The Judge in  so  finding  was  applying  the
        guidance of the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC 17.
    24. There is no absolute prohibition on post-hearing  evidence  if  the
        interest of justice requires the same to be admitted  to  ensure  a
        proper outcome. A person seeking to adduce such evidence,  however,
        must be aware of the principles in Ladd v Marshall [1954] EWCA  Civ
        1, which are applicable if late evidence is to  be  adduced.  These
        were discussed with Dr  Ahmed  at  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal. Those principles are:


        a) The evidence  could  not  have  been  obtained  with  reasonable
           diligence for use at trial;


        b) The evidence must be such, if given, it would probably  have  an
           important influence on the result of the case,  though  it  need
           not be decisive; and


        c) The evidence must be such as is presumably to  be  believed,  it
           must  be  apparently   credible,   though   it   need   not   be
           incontrovertible.

    25. No issue arises with regard to the ability of the appellant to have
        obtained a letter from  the  Trafford  Dermatology  Department  any
        sooner in light of the date when it was typed and would  have  been
        posted to and received by the GP and Miss Khalid.
    26. No issue was raised by Mr Tan in relation to the  information  from
        the Trafford Dermatology  Department  about  whether  it  could  be
        believed. The contents of the letter were not challenged as lacking
        credibility.
    27. The difficulty for the appellant  relates  to  the  second  of  the
        principles, whether that if such evidence had been given  it  would
        probably have an important influence on the results of the case.
    28. The Judge clearly considered the merits of the appeal by  reference
        to  all  the  available  evidence,  which  included  detailed  oral
        evidence regarding Miss Khalid's medical condition. The Judge found
        the witnesses generally credible  and  taking  their  case  at  its
        highest was not satisfied that the AM (Zimbabwe) test was met.  The
        letters that the appellant  seeks  to  rely  upon  as  post-hearing
        evidence do not change  this  assessment.  Whilst  there  is  great
        sympathy for  Miss  Khalid  whose  suffering  must  at  times  feel
        intolerable, it  is  only  in  the  cases  in  which  the  required
        threshold can be shown to be breached that  article  3  provides  a
        means of resisting removal. This is not one of those cases.
    29. The Judge  also  found  the  availability  of  a  dermatologist  in
        Islamabad.  It  is  not  made  out  in  the  post-hearing  evidence
        established  that  the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to  access
        appropriate  medical  treatment  in  Pakistan  to  deal  with   her
        complaints, as found by the Judge.
    30. The claim the Judge "cherry picked" evidence regarding the family's
        ability to integrate into Pakistan is without merit. The Judge  was
        not required to set out all the evidence provided and make findings
        upon the same. It is clear the Judge considered the  evidence  with
        the required degree of anxious scrutiny and that the findings  made
        are adequately reasoned as to why the appellant and his family will
        be able to continue to live in  their  home  country  in  a  normal
        manner.
    31. There is no legal error made out in the Judge's findings  regarding
        the availability of family support in Pakistan.
    32. In  relation  to  the  appellant's  claim  regarding  prospects  of
        employment, specific weight is placed by him upon a letter from the
        University of Engineering and Technology,  Lahore,  dated  28  July
        2015, which the appellant  claims  will  hinder  his  prospects  of
        employment. That letters in the following terms:


              University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore


        Mr Ishiaq Ahmed
        Lecturer, Mechanical Engineering Department, UET, Lahore.


        ...


        PhD Scholar
        School of Mechanical Aerospace and Civil Engineering,
        The University of Manchester, George Begg Building
        Sackville Street
        Manchester


        Subject: ABSENCE FROM DUTIES


        You availed Ex-Pakistan Leave w.e.f 04.11.2009 to pursue  your  PhD
        under Faculty Development Programme. You are granted  extension  on
        leave from time to time up to 03.11.2014. After that,  you  neither
        applied for  further  extension  on  leave,  nor  have  joined  the
        University whereas you should have completed your PhD till now. You
        were already asked vide letter/emails to join  the  University  and
        fulfil the obligations  of  your  agreement  with  the  University.
        However, we have not received any positive response  from  you  and
        that has been taken very seriously.


        The Higher Education Commission has also advised the University  to
        take strict disciplinary action against the PhD Scholars  who  have
        failed to join back  after  the  completion  of  their  PhD  degree
        programme.


        You are directed to report and join your duties as part of terms  &
        conditions of Agreement. You are advised to inform  the  University
        about the date of your joining. University is looking  forward  for
        your joining. In case of failure, University will take disciplinary
        action under  PEEDA  Act  -2006,  which  may  lead  to  charges  of
        misconduct, fraud and corruption as per decision of the  Syndicate.
        Your guarantor Mr Mukhtar Ahmed Naz [...]  Is  also  contacted  for
        necessary compliance and fulfilment  of  terms  and  conditions  of
        agreement.


    33. The test being applied by the Judge was not whether  the  appellant
        will be able to return to his work at the University of Lahore  but
        whether the appellant had established insurmountable obstacles when
        taking everything into account holistically.   At  [58]  the  Judge
        writes:


        58.  I agree with the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  is  highly
             skilled and so ought to be able to find work. He has a PhD  in
             aerospace engineering. His evidence at the 2015 appeal hearing
             attested to how bright he was and his academic  accolades.  He
             now argues that he could not work for a university in Pakistan
             because he left  a  role  in  a  university  employed  by  the
             government to study in the United Kingdom and  never  returned
             even though he was required to for his old job. He argues that
             by reason of that he would not be able to work in a university
             again. I find that to be  rather  a  sweeping  statement  that
             lacks plausibility because, as Miss Kayani argued he would  be
             returning with the benefit of the further skill and  expertise
             obtain during his doctoral study  in  the  UK.  The  reference
             relied upon  for  the  2015  hearing  attested  to  him  being
             diligent and in the top 5% of students. There is  no  evidence
             before me at all that once a relationship with one  university
             is tainted that prevents association with any university, save
             for  the  Appellant's  assertion.  Since  that  suggestion  is
             somewhat surprising.  I  would  have  required  some  external
             evidence of such a practice.  There  is  further  no  evidence
             before me that there wouldn't be fulfilling job  opportunities
             outside the universities.


    34. The appellant has failed to provide any additional evidence to show
        that the Judge's finding  is  not  one  available  to  her  on  the
        evidence.
    35. I do not find that the appellant's argument and the  evidence  that
        he claims the  Judge  should  have  considered,  including  medical
        evidence, undermine any of the findings by the Judge in relation to
        article 3 (medical) test, article 8 ECHR, or findings  pursuant  to
        paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.
    36. Whilst the appellant disagrees with  the  Judge's  findings,  based
        upon a clear desire  to  be  permitted  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom, the grounds fail to establish legal error material to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

    37. There is no material error of law in the Judge  Dainty's  decision.
        The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    38. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 23 August 2021












