
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17697/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons           |
|On 12 March 2020                                |Promulgated                  |
|                                                |On 19 March 2020             |
|                                                |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 laifa omar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, instructed by David Tang & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born on 1 November 1974. He has
      been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK.

   2. The appellant claims to have entered the UK unlawfully in  the  summer
      1994. He claims to have assumed the  identity  of  Jamel  Hammeri,  or
      Djamel Hammeri, a French national, shortly after his  arrival  in  the
      UK. He was convicted on two occasions, on 11 April 2007 and 26 January
      2011, of possessing a false/  improperly  obtained  ID  document,  for
      which he received a six month prison sentence on  the  first  occasion
      and a six week sentence on the second occasion. On 25 January 2011  he
      was served with removal papers as an illegal entrant.

   3. On 1 March 2016 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on
      private life grounds, on the basis of his long residence in the UK  of
      over 20 years. His application was  supported  by  national  insurance
      records dating back to 1994 and HMRC documents in the  name  of  Jamel
      Hammeri, as well as statements from his brothers and  various  friends
      attesting to his entry to the UK in 1994 and his use of that alias.

   4. The appellant's application was refused by the respondent  on  8  July
      2016. The respondent considered that the appellant could not meet  the
      long residence requirements in paragraph 276B as  it  was  undesirable
      for him to be given leave to remain owing to his  failure  to  declare
      his convictions and his use of multiple aliases and,  furthermore,  he
      had not been residing lawfully in the UK.  The  respondent  considered
      that the suitability  provisions  in  S-LTR.1.6  and  S-LTR.2.2(b)  of
      Appendix FM applied as, with regard to  the  former,  the  appellant's
      presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good because he had
      used multiple aliases during his time in the UK and,  with  regard  to
      the latter, he had failed to disclose his convictions.  As  a  result,
      the  appellant  could  not  meet   the   requirements   of   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(i) of  the  immigration  rules.  The  respondent  considered
      further  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) as he had failed to provide evidence to  show
      that he had resided in the UK for at least 20 years, since he had  not
      provided any official identity document issued to him to show  he  was
      ever legally known by  the  name  of  Jamel  Hammeri.  The  respondent
      considered  that  there  were  no  very   significant   obstacles   to
      integration in Algeria for the purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)
      and no compelling circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave  outside
      the immigration rules.

   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was  initially  heard  by
      First tier Tribunal Judge Sweet on 16 November 2017 and was allowed in
      a decision promulgated on 28 November  2017.  However,  following  the
      grant of permission to the Secretary of State to appeal that decision,
      the matter came before the Upper Tribunal on 13 March  2018.  Notably,
      at that hearing  the  respondent  acknowledged  that  the  appellant's
      convictions had, by that time, become spent.   Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Lewis found that Judge Sweet had failed to give  proper  reasons
      for his conclusions on the appellant's length of residence in  the  UK
      and had failed to consider the suitability provisions in S-LTR.1.6. He
      set aside Judge Sweet's decision and remitted the case to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal to be re-decided de novo.

   6. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver on 30 May
      2019. The judge noted the evidence relied upon by the appellant in his
      application to the respondent, and the further evidence consisting  of
      letters from his accountant and medical documents, all in  support  of
      his claimed length of residence in the UK in the assumed name of Jamel
      Hammeri. The judge also noted the  appellant's  explanation  that  his
      conviction in April 2007 resulted from his  attempt  to  open  a  bank
      account with someone  else's  ID  and  that  his  conviction  in  2011
      followed a raid on his home by immigration officers who  found  an  ID
      which did not belong to him. He had not told his solicitors about  the
      convictions as he feared that they would not take  on  his  case.  The
      false identity had not been stolen but had been  given  to  him  by  a
      friend in 1994. The judge heard from the  appellant's  brother  Mourad
      and from his friend. The judge noted that the appellant's claim as  to
      long residence rested on the proposition that he had adopted the alias
      of Jamel Hammeri, on whose name all the relevant evidence  was  based.
      He did not accept the evidence from the  appellant's  accountants  was
      reliable and noted that the accountancy firm, TT Accountancy services,
      was incorporated on 16 December 2016, two years  after  the  appellant
      and his witness maintained that he had stopped working and that  there
      was no explanation why he had needed their services. The judge did not
      find that the evidence advanced by the appellant for  claiming  to  be
      the person referred to in his documents,  Jamel  Hammeri,  established
      that fact and considered that he had therefore failed to show 20 years
      residence under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii). Neither  did  he  find  that
      there were very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration
      for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The judge considered that
      the most the evidence showed was that the appellant had been in the UK
      at the date of his first conviction in 2007. He found there to  be  no
      compelling reason why his  claim  should  be  considered  outside  the
      immigration  rules  and  he  found  that  his  removal  would  not  be
      disproportionate. He accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
      following grounds: that the judge  had  made  a  procedural  or  other
      irregularity by drawing adverse conclusions from the  accountants,  TT
      Accountancy Services, being incorporated two years after he maintained
      that he had stopped working, when that had never been an issue in  the
      refusal letter or  at  the  hearing,  so  giving  rise  to  procedural
      unfairness; that the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
      finding that both witnesses were  unreliable;  and  that  the  judge's
      finding, when considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), that he had come to
      the UK in 1994, contradicted his findings on paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).



   8.  Permission  was  refused  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   but   was
      subsequently granted on a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal on
      all grounds.

Appeal Hearing

   9. At the hearing both parties made submissions.

  10. Mr Lam expanded upon the three  grounds  of  appeal  accompanying  the
      application made to the First-tier Tribunal, as well  as  the  further
      grounds made to the Upper Tribunal. With regard to the  first  ground,
      he submitted that there  was  nothing  abnormal  in  the  accountant's
      letter of 27 October 2015, at page  201  of  the  appeal  bundle.  The
      appellant had approached his  accountants  following  receipt  of  the
      letter at page 200  from  HMRC  dated  October  2015  telling  him  to
      complete tax returns for work undertaken in the tax year ending  April
      2015, which was not inconsistent with him  having  ceased  working  in
      2014. The fact that the accountancy firm was incorporated in 2016  was
      irrelevant. The accountants' letter was written  in  2015  before  the
      appellant made his application for indefinite leave to  remain,  which
      showed that he was using his alias before he made his application.  As
      for the second ground, Mr Lam submitted that the  judge  had  accepted
      that the witnesses did not use deception and the only reason given for
      finding them to be unreliable was the fact that  they  considered  the
      appellant to be trustworthy, which was insufficient,  particularly  in
      light of the findings in ZH (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 8. With regard to  the  third  ground,
      the judge had found at [23] that the appellant came to the UK in  1994
      and  therefore  his  findings   on   paragraph   276ADE(1)(iii)   were
      contradictory. Mr Lam also relied upon the point raised in the renewed
      grounds, that the judge had erred by making adverse findings from  the
      absence of evidence from the appellant's past landlords and employers,
      when such people could not be expected  to  come  to  court  and  give
      evidence  when  they  risked  being  prosecuted   for   accommodating/
      employing an illegal entrant. Mr Lam submitted that the fact that  the
      appellant had been able to accumulate so  much  documentary  evidence,
      and continued to receive and submit recent documentary  evidence  such
      as from the NHS, showed that he was the person named in the documents.
      The judge's decision ought therefore to be set aside.

  11. Ms Fijiwala submitted that whilst it was correct that  the  matter  of
      the year of incorporation of the accountancy firm had not been put  to
      the appellant, there were other reasons given by the judge for finding
      the accountants' letters to be unreliable, as set  out  at  [20].  The
      judge was entitled to find the witnesses not credible for the  reasons
      given and taking all the evidence in the round. The judge was entitled
      to find that the appellant had provided  no  evidence  of  efforts  to
      obtain evidence from landlords or employers. At [23] the judge did not
      make a finding that the appellant had come to the UK in 1994  but  was
      merely referring to what he had claimed.  The  judge  gave  sufficient
      reasons for finding that the appellant was not the person named in the
      documents.

  12. Mr Lam, in response, reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and findings

  13. As both parties agreed, other than the letters  from  TT  Accountancy,
      there was no challenge to the reliability of the substantial number of
      documents submitted by the appellant in  the  name  of  Jamel  Hammeri
      which related to that person's employment history and included  salary
      slips and correspondence from HMRC. The relevant issue was whether the
      appellant was in fact the same person as named in the documents, Jamel
      Hammeri, since if he was, the evidence demonstrated residence  in  the
      UK since 1994.

  14. It was Mr Lam's submission that the fact that the appellant  had  been
      able to produce so many documents covering a period of so  many  years
      and including recent documents such as  those  from  the  NHS  in  the
      supplementary bundle was sufficient, on a balance of probabilities, to
      show that he was the person referred to in those documents. It was his
      submission that the judge had erred by concluding otherwise.  However,
      it is relevant to note that the evidence before the judge, as recorded
      at [8], was that the identity was not stolen but had been given to the
      appellant by a friend and, as such, the judge was entitled  to  expect
      the appellant to show that the documents  related  to  him  personally
      rather than having simply been given to him by his friend.

  15. Before the judge, the appellant relied on letters from his accountants
      as demonstrating a link  between  the  documentary  evidence  and  the
      identity of Jamel Hammeri, on the basis that the accountants,  in  the
      second letter of 22  October  2017,  confirmed  that  the  appellant's
      photograph was Jamel Hammeri. The appellant now asserts in his grounds
      that the judge did not  provide  proper  reasons  for  rejecting  that
      evidence and erred by basing his reasons upon a matter not  previously
      raised and upon which he had no opportunity  to  comment,  namely  the
      fact that the accountancy firm was incorporated two years after he had
      ceased working. However, as Ms Fijiwala properly submitted, there were
      various other reasons given by the judge for according  no  weight  to
      the accountants' confirmation of the appellant's assumed identity. The
      judge's reasons are set out at length at [20]  and  include  the  fact
      that the two accountants' letters are very different, that  the  first
      has letterhead but no address and provides no specific information and
      that the second is simply a handwritten  note  on  differently  headed
      notepaper, that there is no evidence of work done by  the  accountants
      for the appellant such as his accounts and that  the  accountants  did
      not provide any further supporting evidence which  could  easily  have
      been given. I do not find any force in Mr Lam's argument that the fact
      that the  first  letter  pre-dated  the  appellant's  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain  was  reason  to  support  the  appellant's
      claim. For the reasons cogently given by the judge it seems to me that
      it was entirely open to him to accord the letters from the accountants
      no evidential weight and to conclude that the handwritten  letter  was
      not a reliable document.

  16. As for the only other evidence produced by the  appellant  to  support
      his assumed identity of Jamel Hammeri, namely the oral evidence of his
      brother and friend and the statements from  other  friends,  again  it
      seems to me that the judge was fully and  properly  entitled  to  have
      concerns about the reliability of that evidence. The  judge's  comment
      at [12] in relation to the two witnesses, that "neither gave any  sign
      of guile", is not entirely clear, but in any event the judge was fully
      entitled to accord little or no weight to witnesses who described  the
      appellant as honest and trustworthy when he had in fact been convicted
      of criminal offences of using false identities to access  services.  I
      do not agree  with  Mr  Lam  that  the  judgment  in  ZH  (Bangladesh)
      undermines the judge's conclusions in that regard. Furthermore, and as
      Ms Fijiwala submitted, it is clear from the judge's reference  at  the
      end of [20] that  he  was  of  the  view  that  the  evidence  of  the
      witnesses, as "interested" parties, would carry less  weight  than  an
      independent, professional witness, a view which he was fully  entitled
      to hold.

  17. As I indicated to Mr Lam, I find no  merit  in  the  reliance  in  the
      grounds upon the reference at [23] to the appellant coming to  the  UK
      in 1994 as an indication of contradictory findings by  the  judge.  It
      clear that the judge was not making a finding at that  point  but  was
      merely considering the  question  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
      integration on the basis  of  the  account  given  by  the  appellant.
      Neither do I find merit in the  assertion  that  the  judge  erred  by
      drawing adverse conclusions from the absence of live evidence from the
      appellant's past employers and landlords. I  agree  with  Ms  Fijiwala
      that that  was  not  the  point  the  judge  was  making.  Rather,  he
      considered it relevant that there was no evidence from  the  appellant
      to explain whether he had made efforts to seek confirmation from  such
      people, a matter which he was entitled to take into account.

  18. For all these reasons I find no merit in the appellant's challenge  to
      the judge's decision. The judge was fully  and  properly  entitled  to
      accord the weight that he did to the limited evidence relied  upon  by
      the appellant to demonstrate a link between  himself  and  the  person
      named in the documents and to conclude that the documents in the  name
      of Jamel Hammeri were not evidence of the appellant's residence in the
      UK. The judge gave proper reasons, at [25], for  concluding  that  the
      appellant had demonstrated at most that he had resided in the UK since
      2007 when he was first convicted. He was entitled to take  account  of
      the fact that the appellant would have been eligible to apply for long
      residence leave from 2008 under the previous immigration rules, had he
      genuinely resided in the UK since 1994, and to consider the absence of
      any  such  application  as  a  further  indication  that  he  had  not
      accumulated the length of residence claimed.

  19. The grounds make no separate challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  on
      paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  compelling  circumstances  outside  the
      immigration rules. Indeed the judge was fully and properly entitled to
      conclude as he did in that regard. Accordingly the judge was  entitled
      to dismiss the appeal on the basis  that  he  did  and  I  uphold  his
      decision.  There are no errors of law in the judge's decision.

DECISION

  20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 March 2020
