
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17314/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2020                         |                              |
|                                           |On 17 December 2020           |
|                                           |                              |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                              M M N (Zimbabwe)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Mikhael Puar, Counsel instructed by Henry Hyams
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Rhona Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of M M N who is the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's
   decision on 14 August 2018 to make a deportation order and to refuse  her
   human rights claim.  The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.

2. The appellant is a foreign criminal:

Background

3. The appellant's undisputed immigration history is as follows.  She  is  a
   68 year old woman, who arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  February  1999
   with a visit visa, which was valid until August 1999.  She then  switched
   to a student visa, which was granted to 30 January 2002.

4. In 2004, the appellant was diagnosed as HIV positive and in August  2004,
   she began treatment.  Unfortunately, not many of the available drugs  are
   suitable for her.  She has renal problems and some drug resistance.   Her
   condition is stable and she is monitored twice  a  year.   Her  daughter,
   with whom she is living, retrained as a renal nurse in order to  be  able
   to help care for her mother. In the United  Kingdom,  the  appellant  has
   lived  in  a  joint  household  with  her  daughter,  her  son,  and  her
   grandchildren.  She has another married daughter in  Zimbabwe,  but  that
   seems to be a difficult relationship: the daughter's husband  disapproves
   of the appellant because she is HIV positive and is hostile to her.

5. Following the  expiry  of  her  student  leave  in  2002,  the  appellant
   remained in the United Kingdom without leave.  In August 2008 she applied
   for leave to remain on human rights grounds which was  granted,  and  she
   had leave to remain outside the Rules and/or discretionary leave until 26
   September 2016.  From 2009 to 2014, the appellant worked as  the  manager
   of a residential home a position with a high  degree  of  trust,  as  the
   residents were vulnerable people.

6. On 22 October 2015, the appellant was arrested  on  suspicion  of  fraud.
   She had been manager of a residential home and had stolen that money from
   a 58 year old man who was unable to manage his own  affairs.   It  was  a
   significant and serious breach of trust, over  a  substantial  period  of
   time.  The appellant has never acknowledged  that  she  was  guilty.  The
   appellant was convicted, and sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment  and  a
   confiscation order of �16551, or 8 months' additional imprisonment if  it
   were not paid.  She has served both sentences, as she  did  not  pay  the
   confiscation order monies.

7. The appellant has not reoffended.   While  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
   appellant has contributed to the  community  as  much  as  she  can:  she
   produced glowing letters of support and  character  references  from  the
   army, from the prison where she served her sentence, the  East  Greenwich
   Foodbank where she volunteers, and from church members.

8. The appellant challenges her deportation  with  reference  to  Article  3
   ECHR and her medical condition.  She has no  home  in  Zimbabwe  now  and
   there were difficulties between her and her daughter living in  Zimbabwe,
   because her Zimbabwean son in  law  was  hostile  to  her  following  her
   diagnosis as HIV positive and the stigma of  that  particularly  disease.
   The appellant's case was that she could  not  expect  to  live  with  her
   Zimbabwe-resident daughter for that reason.

9. The appellant produced medical evidence,  including  a  report  dated  25
   November 2019 from Dr  Alan  Tang  FRCP,  DFFP,  Dip  GUM,  a  Consultant
   Physician in Genitourinary medicine, who has been treating her since 2004
   for HIV.  Dr Tang said that the appellant is currently stable on Triumeq,
   a single combined medication which she takes once daily.   Triumeq  is  a
   combination of Dolutegravir 50mg, Abacavir 600mg  and  Lamivudine  300mg.
   The appellant has twice yearly blood tests to check for side effects  and
   drug resistance. It is not in dispute that  this  particular  combination
   drug is unavailable in Zimbabwe, particularly Dolutegravir, which was the
   subject of an Information Request by the respondent.

10. The appellant produced evidence that sending money to Zimbabwe  was  not
   easy.  The economy was in a poor state, with  United  States  dollars  no
   longer being accepted.  Everything had to be  paid  for  with  cash,  and
   people had to collect  money  sent  from  abroad  at  a  bank,  attending
   personally to do so.  Banks made deductions before passing on money  from
   abroad.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The appellant's appeal was decided in the First-tier Tribunal  in  March
   2019, before the Supreme Court decided AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State
   for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17 in April 2020.  At [43] the  judge
   gave himself what was then a proper self-direction on the Court of Appeal
   decision in the AM case, which has since been specifically disapproved by
   the Supreme Court.

12. The judge accepted the expertise of Dr Tang and  did  not  suggest  that
   his report was unreliable.  At [39], the judge set out passages  from  Dr
   Tang's report.  At [45], the judge said this:

         "45.  I  am  satisfied  that  the   appellant's   condition   would
         deteriorate if she cannot access Triunuraq [which  seems  to  be  a
         typographical  error  for  Triumeq).   Dr  Tang  does  not   define
         'rapidly'.  It has not been  established  that  she  would  rapidly
         deteriorate to the extent that she would be 'exposed to a  serious,
         rapid and irreversible decline in his/her state of health resulting
         in  intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant  reduction  in  life
         expectancy'. It is by no means clear that if she were to  suffer  a
         decline in her health, then  that  would  be  'irreversible'.   The
         doctors have managed to find a cocktail of drugs that works for her
         and it may be that other drugs would be  available  that  have  the
         same effect, or could reverse the decline.  It has not  been  shown
         that there would be a likely decline in her life  expectancy  as  a
         result."

13. The judge also did not find that  there  was  family  life  between  the
   appellant and her son and/or  her  daughter.   She  was  not  financially
   dependent, as she had a State pension, and she  had  been  able  to  work
   until her arrest in 2015.  The judge found as a fact that the appellant's
   daughter in Zimbabwe would accommodate and  care  for  her.   There  were
   financial difficulties in Zimbabwe, 'but money does get through' and  the
   appellant had her pension.

14. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal.   The appellant  appealed  to
   the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

15. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted  permission  by  reference  to  the
   Supreme Court decision in AM (Zimbabwe).  He was also concerned that  the
   First-tier Judge failed to deal with evidence from the appellant's United
   Kingdom-based family that they would be unable to send money  to  support
   her in Zimbabwe, 'because the banking system is failing, so  that  people
   cannot obtain cash'.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

Rule 24 Reply

16. There was no Rule 24 reply from the respondent.

17. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

18. I heard submissions from Mr Puar for the appellant and Ms Petterson  for
   the respondent.  Ms Petterson  acknowledged  that  in  the  light  of  AM
   (Zimbabwe), the First-tier Judge's decision  could  not  stand.  For  the
   reasons I now give, I indicated at the hearing that I  would  be  setting
   aside the decision and remaking it by allowing the appeal.

Dr Tang's report

19. I begin by considering Dr Tang's evidence. The appellant presented  with
   pancytopaenia (very low levels of red blood cells, white blood cells  and
   platelets) in 2004.  She tested HIV positive. Her CD4 count was 9/mm3 and
   her viral load was 114076.  Initial treatment got the viral load down  to
   about 5000 copies by the end of 2004, but the appellant  was  tested  for
   drug resistance and found to have two HIV mutations and to  be  resistant
   to four of  the  usual  drugs:  nevirapine,  delavirdine,  efavirenz  and
   didanosine.

20.  In  February  2005,  she  was  changed  to  Combivir  (atanazavir   and
   ritonavir) and her viral load dropped to 50, with her CD4 count rising to
   140.  In May 2005, she needed another change of drugs.  Between July 2005
   and July 2010, she was treated successfully and her  CD4  count  rose  to
   840.    However, with persistent jaundice,  the  appellant's  regime  was
   changed again: kivexa, darunavir, and ritonavir.  This was the regime the
   respondent asked about in her Information Request.

21. Following further problems, the regime was changed  again  in  September
   2016, and in October 2017, the appellant was placed on Triumeq.  In March
   2019, another mutation was identified, giving her low level resistance to
   etravirine and rilpivirine.

22. Since December 2017, the appellant's viral load has been  less  than  20
   copies and her CD4 count between 520 and 590.  Dr Tang considers that the
   appellant will need to stay on Triumeq indefinitely, given  how  low  her
   CD4 count was on presentation in 2004 and the evidence that Triumeq  will
   not cure the infection.

23. Dr Tang's report noted that the appellant's HIV treatment  options  were
   restricted by her impaired renal function.  He concluded that:

         "The effect of incorrectly taking or stopping the medication  would
         cause a rapid drop in the CD4 count and  a  rapid  rebound  in  the
         viral load, which if prolonged, will cause  HIV  related  symptoms,
         development of AIDS related illnesses, and eventually death.

         This patient attends for outpatient follow up every  6  months  and
         relied on the service for  repeat  prescriptions  of  the  snit-HIV
         [sic] drugs, and also blood test  monitoring  every  6  months,  to
         check on side effects, CD4 count  and  viral  load,  in  line  with
         British HIV Association Guidelines.  If she did not have access  to
         medical treatment then there will be rapid decline in the CD4 count
         and progression of AIDS and death.

         The prognosis is good  if  the  drugs  continue  to  be  taken  and
         continue to control the viral load and keep CD4  count  within  the
         normal range, and without toxic side  effects  which  would  damage
         other organs.   The  prognosis  will  be  disastrous  if  treatment
         stopped,   for   the   reasons   already    given    above.    ..."
                   [Emphasis added]

AM (Zimbabwe)

24. On 29 April 2020, the Supreme Court gave the following guidance  on  the
   approach now to be adopted following the decision of the  European  Court
   of Human Rights in Paposhvili.  The most important passage  is  at  [22]-
   [23] in the opinion of Lord Wilson JSC,(with whom  Lady  Hale  JSC,  Lady
   Black JSC, Lady Arden JSC and Lord Kitchin JSC agreed:

         "22.             Following a careful analysis of  the  decision  in
         the D case and of its own decision in the N case, the Grand Chamber
         in the Paposhvili case expressed the view  in  para  182  that  the
         approach hitherto adopted should be "clarified". The Convention  is
         a living instrument and  when,  however  appropriately,  the  ECtHR
         charts its growth, it may generate confusion for it to claim to  be
         providing only clarification. The court proceeded as follows:

             "183.  The Court considers that the  'other  very  exceptional
             cases' within the meaning of the judgment in N  v  The  United
             Kingdom (para 43) which may raise an  issue  under  article  3
             should be understood to  refer  to  situations  involving  the
             removal of a seriously ill person in which substantial grounds
             have been shown for believing that he or she, although not  at
             imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account  of
             the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving  country
             or the lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a
             serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of
             health resulting in intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
             reduction in life expectancy. The Court points out that  these
             situations correspond to a high threshold for the  application
             of article 3 of the Convention in cases concerning the removal
             of aliens suffering from serious illness."

         ... So the Grand Chamber was thereby explaining that, in  cases  of
         resistance to return by reference to ill-health,  article  3  might
         extend to a situation other than that exemplified by  the  D  case,
         cited in para 14 above, in which there  was  an  imminent  risk  of
         death in the returning state.




         23.             Its new focus on the existence and accessibility of
         appropriate treatment in the receiving state led the Grand  Chamber
         in the Paposhvili case to make significant pronouncements about the
         procedural requirements of article 3 in that regard. It held

             (a)    in para 186 that it was for applicants to adduce before
             the returning state evidence "capable  of  demonstrating  that
             there are substantial grounds for believing" that, if removed,
             they would  be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  subjection  to
             treatment contrary to article 3;

             (b)   in para 187 that, where such  evidence  was  adduced  in
             support of an application under article  3,  it  was  for  the
             returning state to  "dispel  any  doubts  raised  by  it";  to
             subject the alleged risk to close  scrutiny;  and  to  address
             reports of reputable  organisations  about  treatment  in  the
             receiving state;

             (c)   in para 189 that the returning state had to "verify on a
             case-by-case basis" whether the care  generally  available  in
             the receiving state was in practice sufficient to prevent  the
             applicant's exposure to treatment contrary to article 3;

             (d)    in para 190  that  the  returning  state  also  had  to
             consider the accessibility of the treatment to the  particular
             applicant, including by reference to its cost if any,  to  the
             existence  of  a  family  network  and  to  its   geographical
             location; and

             (e)    in para 191  that  if,  following  examination  of  the
             relevant information, serious doubts continued to surround the
             impact of removal,  the  returning  state  had  to  obtain  an
             individual assurance from the receiving state that appropriate
             treatment would be available and accessible to the applicant.

         These procedural obligations on returning states,  at  first  sight
         very onerous, will require study in paras 32 and 33 below."

25. At [32], Lord Wilson confirmed the Supreme  Court's  understanding  that
   Paposhvili was more than 'mere clarification of what the [European  Court
   of Human Rights] had previously said'.  In effect, there would now  be  a
   shifting burden of proof.  It was for the appellant  to  adduce  evidence
   'capable  of  demonstrating  that  there  are  substantial  grounds   for
   believing' that there is a risk on return of an Article  3  ECHR  breach.
   That is  not  an  undemanding  threshold:  the  requirement  is  for  the
   appellant to raise a prima facie case of potential infringement, which if
   not challenged or countered, would establish that infringement.

26. At [33], the guidance in Lord Wilson's judgment concludes:

         "33.     In the event that the applicant presents evidence  to  the
         standard addressed above, the returning state can seek to challenge
         or counter it in the manner helpfully outlined in the  judgment  in
         the Paposhvili case at paras 187 to  191  and  summarised  at  para
         23(b) to  (e)  above.  The  premise  behind  the  guidance,  surely
         reasonable, is that, while  it  is  for  the  applicant  to  adduce
         evidence about his or  her  medical  condition,  current  treatment
         (including the likely suitability of any other treatment)  and  the
         effect on him or her of inability to access it, the returning state
         is better able to  collect  evidence  about  the  availability  and
         accessibility of suitable treatment in the  receiving  state.  What
         will most surprise the first-time reader  of  the  Grand  Chamber's
         judgment is the reference in para 187 to the  suggested  obligation
         on the returning  state  to  dispel  "any"  doubts  raised  by  the
         applicant's evidence. But, when the reader  reaches  para  191  and
         notes the reference, in precisely the  same  context,  to  "serious
         doubts", he will realise that "any" doubts in para  187  means  any
         serious doubts. For proof, or in this  case  disproof,  beyond  all
         doubt is a concept rightly unknown to the Convention."

27. At [34], Lord Wilson recorded that neither party  had  actively  invited
   the Court to refuse to follow Paposhvili:

         "[34].  ...Our  refusal  to  follow  a  decision  of   the   ECtHR,
         particularly of its Grand Chamber, is no  longer  regarded  as,  in
         effect, always inappropriate. But it  remains,  for  well-rehearsed
         reasons, inappropriate save in highly unusual circumstances such as
         were considered in R (Hallam) and R (Nealon) v Secretary  of  State
         for Justice (JUSTICE intervening) [2019] UKSC 2, [2020] AC 279.  In
         any event, however, there is no question of our refusing to  follow
         the decision in the Paposhvili case. For it was 15  years  ago,  in
         the N case cited at para 2 above, that the House of Lords expressed
         concern that the restriction of article 3 to early death only  when
         in prospect in the returning state appeared illogical: see para  17
         above. In the light of the decision in the Paposhvili case,  it  is
         from the decision of the House of Lords  in  the  N  case  that  we
         should today depart."

28. I proceed, therefore, to apply that approach to the appellant's case.

Analysis

29.  The  first  question  is  whether  the  appellant's  evidence,  if  not
   countered, would establish a breach of  Article  3  ECHR.   The  passages
   cited from Dr Tang's report, taken with the evidence about  the  lack  of
   the particular combination therapy which has worked for the appellant for
   the last three years, are plainly sufficient to meet the Article  3  ECHR
   standard.  Dr Tang's clear evidence was that if  returned  to  a  country
   where that treatment was unavailable, the appellant would suffer a  rapid
   decline in CD4 count, an equally rapid rise in her viral load, and if the
   absence of treatment persisted, death.

30. The next question is whether the Secretary of State has done  enough  to
   counter that evidence, and to dispel any serious  doubts  raised  by  the
   appellant's  case,  subjecting  the  alleged  risk  to  close   scrutiny,
   addressing reports of reputable  organisations  about  treatment  in  the
   receiving state, and verifying, on a case by case basis, whether the care
   generally available in Zimbabwe was in practice sufficient to prevent the
   appellant's exposure to treatment contrary to Article  3  ECHR,  and  the
   accessibility of the treatment to this appellant, including cost,  family
   network, and geographical location.

31. In default of satisfactory evidence to that effect, the returning  state
   is required to obtain an individual assurance of appropriate,  accessible
   treatment for the particular appellant.

32. The Secretary of State's evidence in this appeal  was  not  prepared  by
   reference to the Supreme Court guidance.  She produced her CPIN of  April
   2019 on Medical and Healthcare Issues, and Responses to  two  information
   requests, one dated 28 December 2018 about support for  lone  women,  and
   one dated 3 February 2020 concerning HIV/AIDS.

33. The December 2018 Response, dealing with single women, says there is  no
   publicly available  information  on  the  support  for  single  women  in
   Zimbabwe from UN RefWorld, US State Department, UNHCR,  or  the  Canadian
   IRB. The information which the Response does  contain,  which  originates
   from Zimbabwean documents, is mainly about banking facilities  and  loans
   for single women, and the constitutional status of women.   It  does  not
   assist me with the issue in this appeal.

34. In the April 2019 CPIN on medical and healthcare issues, the  respondent
   acknowledged assistance from MedCOI in the preparation of the report:

         "MedCOI is  an  Asylum  and  Migration  Integration  Fund  financed
         project to  obtain  medical  country  of  origin  information.  The
         project allows 11 European Union member states plus Denmark, Norway
         and Switzerland to make use of the services of the 'MedCOI' team in
         the Netherlands and Belgium. The MedCOI team makes  enquiries  with
         qualified doctors and other experts working in countries of origin.
         The information obtained is reviewed by  the  MedCOI  project  team
         before it is forwarded to the  UK  or  other  national  COI  teams.
         Previous  MedCOI  responses  are  stored  on  its  database   which
         participating states are able to access."

35. At section 8, the CPIN records that there are now a  million  people  in
   Zimbabwe on HIV treatment, although 1.3 million are  said  to  be  living
   with HIV in 2016 and 2017.  Deaths from AIDS-related illnesses fell  from
   61000 in 2013 to 22000 in 2017.  A 'treat all' approach is taken.   There
   is a list at 8.2.4 of available HIV anti-retroviral drugs, including most
   of the drugs which the appellant has taken, but no longer  takes,  either
   because of side effects or drug resistance.  However, at 8.2.5, the  CPIN
   says this:

         "8.2.5   MedCOI reported that the following ARV drugs, used in  the
         treatment of HIV/AIDS, are not available in Zimbabwe:-

          - Cobicistat

          - Rezolta

          - elvitegravir

          - Stribild

          - dolutegravir

          - triumeq."

36. That is a clear statement that the treatment on which the  appellant  is
   currently stable, is not available in Zimbabwe.

37. The February 2020 HIV/AIDS Response,  again  based  on  MedCOI  research
   says  that  darunavir,  emtricitabine  and  ritonavir  are  available  in
   Zimbabwe, along with various moisturisers  needed  by  people  with  HIV.
   There is no mention of the components of Triumeq (Dolutegravir,  Abacavir
   and Lamivudine).  A footnote from MedCOI, who  prepared  the  information
   response, says that the information provided is expressly limited to  the
   availability of medical treatment, not its accessibility.

38. It follows that the respondent has failed to  establish  that  the  care
   generally available in the receiving state is in practice  sufficient  to
   prevent a rapid deterioration in  the  appellant's  health,  and  if  not
   corrected, her death.  There is no evidence of the accessibility  of  the
   treatment  she  needs,  because  it  is  unavailable  in  Zimbabwe.   The
   respondent has not sought an  individual  assurance  from  Zimbabwe  that
   appropriate  treatment  would  be  available  and  accessible   to   this
   appellant, in context,  Triumeq  and  six  monthly  monitoring  for  side
   effects and/or drug resistance.

39. On that basis, the appellant's Article 3 case is made out and,  applying
   section 33(2) of the 2007 Act, Exception 1 applies to her.  There  is  no
   obligation on the Secretary of State to make a deportation order.

40. I have reviewed the appellant's statements  and  the  medical  evidence.
   While the appellant's deportation is in  the  public  interest,  and  the
   offence she committed was a serious breach of trust, on the facts of this
   appeal it is outweighed by the health risk to her if she is  returned  to
   Zimbabwe.  I am satisfied that it would be a breach of Article 3 ECHR  to
   return this appellant to Zimbabwe,  where  she  is  likely  to  suffer  a
   serious, rapid and irreversible decline in her state  of  health,  and  a
   significant reduction in her life expectancy.

41. The appeal is therefore allowed.

DECISION

42. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      8 December
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



