
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/17247/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 January 2020                  |On 15 January 2020                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                              WILTON MARK BROWN
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim of Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 28 November 2019  against
          the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Mulholland,
          promulgated on 4 October 2019 following a hearing at Taylor  House
          on 29 August 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Jamaican national born on  15  March  1968.  He
          entered the  UK  on  20  June  1999  on  a  visit  visa  (although
          conflicting information and dates are provided by the  appellant's
          representatives; AB:32) and on 26 November  1999  he  applied  for
          leave to remain as a  student.  However,  before  the  application
          could be decided and within  a  few  months  of  his  arrival  (in
          September 1999) the appellant fell into criminal  ways  and  on  8
          December 1999 faced criminal charges. On 23  August  2000  he  was
          convicted, following a guilty plea, of  two  counts  of  supplying
          Class A drugs, and one count of breaching bail conditions, and was
          sentenced to two years  for  each  drugs  offence,  to  be  served
          concurrently, and to three months' imprisonment for the breach  of
          bail. He was recommended for deportation by the court. He did  not
          appeal the conviction or the sentence. His student application was
          refused on 16 May 2001 and a deportation order was signed.  On  19
          June 2001 he was deported.


       3. Shortly after the appellant's arrival in the UK, his son was  born
          in Jamaica in September 1999. Six  months  after  the  appellant's
          deportation, his partner and son left Jamaica and came to  the  UK
          and have been living here since. They are now British citizens. In
          July 2017 the appellant and his partner married in Jamaica and  on
          19 January 2018 an application was  made  for  revocation  of  the
          deportation order. This was refused on 23 July 2018. That decision
          gives rise to these proceedings.


       4. The appellant's grounds argue that there was procedural unfairness
          because the judge relied on  EYF  (Turkey)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  592
          without putting this to the parties. It  is  maintained  that  the
          appellant  did  not,  therefore,  have  the  opportunity  to  make
          submissions on the judgment.


       5. It is also argued that it was unfair to rely on the  aliases  used
          by the appellant in the past and detailed in the PNC because  this
          was not a matter relied  on  by  the  respondent  in  her  refusal
          letter.


       6. It is argued that the judge did not refer to the  letter  of  good
          character and pictures of the appellant's farm  contained  in  the
          appellant's bundle  and  that  she  was  wrong  to  criticise  the
          appellant for not working and for his character when these matters
          were not relied on in the decision letter.


       7. It is argued that having relied on EYF the judge  failed  to  give
          sufficient consideration to the guidance therein that the lapse of
          a ten-year period makes it easier to argue that  the  balance  has
          shifted in favour of revocation and, further, that she  failed  to
          have regard to paragraph 391(a) of the Immigration  Rules.  It  is
          maintained that 18  years  had  passed,  the  appellant  had  been
          outside the UK, had not committed further  offences  and  that  no
          public interest factors were pointed to.


       8. The final ground maintains  that  there  had  been  an  inadequate
          assessment of the appellant's wife's evidence or  to  her  private
          and family life.


       9. There has been no Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State.


          The Hearing


      10. The appellant is in Jamaica and so was not in attendance  for  the
          hearing.  Mr Karim made submissions on his behalf.  He  relied  on
          the grounds and argued that the judge had been wrong  to  rely  on
          EYF without putting this to the parties and had also been wrong to
          rely on the use of aliases and other matters which had not been  a
          part of the  respondent's  decision.  He  argued  that  there  was
          evidence in respect of the appellant's work and character  in  the
          bundle and no challenge was made to these by  the  respondent.  He
          maintained that there was no reference by the judge to the passing
          of the ten-year period and no consideration of  paragraph  391(a).
          He submitted that the appellant's wife's evidence and  the  impact
          of the decision on her  private  and  family  life  had  not  been
          sufficiently considered. He asked that the  determination  be  set
          aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
          to be made.


      11. Mr Whitwell submitted that the determination was  sustainable.  He
          referred to the reasons given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holmes
          when he refused permission to appeal. He submitted that EYF was  a
          binding case, it  was  handed  down  three  months  prior  to  the
          hearing, both sides were represented, and the judge  was  entitled
          to consider the relevant law. The PNC was  part  of  the  evidence
          before the judge and she was entitled to take it into  account  in
          respect of the appellant's  contention  that  he  was  a  reformed
          character. In any event, the appellant was given  the  opportunity
          to participate in the hearing by video link but declined to do so.
          The judge found that there was no evidence of bank  statements  to
          show the appellant's income despite the submission of  photographs
          of a farm. EYF had to be read as a whole; it was not authority for
          the contention that revocation was automatic after ten years.  The
          judge had considered all the factors. It  was  not  relevant  that
          another  judge  may  have  reached  a  different  conclusion.  The
          evidence of the witness was recorded and considered throughout the
          findings. The omission of a reference of paragraph  391(a)  was  a
          matter of form over substance. There was no material error and the
          appeal should be dismissed.


      12. Mr Karim replied. He stated that the absence of a reference  to  a
          provision of the rules may not be an error, but the judge did  not
          even consider the matter of the passing of over ten  years.  There
          was no regard at all to that and the shifting of the balance.  The
          aliases used were prior to deportation and did not go to the issue
          of whether or not be had been of good character since and was  not
          a point taken by the respondent in any event. The lack of  a  bank
          statement was not relevant to the issue of revocation.


      13. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my decision  which  I
          now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      14. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made before
          coming to a decision. My conclusions are reached in no  particular
          order of priority.


      15. I do not accept the argument that the judge failed to consider the
          passing of the ten-year period. She  clearly  refers  to  this  at
          paragraph 21 of the determination. Moreover, she  had  before  her
          various authorities relied on by  the  appellant  including  Smith
          (paragraph 391(a) - revocation of deportation order)  [2017]  UKUT
          166 (IAC) which, as can be seen from the  title,  deals  with  the
          391(a) issue. She also confirms that she had taken  this  and  the
          principles of the authorities into account (at 8).  These  are  in
          fact referred to further at paragraphs 22-24. Towards the  end  of
          paragraph 22 she again notes the issue of the ten-year period  and
          at paragraph 36 she notes that 18  years  have  passed  since  the
          offence and that this is "a weighty consideration in his  favour".
          The passage of time is referred to again at paragraphs 39 and  50.
          To allege that she had no regard to the passage  of  time  or  the
          shift of the balance is thus wholly incorrect.  I  find  that  the
          judge was patently aware of the  implication  of  the  passage  of
          time, and that she correctly noted that  whilst  the  balance  can
          shift towards revocation after this time, such a shift is  not  to
          be presumed.


      16. Nor do I find any merit in the complaint about reliance on EYF  in
          this case. The principles from that authority  relied  on  by  the
          judge are uncontroversial and, indeed, are supported by the  other
          authorities  which  were  relied  on  and  adduced.  The  judgment
          contained nothing new and did not raise any matter that would have
          required  additional  submissions  given   that   it   essentially
          reiterated what is contained in paragraph  391(a)  and  391A.  The
          judge proceeded on the basis that there could be a  shift  in  the
          balance towards revocation but that each case should be considered
          on a case by case basis and that is  the  approach  she  followed.
          Both parties would have been aware that was the  correct  approach
          and had the opportunity to make submissions on it. Had EYF  raised
          matters that were unexpected or which  the  representatives  would
          have been unfamiliar with, then Mr Karim's complaint may have  had
          weight. In this case, however, it does not.


      17. Mr Karim also complained in his submissions of the judge's failure
          to point to any public interest factors however this is simply not
          the case. The judge considers this at paragraphs 27,  32,  35  and
          50.


      18. Much is made of the judge's consideration of the  appellant's  use
          of aliases as confirmed by the PNC. The submission appears  to  be
          that the judge should have either put this to the parties  at  the
          hearing so that they cd respond to it or else not have  relied  on
          this at all because  the  respondent  did  not  raise  it  in  her
          decision letter. I do not consider this argument  has  any  merit.
          The PNC formed part of the evidence before the  Tribunal.  Whether
          or not the  respondent  relied  on  matters  arising  from  it  is
          irrelevant. The evidence was before the judge and she was required
          to consider it. If there were matters that concerned  her  arising
          from the evidence, then she was entitled to set these out  in  her
          determination. She properly noted  that  the  respondent  had  not
          referred to the seven aliases and two dates of birth used but also
          properly found that the appellant was  represented  and  so  would
          have been aware of this (at 38). Given that he himself used  these
          bogus identities, that is a safe presumption.  It was for  him  to
          address issues in his past and  his  prior  poor  behaviour  in  a
          witness statement, given that he  chose  not  to  partake  in  the
          hearing. I note that the  sponsor  was  given  an  opportunity  to
          respond to the issue of the identities  (at  44)  so  the  judge's
          concerns were clearly raised at the hearing. No request  was  made
          at that stage for an adjournment so that the appellant's  response
          could be obtained and no objections to the  judge's  reference  to
          that was raised.


      19. Mr Karim also argued that the photographs of the appellant's  farm
          and the letter of good character from the Jamaican police were not
          considered by the judge, but this is  not  so.    The  appellant's
          contention that he works on a farm was  noted  by  the  judge  (at
          paragraphs 13, 39 and 48) and was accepted  (at  48).  It  is  not
          correct, thus, that she found he was not working as was argued. Mr
          Karim questioned why the judge wanted bank  statements.  This  is,
          however, clear from the determination. She plainly wanted  to  see
          evidence to demonstrate that the appellant had a  regular  income.
          Contrary to what has been argued, the judge also had regard to the
          letter of good character (at 39).


      20. The final complaint is that the appellant's  wife's  evidence  was
          not properly assessed and that there was no adequate consideration
          of her family life and presumably that of her son. This  complaint
          is  without  any  foundation.  At  paragraphs  41-65   the   judge
          undertakes a thorough private/family life assessment  both  within
          and outside the rules. This is  a  family  where  the  appellant's
          partner and child left him in Jamaica and came to the  UK.  It  is
          not  a  case  where  they  were  separated  as  a  result  of  the
          deportation order. In fact, the  deportation  had  the  effect  of
          reuniting them. Their marriage took place some 16 years after  the
          appellant's partner left Jamaica for the UK, entered as a  visitor
          and overstayed after a failed student application. The judge noted
          that there was no evidence of any family life in Jamaica (at  43).
          Their adult son failed to attend the hearing and gave no statement
          in support. The judge clearly had concerns over  the  relationship
          (at 44) in view of the appellant's marriage to someone else  until
          2014-2015, a ten-year  old  son  (his  current  wife  is  not  the
          mother), and his wife's vagueness about several matters. She  also
          noted there  was  no  evidence  of  any  ongoing  contact  and  no
          explanation for why she would choose to leave the  appellant  when
          she had a young son or why she preferred to remain here unlawfully
          instead of returning to be with the appellant (at 45-46).  It  was
          open to the judge  to  reject  the  claim  that  the  relationship
          between the appellant and the sponsor had been ongoing since  1997
          and given the departure of the appellant for the UK shortly before
          the birth of their son and then her departure from Jamaica shortly
          after the appellant had returned  there,  that  is  a  sustainable
          finding.


      21. The judge accepted that the appellant and the sponsor  married  in
          2017 and their and their son's  circumstances  are  considered  at
          length. It is difficult to see what  more  the  judge  could  have
          done. Her assessment is detailed, thorough and conducted according
          to the appropriate authorities and the  law  (at  46-66).  It  was
          entirely open to her to find that deportation took  priority  over
          family life, noting that that family life had been conducted  from
          overseas for almost the entire duration of the  relationship.  She
          also found that the  sponsor  had  the  option  of  relocating  to
          Jamaica to be with the appellant.  those are all findings properly
          made  and  open  to  her  on  the  evidence.  Given  the  detailed
          assessment, it is difficult to see  how  it  can  be  argued  that
          inadequate consideration was given to the  sponsor's  evidence  or
          circumstances.


      22. Having, therefore, considered all the  factors  and  evidence  put
          forward,  and  having  regard  to  the  shifting  balance  towards
          revocation after ten years, the judge considered the case  on  its
          individual factors and concluded that "despite the passage of time
          since the appellant committed serious crimes  by  supplying  drugs
          (crack cocaine), the public interest requires that the deportation
          order  be  maintained"  (at  50).   That  conclusion   is   wholly
          sustainable.


      23. The grounds are without merit. There are no material errors of law
          in the judge's decision making.





          Decision

      24. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
          errors of law. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.




                 Anonymity


      25. No request for an anonymity order was made.



    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 13 January 2020


