
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17424/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 21st November 2018                |on 10th December 2018           |
|                                     |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  DR [E O]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L McCrorie, Drummond Miller LLP, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal David Clapham allowing an appeal by
      Dr [O] (hereinafter referred to as the "claimant").

   2. The appeal was brought before the First-tier Tribunal against a
      decision dated 23rd November 2017 by the respondent refusing leave to
      remain under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.  In
      applying for leave to remain the claimant relied upon a parental
      relationship with his son and on his own ill health.  The claimant has
      been diagnosed with schizophrenia.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found the claimant has a
      continuing relationship with his son and that there is ongoing family
      life.  The judge purported to allow the appeal under the Immigration
      Rules.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on two arguable grounds.  It was
      observed that the judge purported to allow the appeal under the
      Immigration Rules but the judge did not have jurisdiction to do this.
      The only statutory ground of appeal was that the respondent's decision
      would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  The
      judge did not consider the appeal under Article 3 and did not carry
      out a proportionality assessment under Article 8.  Secondly, although
      purporting to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules, the judge
      did not resolve the eligibility question under paragraph E-LTRPT.2.2
      of Appendix FM, which was not met, according to the Secretary of
      State, because the claimant's son was neither a British citizen nor
      settled in the UK and neither had he lived in the UK for at least
      seven years.

   5. Before me the parties were agreed that the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal erred in law and that the appeal should be remitted.  I was
      satisfied that the judge erred in the manner described in the grant of
      permission to appeal.  So far as remittal was concerned, I was
      satisfied that the judge had either not made relevant findings on the
      evidence or had made findings which were not adequately supported.
      Accordingly the appropriate course in terms of paragraph 7.2(b) of the
      Practice Statement is for remittal to a differently constituted First-
      tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Conclusions

   6. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   7. The decision is set aside.

   8. The appeal is remitted to a differently constituted First-tier
      Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I do not consider a direction to be
necessary.


M E Deans
                              6th December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
