
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17437/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgation      |
|                                     |On 12th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                SANJAYA LIMBU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, aged 30 at the date of the hearing
    in the FtT.  The sponsor is his mother.

 2. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 4 July 2018.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Buttar, promulgated on 7 September 2019.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 30 March 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the UT, issued on 28 May 2020.

     vi) The UT's directions dated 30 June 2020, issued in amended terms  on
         3 July 2020, with a view to deciding without a hearing whether  the
         FtT erred in law, and if so, whether its  decision  should  be  set
         aside;  and  giving  parties  the  opportunity  to   make   further
         submissions, including any submissions on whether there should be a
         hearing.

 3. Time for submissions has expired.  To date, no response is on file from
    either party.

 4. The UT may now fairly and justly decide the above questions  without  a
    hearing, in terms of rules 2 and 34.

 5. (There are 2  grounds,  not  3;  whether  the  FtT  erred  by  refusing
    permission is not a relevant issue.)

 6. Ground 1 is that Judge Buttar erred by failing to say why  family  life
    between the appellant and the sponsor was  "suddenly  cut  off  on  her
    departure and why the financial support she continued to send  did  not
    amount to dependency", and further erred by stating that the  appellant
    failed to provide evidence of unemployment and failing  to  state  "why
    she assumes that the status quo changed as soon as  the  sponsor  left.
    Surely it follows that the appellant continued to be dependent  on  his
    mother when she left Nepal".

 7. This ground does not fully and fairly reflect the decision.

 8. At [40], the judge found the sponsor's  evidence  reluctant  and  self-
    contradictory about the availability of employment  to  the  appellant,
    and a lack of evidence to show that he  remained  unemployed  after  he
    left.  At [41], she found that their ties had not been over  and  above
    those to be expected between an unemployed adult living at home and his
    mother.  At [42] she drew no  inference  that  he  expected  to  remain
    dependent upon her.  The final sentence is, "It is on those facts  that
    I find family life existed ... when the sponsor left Nepal".  All  such
    questions are matters of fact and degree.  This was plainly a  marginal
    case.  On the facts found, it would not have  been  surprising  if  the
    conclusion on family life at the time of departure had gone  the  other
    way.  That was the judge's  starting  point  for  whether  family  life
    continued to exist after she left.

 9. The resolution of that issue, at [43 - 48] is on these lines:

      the sponsor left some money for the  appellant,  but  the  amount  was
      unknown;

      evidence of sponsor regularly sending  money,  but  transfer  receipts
      only from November 2018 to May 2019 (the hearing was on  13  September
      2019);

      evidence  of  regular  contact  by  internet  app,   but   significant
      inconsistencies   over   current    circumstances,    including    the
      circumstances of siblings living nearby;

      no evidence of inability to find work;

      appellant living independently "albeit with some financial support";

      evidence "in the round does not demonstrate  support  which  is  real,
      effective and committed";

      relationship not now "beyond the normal ties of love and affection ...
      between adult children and their parents".
10. The appellant cites no authority to support ground  1.   The  grant  of
    permission refers to Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320 at [41].  That  case
    involved the question whether family life continued with an adult child
    after parents left Nepal.   That  was   a  question  of  fact  for  the
    tribunal, and respect was to be given to its evaluative  judgment;  but
    there had not been careful consideration of all the relevant facts, and
    the case was remitted for further decision.

11. I consider that the FtT in the present case reached  a  conclusion,  as
    set out above, which was  within  its  rational  scope,  after  careful
    consideration of all relevant  facts,  for  legally  adequate  reasons.
    Ground 1 does not show otherwise.

12. Ground 2 is that the judge focused on  whether  the  appellant  had  or
    could secure employment in Nepal, overlooking that he was  entitled  to
    depend on the sponsor as a matter of  choice,  and  that  inability  or
    unwillingness to obtain employment was irrelevant.

13. The appellant cites Lim [2015] EWCA Civ 1383 and C/-423/12 Reyes. Those
    cases are concerned with the nature of  dependency  under  regulations.
    They are not concerned with whether family life exists so as to qualify
    for article 8 protection.

14.  Ground  2  is  only  an  inaccurate  and  irrelevant   expression   of
    disagreement.

15. The grounds together fail to show that the making of  the  decision  by
    the FtT involved the making of any  error  on  a  point  of  law.  That
    decision shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
      7 August 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.




