
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18291/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard on 19 January 2021                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Via Skype for Business                        |On 3 February 2021            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               BERNARD NJENGA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Introduction

      0. The SSHD has appealed against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         ('FTT') promulgated on 19 December 2019 allowing Mr Njenga's appeal
         on Article 8 grounds, against the SSHD's decision dated 24 October
         2019 to refuse his human rights claim and refuse to revoke a
         deportation order against him.





Background

      0. Mr Njenga entered the UK with his mother in December 2012, when he
         was 16 years old.  He was granted indefinite leave to enter upon
         arrival and then given a no time limit ('NTL') stamp on 13 April
         2017.

      0. On 6 October 2017 Mr Njenga was given a community order, having
         been convicted of possession with intent to supply a Class A drug.
         On 22 October 2018 he was given a conditional discharge having been
         convicted of assaulting an officer when he was arrested for this
         drugs offence.  The pre-sentence report written for the hearing on
         6 October 2017 recommended a community order in the light of a
         number of mitigating factors.  These are succinctly set out at [8]
         and [30] of the FTT's decision and perhaps explain the relatively
         low sentence for a drugs offence.

      0. On 15 March 2018, 22 October 2018, 4 April 2019 and 6 June 2019 Mr
         Njenga was convicted of failing to comply with the terms of the
         2017 community order.  After the fourth breach he was sentenced to
         seven months imprisonment on 6 June 2019.  This activated a
         suspended sentence order of nine months, suspended for 12 months
         imposed on 4 April 2019 when the community order was varied.

      0. On 13 August 2019 the SSHD made a deportation order against Mr
         Njenga under s. 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 ('1971 Act'), in
         which she deemed his deportation to be conducive to the public
         good.  Mr Njenga made fresh submissions to remain in the UK on the
         basis of Article 8 but this was refused in a decision dated 24
         October 2019.

      0. The FTT heard the appeal on 18 December 2019.  Mr Njenga was not
         legally represented but gave evidence and was cross-examined.  The
         FTT accepted his evidence and allowed the appeal.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      0.  At the beginning of the hearing before me Mrs Pettersen clarified
         the following matters:

          i) The SSHD did not contend that Mr Njenga was a 'foreign
             criminal' for the purposes of the Immigration Rules or s.117C
             and s.117D of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
             ('the 2002 Act').

         ii) The SSHD deemed his deportation to be conducive to the public
             good under the 1971 Act.

        iii) It followed that the FTT was not required to address the
             considerations at 398 to 399 of the Immigration Rules or
             s.117C of the 2002 Act.  In the circumstances, reliance was no
             longer placed upon [3] to [7] of the SSHD's grounds of appeal.

         iv) Although s. 117B of the 2002 Act was relevant, the failure on
             the part of the FTT to explicitly refer to the public interest
             considerations was not a material error of law and therefore
             not pleaded as such.

          v) The only narrow ground of appeal relied upon was that included
             at [2] - the FTT failed to resolve the difference between the
             observations made by the sentencing judge and Mr Njenga's
             evidence before the FTT, prior to accepting his evidence.

      0.  Mrs Pettersen invited me to find that there were clear unresolved
         discrepancies between the sentencing remarks and the FTT's findings
         and the FTT did not adequately explain why it was prepared to
         depart from the sentencing remarks.

      0. Mr Njenga clarified that when he attended the court for sentencing
         on 6 June 2019 he did not have any legal representation.  His case
         was stood down to enable Counsel to represent him.  He only spoke
         to Counsel for about 15 minutes prior to the sentencing hearing.

      0.  Mrs Pettersen did not wish to respond to this.  Having heard from
         both parties I indicated that I would be dismissing the SSHD's
         decision for reasons I now provide.

Error of law discussion

      0.  As set out above, Mrs Pettersen accepted that the SSHD relied upon
         one narrow ground of appeal.  She summarised this as follows: the
         FTT erred in law in accepting Mr Njenga's explanation for failing
         to comply with the terms of his community order when that was
         inconsistent with the sentencing remarks.  Before considering this
         further, it is important to clarify that which Mrs Pettersen did
         not rely upon.  The submission at [2] of the grounds of appeal that
         Mr N "has clearly shown a persistent disregard for the law" carries
         with it an implication that this made him a 'foreign criminal' for
         the purposes of the Immigration Rules and s.117C and s.117D of the
         2002 Act.  Mrs Pettersen confirmed that this had never been the
         basis of the SSHD's deportation order and she continued to simply
         rely upon s.5 of the 1971 Act.  I now address the findings of fact
         that have been challenged by considering the sentencing remarks and
         then the FTT's decision.

      0.  In her sentencing remarks, Recorder Jones noted that Mr Njenga
         accepted his failure to attend appointments as part of his
         community order sentence, and commented that this was a point in
         his favour.  The Recorder reduced the sentence from nine to seven
         months imprisonment and said this:

             "...in light of the fact that you did admit the breach here
             and there has been at least some attempt to comply at least, I
             am going to order that the suspended sentence be varied."

      0.  The Recorder however also noted that: (i) he only attended three
         out of eight appointments; (ii) with an excuse given for one of the
         five he did not attend; (iii) although he said letters were not
         sent to the right address, probation service tried to stay in touch
         including by text; (iv) he claimed that he was working at the time
         but did not provide evidence of this.

      0. The FTT was clearly impressed by Mr Njenga and described his oral
         evidence at [32] as "entirely credible and consistent" and reached
         the following conclusion at [39]:

             "Assessing all these factors I conclude that this is a
             fundamentally decent individual who lost his way at the time
             of the death of his mother [in July 2017], and who has a
             realisation that what he did was wrong, has insight and will
             try to live a worthwhile life in the future.  The sentencing
             remarks do not indicate that the drug offence of the sale of
             drugs [played a key role in the sentence].  The sentence
             supports that.  The [drug] conviction did not lead to any wish
             to deport him, and is not converted into good reason because
             of a subsequent failure to meet conditions of a community
             order.  The failure to comply with those conditions
             (separately or added to the initial offence) does not warrant
             deporting him."

      0. The FTT heard detailed oral evidence from Mr Njenga and who was
         cross-examined.  The documentary evidence before the FTT contained
         a number of letters written by Mr Njenga (who has been self-
         representing presumably because of a lack of funds).  This
         explained that he spiralled into a very bad state for a lengthy
         period after his mother died of cancer in June 2017.  It led to his
         sister going into care and him having no accommodation such that he
         was 'sofa surfing' and living a chaotic lifestyle.  He also had
         difficulties attending the appointments in Northampton because he
         was living in London.  That explanation for not attending the
         community order appointments is not inconsistent with the
         explanation available to the Recorder (as summarised at [13]).  It
         is important to note that before sentencing, the Recorder did not
         hear from Mr Njenga and only from Counsel who was appointed to him
         shortly before the hearing.  The sentencing remarks make no
         reference to that Counsel who is only referred to as 'unknown
         Counsel'.

      0. In any event the FTT was aware of these sentencing remarks and
         clearly took them into account having referred to them at [32] and
         [39].   Indeed, the FTT not only accepted Mr N's account as true
         but observed that "it accords with the sentencing remarks and other
         documents..." at [32].  Although there are some differences between
         the sentencing remarks and explanations before the FTT, I am
         satisfied that the FTT was entitled to find broad consistency.  In
         particular:

         vi) Mr N accepted that he failed to attend at the appointed times;

        vii) There was at least some attempt to comply with appointments;

       viii) (i) and (ii) were deemed sufficient mitigating factors to lead
             to the reduction of the sentence.

      0. The FTT was entitled to consider these broad consistencies in the
         context of the pivotal evidence it fully accepted - Mr Njenga was
         leading a chaotic lifestyle in the immediate aftermath of the loss
         of his mother and home.  That evidence and the findings that flow
         from it have not been disputed.  Yet that evidence does not appear
         to have been before the Recorder.

      0. The fact that Mr Njenga no longer claimed to be working as an
         explanation for non-attendance of appointments before the FTT, in
         circumstances where, as the Recorder noted he was unable to provide
         evidence of this, was a minor point.  I do not accept the assertion
         in the grounds that Mr Njenga gave a "totally different reason" to
         the sentencing judge.  The reasoning was broadly similar with some
         differences, but those difference were minor given the particular
         circumstances.

      0. In any event, the FTT's ultimate conclusion at [39] was entirely
         open to it.  The FTT found that (whatever the explanation) the
         failure to attend the appointments together with the initial drugs
         offence was insufficient to outweigh the private life in the UK
         developed in compelling and compassionate circumstances since
         childhood.  That ultimate conclusion has not been challenged by the
         SSHD.

      0. It follows that the SSHD has not identified a material error of law
         in the FTT's decision.

Decision

The decision of the FTT does not contain a material error of law and is not
    set aside.


Signed:                             Date:
Ms Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     20 January 2021
