
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18943/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 March 2021                              |On 26 March 2021              |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              miss isata kabba
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 November  2019  dismissing  her  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent to refuse her entry  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom to settle with  her  father  as  a  dependent  child
    pursuant to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules and also  to  refuse
    her human rights claim based on that decision.

 2. The appellant says that she was born on 24 May  2000  and  she  applied
    shortly before her 18th birthday for entry clearance to join her father
    who is settled in the United Kingdom.  It is not in  dispute  that  the
    appellant's father ("the  sponsor")  has  been  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2001 nor that her mother has remarried.

 3. The appellant's case is that she  was  left  first  with  the  maternal
    grandmother and then with a maternal aunt, Fatmata. who had care of her
    subject to the sponsor providing funds and taking an active part in her
    upbringing such that  he  met  the  test  to  show  that  he  had  sole
    responsibility for her.  It is the appellant's case that there has been
    little or no contact with the mother who plays  no  real  part  in  her
    life.  It is also said by the appellant that she is at  risk  from  her
    maternal aunt who is pressurising her to  join  the  Bondo  Society  in
    Sierra Leone and that in consequence there are serious  and  compelling
    reasons why she should be allowed  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  and
    overall it is said that as a result it would be a breach of her  rights
    pursuant to Article 8 to refuse her entry clearance.  It is I  consider
    notable that it is said that being forced to undergo induction into the
    Bondo Society would require female genital mutilation ("FGM").

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the  application  on  two  discrete
    bases.  The first is that the appellant had failed to provide  a  valid
    medical  certificate  confirming  she  had  undergone   screening   for
    pulmonary tuberculosis and therefore that her application failed to  be
    refused under paragraph A39 of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The second basis for refusal, and the focus of the appeal in the First-
    tier Tribunal, is that the applicant did not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  The first reason given is that
    the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant and her father were
    related as claimed, the respondent attaching little weight to the birth
    certificate which he noted was not issued until 27 December  2017  more
    than seventeen years after her birth.  He was also not  satisfied  that
    the documents provided that the mother had abandoned her  and  was  not
    satisfied that the evidence of money transfers and the  other  evidence
    satisfied him that there was sole responsibility.  The respondent  also
    concluded that there were not  any  serious  and  compelling  other  or
    family reasons which makes her exclusion undesirable, noting that there
    would be agencies in Sierra Leone  which  could  assist  her  with  her
    resisting FGM and noting also that she was legally an adult and capable
    of living an independent life.  He also considered pursuant to  Article
    8 that there was no reason why her exclusion was disproportionate.

 6. On appeal, the judge heard evidence from the  sponsor  and  submissions
    from both representatives.  The judge concluded that the appellant  and
    sponsor were related as claimed given the evidence of the Cellmark  DNA
    report but concluded that the appellant had not shown that  her  father
    had sole  responsibility  for  her  or  that  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations such as  she  should  not  be
    excluded.  The judge also concluded pursuant to Article  8  that  there
    were no reasons having had regard to the facts as set  out  in  Section
    117A to Section D of the 2002 Act that the refusal of  entry  clearance
    was disproportionate.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on what are characterised  by
    Ms Jaquiss today as three principal grounds:

      i) a failure properly to apply TD Yemen [2006] UKAIT 49

     ii) a  failure  to  provide  reasoning  for  the  conclusion  that  the
         appellant  had  not  shown  that   the   sponsor   has   had   sole
         responsibility for her;

    iii) a failure to attach weight to the  birth  certificate  the  reasons
         given for that being insufficient but failure properly  to  resolve
         the issue of whether or not the appellant was at risk of FGM  which
         relates to the issue of whether there are  serious  and  compelling
         reasons why she should not be excluded.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Pickup  on  a
    renewed application on  24  June  2020.   Although  the  judge  granted
    permission on all grounds he did conclude that there was  no  merit  in
    the challenge to the judge's assessment of the weight to be attached to
    the birth certificate.

 9. Subsequent to that there was a hearing before me on 27 November 2020 at
    which I drew to the parties' attention the fact that there had  been  a
    failure by the judge to address  paragraph  A39  and  I  adjourned  for
    evidence to be produced and submissions to be made.  In consequence the
    appellant has now produced a valid TB certificate which would appear to
    meet the requirements of the Rules and submissions were made as to  the
    materiality of that error which I will turn to in due course.

10. The issue of whether sole responsibility has been demonstrated (and  it
    is  for  the  appellant  to  show  that  her  father   has   had   sole
    responsibility for her upbringing ), is a factual matter to be  decided
    on all the evidence the test being set out in TD Yemen.  As  was  noted
    by the Tribunal at [7], some responsibility for the child's  life  must
    rest with the carer in the country of origin.  It is  accepted  that  a
    parent  who  has  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  may  retain   sole
    responsibility for a child where the day-to-day care and responsibility
    for that child is necessarily undertaken by a relative abroad.

11. At [13] the Tribunal noted that the central part of the notion of  sole
    responsibility  is  the  UK  based  parent's  continuing  interest  and
    involvement in the child's life including  making  or  being  consulted
    about and approving important  decisions,  and  at  [15]  the  Tribunal
    identified the core issue which  is  who  makes  significant  decisions
    about the child's upbringing and whose obligation is it to  make  those
    decisions.  Financial support is of course relevant but as the Tribunal
    noted where, as is claimed to be the case here, there are  two  parents
    involved, it is more difficult to show that one of the parents has  had
    sole responsibility: at [42] the Tribunal said it is merely a factually
    unusual indeed  exceptional  case  in  terms  of  the  very  particular
    findings of the judge concerning non-involvement of her father  in  the
    child's upbringing despite the fact that the appellant was living  with
    him.

12. In TD (Yemen) [46] the Tribunal held:

         In  order  to  conclude  that  the  UK  based   parent   had   sole
         responsibility for the child it will be necessary to show that  the
         parent abroad had abdicated any responsibility for  the  child  and
         was merely acting with the directions of the UK  based  parent  who
         was otherwise totally uninvolved with the child's upbringing.  That
         possibility clearly cannot be ruled out.

13. Equally at [49] where one parent has disappeared from the child's  life
    and so relinquished or abdicated responsibility the starting point must
    be that it is the remaining active parent who has  sole  responsibility
    for the child.

14. It is evident from these passages that what is  required  is  a  proper
    factual analysis of the situation particularly where  two  parents  are
    involved or still alive.

15. In this case challenges  are  made  to  the  findings  made  about  the
    appellant and discrepancies that arise in the evidence.  But it has  to
    be borne in mind that it is still for the appellant to prove her  case.
    What the judge says at [38] is:

         taking into account all of the above factors I am not satisfied  on
         the  evidence  before  me  that  the  appellant's  mother  has   no
         involvement in the appellant's life.

16. That, taken at its face, would appear to be contrary to  the  test  set
    out in TD Yemen.  But, the judge goes on to say:

         I do  not  consider  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  have  been
         transparent regarding the appellant's circumstances either  at  the
         date of application or decision or now.  I consider  the  sponsor's
         credibility is damaged by the contradictions that  have  arisen  in
         his evidence and that  the  transfer  receipts  clearly  place  the
         appellant's mother at the same address as the appellant  from  2008
         until 2014.  The appellant's and sponsor's claim  that  nothing  is
         known  about  the  appellant's  mother  is  contradicted   by   the
         prediction of a letter of 2018 from the appellant's mother.

17. The judge did  accept  the  sponsor  had  been  sending  funds  to  the
    appellant.  It is also of note that although this is under the  heading
    serious and compelling family or other considerations, the judge did at
    paragraph [41] say  that  she  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances were as claimed and considered the fact that she has been
    living with or has contact with her mother  and  that  her  mother  has
    shared parental responsibility for her with the sponsor whilst she  was
    a minor.

18. I consider it is artificial to separate that finding out from the  rest
    of the findings which are based on the evidence and the  findings  made
    in the previous paragraphs.  That then leads to a consideration of  the
    findings.

19. I consider that the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  adverse  findings
    regarding credibility and as to the actual circumstances of  where  the
    appellant was living given the inconsistencies identified  properly  in
    the evidence and which are set out  at  paragraphs  [22]  to  [24].   I
    consider also that the judge was entitled to draw inferences adverse to
    the appellant and sponsor from  the  apparent  inconsistency  of  their
    saying there had been no contact with the mother yet a letter from  her
    is produced and which telling me makes reference  to  circumstances  in
    which the appellant finds herself.

20. The judge was I consider entitled to conclude  in  the  light  of  that
    letter that there had been contact and that the position that was being
    presented was not  accurate.   I  consider  also  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to draw inferences from the fact that the  financial  receipts
    are addressed to Kadijatu Kamara which is the name given for the mother
    and at an address where it is said the appellant has been living.

21. It is only today said that Kadijatu Kamara referred to in the  receipts
    is in fact the appellant's daughter that is  the  aunt  with  whom  she
    lives daughter making it her first cousin.  This is  not  addressed  in
    the evidence before me nor has it been shown to me that this point  was
    put to the judge.  It is not I consider inappropriate or unfair  for  a
    judge when faced with evidence which shows that  the  mother  is  named
    Kadijatu Kamara and money  receipts  in  that  they  were  produced  to
    conclude that this is anything other than appears at  face  value.   If
    there was a difficulty and bearing in mind  that  the  issue  here  was
    whether or not the mother had had any contact at all, it  was  for  the
    appellant to make the point it is not for a judge to point out  defects
    in an appellant's case which  were  that  clear  on  the  face  of  the
    evidence.

22. Turning next to the birth certificate, whilst it is not clear that  the
    Secretary of State took issue with the age or  date  of  birth  of  the
    appellant, it is evident that the respondent did consider that  it  was
    not reliable evidence.

23. In fairness to the appellant the judge did not reach any conclusion  on
    this basis, and it cannot be said that the judge  has  made  a  finding
    that the appellant is not the age claimed but rather that the  document
    is unreliable.  I consider that the judge was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the birth certificate was unreliable and gave  adequate
    and sustainable reasons for doing so.  At [28] the judge observed  that
    the document was issued seventeen years after the birth and  is  not  a
    contemporaneous record.  That is  in  itself  a  sufficient  reason  to
    attach less weight to it, as indeed is the reference to  the  appellant
    apparently studying at the age of 15 and the evidence which relates  to
    another daughter is material because it indicates that it  is  possible
    to register an incorrect date of birth on the basis of information by a
    third party, that is the point.  The fact that it was possible to do so
    and what happened in  the  case  of  Zainab  (the  other  daughter)  is
    evidence that it is possible to do,  does  not  mean  necessarily  that
    incorrect evidence was provided on this case, but it is a factor  which
    the judge was rationally entitled to take into account.

24. Drawing all these strands together, it is evident that  the  judge  for
    adequate and sustainable reasons, reached the conclusion that  she  was
    not being told the truth about the circumstances in which the appellant
    was living or indeed the contact with the  mother.   That,  bearing  in
    mind that it was for the appellant  to  show  sole  responsibility,  is
    sufficient to show that the decision on this issue was sustainable; the
    judge did not accept the account of decisions being taken or indeed the
    other indicators which were pointed in favour of there  being  no  sole
    responsibility.  It was open  to  the  judge  and  she  gave  good  and
    adequate reasons for this to conclude that the appellant's  mother  was
    involved in her life and that they had been living together.

25. Viewing the evidence as a whole and taking the decision as a whole I am
    satisfied that, and bearing in mind that the judge heard the  evidence,
    the judge was entitled to conclude for  the  reasons  given  that  sole
    responsibility had not been established.

26. With regard to the submission that  the  judge  acted  irrationally  in
    concluding that the appellant was not at sufficient risk  of  FGM  such
    that there were serious reasons for her exclusion that she  should  not
    be excluded,  Ms Jaquiss was unable to take me to any evidence  showing
    that membership of the Bondo Society  necessarily  involved  undergoing
    FGM although she did submit that that was implicit and in effect common
    ground before the Tribunal.

27.  It is difficult to discern how that is so although the judge does note
    that the appellant claimed that was the case  at  paragraphs  [43]  and
    [44], but again it was for the appellant to show that this was  so  and
    that what she said about the aunt was true but it has to  be  borne  in
    mind that for adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  the  judge  had  not
    accepted what had been presented to who about the circumstances.

28. Accordingly, I conclude that on the facts before her and  in  light  of
    the findings of  fact  properly  reached  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that there were  not  in  this  case  serious  and  compelling
    circumstances such that paragraph 297(i)(e) or (f) were met.

29. In the circumstances and given that  the  appellant  had  not  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, it cannot  be  argued  that  the
    conclusion with regard to Article 8 was one vitiated by an error of law
    on the basis it is not sufficiently reasoned or otherwise  involve  the
    making for an error of law.  The judge was entitled to conclude that it
    was not a disproportionate interference with the appellant's  right  to
    an Article 8 family or private life to refuse entry clearance.

30. Finally, it was  a  requirement  of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  the
    appellant had a relevant TB certificate. Although this  issue  was  not
    considered by the judge, as  is  accepted  appellant  did  not  have  a
    certificate which met the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Appendix T of the Immigration Rules although she does so now.  On  that
    basis alone the appellant would have failed to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules in which case despite  Ms  Jaquiss'  submissions,
    the  errors  with  regard  to  sole  responsibility  and  serious   and
    compelling reasons are not material.  No proper basis is given to  show
    why the necessity of having that certificate could be outweighed by any
    Article 8 interest but in  any  event  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
    consider that in any great  detail  given  the  findings  that  I  have
    already made.

31. Accordingly, for these reasons I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I
    uphold it.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Jeremy K H Rintoul         Date 18 March 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

