
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/18481/2016
                                                         Extempore judgement


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 October 2017                        |On 9 October 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        PATRICK NEWTON GNANAPRAGASAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the Respondent as the Appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. He is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his date of birth
    is 21 April 1986.  He came here on 15 February 2006 having been granted
    leave to enter as a student and he remained here lawfully until 19 June
    2015.  The Appellant made an application for a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member under the 2006 EEA Regulations on 18 June  2015,
    before the expiry of his leave on 19 June 2015.  This  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State  on  14  August  2015.   He  made  an
    application under the long residence Rules on 27 January 2016 and  this
    was refused by the Secretary of State on 14 July 2016.   The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision and his appeal was allowed by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Cockrill, in a decision that was promulgated on
    20 January 2017, following a hearing on 12 January 2017 (not 2016 which
    is a typographical error).  Permission was granted to the Secretary  of
    State by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page on 31 July 2017.

2.   The Secretary of State in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  referred  to
    the obtaining of a fraudulent document but this was not pursued at  the
    hearing.  It was agreed by Mr Solomon at the hearing before the  First-
    Tier Tribunal, that there was no right of appeal in relation to the EEA
    point following Sala [2016] UKUT  411.   It  was  also  agreed  at  the
    hearing by both representatives that this Appellant did not have  leave
    under section 3C of the 1971 Act following his  application  under  the
    2006 EEA Regulations (see AS (Ghana) [2016] EWCA Civ 133).

3.   The appeal was pursued on Article 8 grounds, and the argument  for  the
    Appellant,  was that  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to  apply  the
    relevant policy (identified as "The  guidance  long  residence  version
    13.0 published for the Home Office staff on 8 May 2015"):

         "This  page  tells  you  about  circumstances  that  break   lawful
         residence for long residence applications  and  when  you  can  use
         discretion for short breaks in lawful residence:

         Time spent outside the UK:

         Gap(s) in lawful residence:

         You may grant the application if an applicant:

            . Has short gaps in lawful residence  through  making  previous
              applications out of time by no more than  28  calendar  days,
              and

            . Meets all the other requirements for lawful residence.

         The 28 day period of overstaying is calculated from the  latest  of
         the:

            . End of the last period of leave to enter or remain granted.

            . End of any extension of leave under sections 3C or 3D of  the
              Immigration Act 1971.

            . The point that a migrant is deemed to have received a written
              notice of invalidity, in line with paragraph 34C or  34CA  of
              the Immigration Rules, in relation to an in-time  application
              for further leave to remain.

         Periods of overstaying:

         When refusing an application on the  grounds  it  was  made  by  an
         applicant who has  overstayed  by  more  than  28  days,  you  must
         consider any evidence of exceptional circumstances which  prevented
         the  applicant  from  applying  within  the  first   28   days   of
         overstaying.

         The threshold for what constitutes 'exceptional  circumstances'  is
         high,  but  could  include  delays  resulting  from  unexpected  or
         unforeseeable causes.  For example:

            .  Serious  illness  which  meant  the   applicant   or   their
              representative was not able to submit the application in time
              -   this   must   be   supported   by   appropriate   medical
              documentation.

            . Travel or postal delays which meant the  applicant  or  their
              representative was not able  to  submit  the  application  in
              time.

            . Inability to provide necessary documents -  this  would  only
              apply in exceptional or unavoidable circumstances beyond  the
              applicant's control.  For example:

                  o It is the fault of the Home Office because it  lost  or
                    delayed returning travel documents.

                  o There is a delay because the applicant  cannot  replace
                    their documents  quickly  because  of  theft,  fire  or
                    flood.  The applicant must send evidence of the date of
                    loss and the date replacement documents were sought.

         Any decision to exercise discretion and not refuse the  application
         on these grounds must be  authorised  by  a  senior  caseworker  at
         senior executive officer (SEO) grade or above.

         When granting leave in these circumstances, the applicant  must  be
         granted  leave  outside  the  rules  for  the  same  duration   and
         conditions that would have applied  had  they  been  granted  leave
         under the rules.

         Time spent outside the UK:

         A person who is outside the  UK  will  not  be  in  breach  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

         You can overlook a period of unlawful residence  if  the  applicant
         leaves the UK after their valid leave has expired and:

            . Applies for entry clearance within 28 days of their  original
              leave expiring.

            . Returns to the UK with valid leave within 6 months  of  their
              original departure.

         Examples of gaps in lawful residence:

         The examples below show some instances when it may or  may  not  be
         appropriate to grant the application.  This is not a complete  list
         and you must judge each application on the information it  contains
         and discuss this with a senior caseworker.

         Example 1:

         An applicant has a single gap in  their  lawful  residence  due  to
         submitting an application."

4.     At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Mr Solomon referred  to
    a "lacuna" in the legislation because the Appellant had in fact made an
    in-time application under the 2006 EEA Regulations, but does  not  have
    the benefit of 3C leave.  The judge  made  findings  at  paragraphs  38
    through to 45 which are relevant:

         "38. The situation is that the Respondent does  have  a  policy  to
             deal with those  who  have  broken  the  continuity  of  their
             residence and, in this particular case, suffice it to say that
             the Respondent has simply not addressed her own public  policy
             in any shape or form.

         39.  What was  incumbent  upon  the  Respondent,  pursuant  to  her
             policy,  was  to  consider   any   evidence   of   exceptional
             circumstances which  prevented  the  applicant  from  applying
             within the first 28 days of overstaying.  The simple answer to
             that is that the Appellant really did not appreciate  that  he
             was getting himself into this difficulty and that  is  why  he
             did not make the application to regularise  his  position,  he
             was simply  awaiting  the  outcome  of  the  2006  Regulations
             application.

         40.  What we have here, therefore, is not a case where someone  has
             been absent from this country for  an  appreciable  length  of
             time and then has  to  explain  and  justify  that  period  of
             absence.  It is not a question of ill health, or  anything  of
             that nature, intervening.  As Mr. Solomon  rightly  indicated,
             in my judgment, it is a lacuna in the law in the sense that  a
             layman would naturally expect  that  if  they  had  made  this
             Residence Card application that that would not jeopardise  the
             whole issue of the calculation of time  for  the  purposes  of
             showing ten year's  continuous  lawful  residence.   What  the
             policy  encourages  the  decision-maker  to  do  is  to  apply
             discretion to count time  spent  in  this  country  as  lawful
             residence for an EE or EEA national, or their  family  members
             exercising their Treaty rights to reside in the UK.

         41.  It  is  my  overall  assessment,  having  regard  to  all  the
             circumstances presented to me, that if I was to step into  the
             shoes  of  the  Secretary  of  State  then  I  would  exercise
             discretion in the Appellant's favour, given all  that  I  have
             read about and heard.

         42.  Further, or in the alternative, the way in which this failure,
             as I see it, to apply the policy to the Appellant's  situation
             can be dealt with is that  it  features  as  a  factor  in  an
             analysis of the Appellant's private life outside  the  context
             of the Immigration Rules.  Prior  to  turning  to  that  area,
             though, it seems to me that I need to look at whether  or  not
             the Appellant can meet the requirements of the Rules  and  the
             only relevant part, as I see it, is paragraph 276ADE(vi).  Can
             it rightly be  said  that  there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to his  integration  to  Sri  Lanka?   Although  the
             Appellant has been here for a very long  time,  that  specific
             test, it seems to me, is not met by the Appellant.   The  fact
             that he has formed ties here, and feels very much  settled  in
             the United Kingdom, is not the point.  He  has  not  presented
             any argument and material to show that there really  would  be
             significant obstacles to his integration  to  Sri  Lanka,  let
             alone very significant obstacles.  As I see it, on  the  facts
             presented by this Appellant, he does  not  succeed  under  the
             Rules.

         43.  There is no further threshold set and, looking at  the  matter
             overall,  it  does  seem  to  me  that  there  are  compelling
             circumstances whereby I can look at his position in  far  more
             detail outside the Rules.  It allows me to take what I term  a
             more global assessment of the Appellant's situation.  Clearly,
             I am  going  to  be  following  the  five-stage  approach  set
             outweighed in Razgar [2004] UKHL.  There  is  here  a  private
             life that has been developed, albeit that  the  Appellant  did
             not have any expectation that he would be able to stay  on  in
             this country.  It is clear he has developed a number  of  ties
             and associations over the very long  time  that  he  has  been
             here, since 2006.  I think it is very much to be noted that he
             has been here lawfully right up to 2015.

         44.  Looking, therefore, at the several steps under  Razgar,  there
             would be an  interference  with  that  right  to  respect  for
             private life and of  sufficient  gravity  such  as  to  engage
             Article 8.  The third question is a  particularly  interesting
             and critical one in the particular circumstances of this case.
              It seems to me that the lawfulness of the decision  has  been
             brought into question by the failure of the Respondent to give
             proper consideration to her  stated  policy  and  guidance  in
             relation to long residence applications where applicants  have
             overstayed.  If I am right in that analysis so far,  then  the
             matter could end there because the decision could then rightly
             be said not to be in accordance with  the  law  but,  for  the
             purposes of this appeal, I think it is helpful to  go  on  and
             look at the fourth and fifth questions and, conflating  those,
             the real issue is proportionality.  I can, though, in  looking
             at proportionality, take full and proper account, as I do,  of
             what seems to  be  an  undesirable  prejudice  caused  to  the
             Appellant by the particular sequence of events  in  his  case.
             It seems to me that that is  something  that  can  be  rightly
             placed in the scales, the fact that he did not realise that he
             was jeopardising the calculation of the ten year period by his
             2006 Regulations application.  He has not fallen far short  of
             showing compliance, in any event, with paragraph 276B.

         45.  In looking also at public interest, I am of course mindful  of
             the statutory provisions of Section 117B to  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by the  Immigration
             Act 2014, Section 19.  The Appellant does speak  English.   He
             has not been a burden on the state.  He has been supported  by
             relatives; he has got the capacity to gain work,  once  he  is
             permitted to do so lawfully.  He has  taken  perfectly  proper
             steps to try to regularise his stay in this country  over  the
             years.   Whilst  it  might  be  said  that  his  position  has
             technically been precarious, I  think  it  is  also  right  to
             record that as the months and years have gone on the Appellant
             had considered that he was  more  and  more  settled  in  this
             country, in practice, and had really thought that he had  been
             able to show ten  year's  continuous  lawful  residence  here.
             Looked at overall, therefore, the Section 117B factors can  be
             brought in aid of the Appellant.  The reality of the situation
             is that the  Appellant  has  been  in  this  country  now  for
             practically eleven years and, with the one exception  when  he
             went back for his father's funeral, he has made  this  country
             his home, with all that that entails.   I  have  devoted  some
             time to this issue  of  the  Appellant  being  treated  as  an
             overstayer.  It seems to me that there is some injustice  that
             is likely to be caused to the Appellant if a  strict  view  is
             taken of that break in the calculation  of  time.   There  was
             policy and guidance  issued  by  the  Respondent  and  it  was
             incumbent upon the Respondent to apply that  guidance.   I  am
             afraid she did not apply it.  Discretion could have been,  and
             indeed in my judgment ought to have  been,  exercised  in  the
             Appellant's favour, given the overall circumstances  and  that
             is a factor which I give weight to in looking  at  this  final
             question of proportionality of the interference.   My  overall
             conclusion, therefore,  in  the  light  of  all  the  material
             presented, is that the decision would  be  a  disproportionate
             one."


5.   The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal argue that the  judge  erred
    in allowing the appeal under Article 8 because the judge failed to have
    regard to the exceptional circumstances test.  It is also  argued  that
    the Appellant's  circumstances  do  not  fall  within  the  policy  and
    therefore there has been no breach by the Secretary of  State.   It  is
    further argued that the judge relied on an erroneous finding that there
    was a failure to apply the policy and that there was a  lacuna  in  the
    law in respect of EEA nationals wishing to apply for  indefinite  leave
    to remain.

6.   I heard extensive submissions from Mr Solomon and  Ms  Ahmad  addressed
    me in respect of the grounds.

Error of Law

7.       The judge erred in concluding that the Secretary  of  State  should
    have applied the guidance.  The  guidance  refers  to  gaps  in  lawful
    residence and under this discreet heading indicates that leave  may  be
    granted if an applicant has short gaps in  lawful  residence,  no  more
    than 28 calendar days, and meets all the other requirements for  lawful
    residence.  It is clear that this part of the guidance does  not  apply
    to the Appellant.  Mr Solomon referred me to the  paragraph  under  the
    heading 'periods of  overstaying'  and  his  submission  was  that  the
    "exceptional circumstances" which are referred to  in  this  paragraph,
    are the exceptional circumstances that the judge  referred  to  in  the
    decision.

8.   On a proper reading of the  guidance,  it  covers  situations  where  a
    person who has accrued ten  years'  lawful  continuous  residence  then
    overstays and fails to apply within the first 28 days  of  overstaying.
    It refers to the failure to submit an application in a  timely  fashion
    and it does  not  apply  to  a  situation  where  a  person,  like  the
    Appellant,  has not  in  fact  accrued  ten  years'  lawful  continuous
    residence under the Rules.  The policy does not apply and therefore  it
    was not incumbent on the Secretary of State to apply it.  The judge  in
    concluding that the Secretary of State failed to apply the  policy  and
    attaching significant weight to this in the Article  8  proportionality
    assessment material erred.

Notice of Decision

9.   I set aside the decision. I agreed with the parties  that  there  would
    need to be a de novo hearing and remitted the matter to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing.

10.  The judge made a finding in relation to paragraph 276ADE and there  has
    been no counter challenge to this. The First-tier Tribunal will re-hear
    the matter afresh. There may be no change in the position and  no  good
    reason to go behind the finding, but that will ultimately be a decision
    for the judge who will consider the appeal under Article 8 at the  date
    of the hearing.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                    Date    6 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

