








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18903/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 January 2019                   |On 6 February 2019                   |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                 Francis [A]
                        anonymity direction NOT made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, counsel, instructed by Templeton Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 10 June 1968. He  appeals
    with permission against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bulpitt, promulgated on 15 October 2018, dismissing his appeal  against
    the refusal by the respondent on 22 July 2016, of his  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.


 2.  Judge  Bulpitt  noted  that  the  appellant  had  a  long  history  of
    immigration  applications  from  February  2006   until   his   current
    application made on 14 July 2016.


 3. The  appellant  asserted  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with Ms [T], a British national, and that they  have  been
    living together in a relationship akin to marriage for  more  than  two
    years. Judge Bulpitt found at [25] that the couple were living together
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship akin to marriage.


 4. The appellant also claimed to have a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with Ms [T]'s eleven year old son, [A].  It  was  accepted
    that the appellant has had two children with her, [E], aged 3 and  [EA]
    aged 7 months at the date of hearing.


 5. The appellant contended that the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM are met as it would not be reasonable to expect [A], [E] or
    [EA], all British citizens, to leave the UK and also because there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant continuing family  life  with
    Ms [T] outside the UK.


 6. The  respondent  contended  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability requirement  in  the  Rules  and  paragraph  EX.1  is  only
    relevant to [E] and [EA], and it would be reasonable to expect them  to
    leave the UK [8].


 7. In that respect the appellant stated in evidence that during the summer
    of 2015 he was arrested and prosecuted for using a fraudulent document.
    That was a forged visa which he used in order to obtain employment with
    TFL. He pleaded guilty to that offence and was sentenced to four months
    in prison [15].


 8. A letter from Thamesmead Health Centre dated 15  November  2017  stated
    that the appellant and [E] are registered at the surgery and  that  the
    appellant attends appointments with [E]. Ms [T] is employed as a dinner
    lady. The family income is supported by benefits [21].


 9. On 3 January 2018 the appellant and Ms [T] had another child, [EA].  It
    is confirmed by the Thamesmead Health  Centre  that  the  appellant  is
    registered as her father and  attends  medical  appointments  with  her
    [22].


10. When cross examined, the appellant confirmed that [EA] and [E] were  in
    good health. Ms [T] travelled to Ghana with [E] and [A] a year  ago  in
    order to visit Ms [T]'s family. The appellant claimed that his  parents
    were no longer alive and although he has a brother he did not know  his
    or any of his extended family's whereabouts [23].


11. In her evidence, Ms [T] stated that she tried to  return  to  Ghana  to
    visit family every two years with [A] accompanying her on four or  five
    occasions, and [E] "the last time". Her mother and  father  plus  three
    younger siblings live in Ghana. [A] enjoyed a close  relationship  with
    her youngest brother. She claimed that [A] would not fit in to Ghana as
    he was born and has grown up in the UK [24].


12. As noted, Judge Bulpitt found that they had been living together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for  at  least  two  years.  Further,  he
    accepted that it is more likely than not that the appellant has stepped
    into the shoes of a parent in respect of [A]  and  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with him [29]. He had regard  to  s.55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The appellant  does  not
    see his two children from the relationship with a Ms [G].  His  removal
    would have no impact on them [31].


13. The Judge had regard to  the  decision  in  MT  and  ET  (child's  best
    interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88. He referred to the
    strong links that the family have in Ghana and the fact  that  [E]  has
    already been taken to Ghana by Ms [T]. He found that the best interests
    of [E] and [EA] will be met equally in Ghana or the UK so long as  they
    are with their parents. They would retain their British citizenship  in
    either country [32].


14. [A] has lived in the UK for all 11 years of his life and is  a  British
    citizen. Moving from the UK would involve disruption of  his  education
    although, given his age, he is about to experience some  disruption  in
    any event as he moves into secondary education. He has begun developing
    some independence by walking to school on his own.  Those  are  factors
    which point towards the  fact  that  his  best  interests  involve  him
    remaining in the UK [33].


15. Against that conclusion however he noted that [A] has  retained  strong
    links to Ghana. He visits every other year and was described by Ms  [T]
    as having a close relationship with his uncle, her younger brother,  in
    Ghana.


16. He found that the educational system in Ghana "is similar  to  that  in
    the UK and includes teaching in English". Considering  the  factors  in
    the round, he found that on balance [A]'s best interests are to  remain
    in the UK but this is only marginally the case  as  there  are  factors
    which mean that his interests would be well met in Ghana [33].


17. He considered at [35] whether the appellant has  met  the  requirements
    under the Rules. He noted that it is certainly true that  the  sentence
    imposed on the appellant meant that the conviction  is  not  one  which
    automatically means that he falls foul of the suitability criteria.  It
    is to the appellant's credit that he  pleaded  guilty  and  served  his
    sentence properly. However, the offence of which he  was  convicted  is
    one committed directly against the immigration controls  which  the  UK
    has in place, involving as it did a forged visa. It therefore  is  more
    serious when considered in an immigration context. It also followed his
    entry into the UK illegally and his  failure  to  leave  when  previous
    immigration applications have been refused.


18.  Viewed  with  this  background,  he  "thinks"  that  on  balance   the
    appellant's conduct including that conviction means that  he  fails  to
    meet the  suitability  requirement  of  the  Rules.  He  did  meet  the
    eligibility requirements [36].


19. At [38] he noted that while the best interests of [E] and [EA] would be
    equally well met in Ghana or the UK as long  as  they  are  with  their
    parents, the best interests of [A] are to remain in the UK. That is the
    primary  consideration  under  EX.1(a)  but  it   is   not   the   only
    consideration. That is particularly true given the fact that  he  found
    that [A]'s best interests are only marginally in favour of remaining in
    the UK. There are other competing  considerations.  This  includes  his
    strong ties in Ghana where he has grandparents, aunts and  uncles,  one
    of whom he has a particularly good relationship with.  He  has  been  a
    regular visitor to Ghana throughout his life and therefore  has  strong
    cultural ties there.


20. Whether in the UK or Ghana, his stage of education is such that  he  is
    about to  experience  a  significant  change  as  he  enters  secondary
    education. The reasonableness of requiring him to  leave  the  UK  also
    needs to be considered in the context of the question being considered,
    namely whether the appellant should be granted leave to remain  in  the
    UK. This means that the appalling immigration history of the  appellant
    and the impact allowing the application would have on the UK's economic
    wellbeing are further relevant considerations  which  strongly  suggest
    that it would be reasonable to expect [A] to leave the UK [38].


21. Balancing all these competing considerations and  treating  their  best
    interests as a primary consideration, he found on balance that it would
    be reasonable to expect [A], [E] and [EA] to leave the UK and therefore
    the requirement under EX.1(a) is not met by the appellant [38].


22. There would not be insurmountable obstacles to the appellant continuing
    family life with Ms [T] outside the UK. The strong ties that the family
    has maintained and the family support  which  would  await  them  there
    meant that  they  would  not  experience  significant  difficulties  in
    continuing their life in that country. Both  have  transferable  skills
    which would help them find employment in Ghana [39].


23. Accordingly, the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  under  the
    Rules as he failed the suitability requirement, and  because  Paragraph
    EX.1 does not apply [40].


24. He considered Article 8 "outside the Rules." He answered the first four
    questions posed in Razgar affirmatively [41].  He  had  regard  to  the
    proportionality question which involved balancing the strength  of  the
    public interest in his removal against the impact on his  family  life.
    He referred to various authorities at [42].


25. At [43] he identified factors  in  favour  of  removing  the  appellant
    including the fact that he did not  meet  the  requirements  under  the
    Rules; his dreadful history  of  failing  to  comply  with  immigration
    requirements; the history of his immigration applications on the  basis
    of private life and family  life  with  other  partners.  He  had  made
    applications in  respect  of  two  previous  partners  as  well  as  an
    application for a residence card with a third partner.


26. On each occasion the relationship ended quickly after  the  application
    was refused. He has had children with two of  those  previous  partners
    and then ceased to maintain contact with those children  following  the
    refusal of  his  immigration  application.  His  conviction  for  fraud
    suggests that his presence in the UK is not  conducive  to  the  public
    good; his relationships have been established whilst he has been in the
    UK unlawfully and little weight should be given by virtue of  s.117B(4)
    of the 2002 Act. That is particularly relevant since the fact that  the
    respondent was seeking to remove him was well known both to him and Mrs
    [T] when they commenced  their  relationship.  The  appellant  and  his
    family are not financially  independent  and  receive  state  benefits.
    Further, there are close cultural and family ties which the appellant's
    family has maintained with Ghana.


27. He set out those factors  in  favour  of  maintaining  the  appellant's
    family life in the UK at [44]. This included the finding that it  would
    be in the best interests of [A] that  he  remain  in  the  UK  and  his
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the  three  British  children,
    [A], [E] and [EA]. Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  did  not  apply
    because, for reasons that he had already given, he found that it  would
    be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.


28. The factor attracting the greatest weight is the best interests of  the
    children which includes his finding that [A]'s best  interests  involve
    remaining in the UK although his best interests are far from clear  cut
    and as he has made clear, where they lie is a marginal decision.  There
    are also good reasons why his interests would be met by living in Ghana
    [45].


29. Cumulatively, the factors  in  favour  of  removal  are  "exceptionally
    powerful" and outweigh the factors in favour of maintaining his  family
    life in the UK including [A]'s best interests.


30.  Accordingly,  the  respondent's  decision  did  not  breach  the  UK's
    obligations under the Human Rights Convention [47].


31. On  3  December  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal. She found it arguable that the Tribunal
    erred in its assessment of reasonableness, failed  to  give  sufficient
    weight to the child's best interests and wrongly concluded that it  was
    only marginally the case that it was in [A]'s best interests to  remain
    in the UK.


32. Mr Lam, who represented the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    adopted the grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.


33.  When  considering  the  best  interests,  the  Judge  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the issue of the child's nationality as a  British
    citizen. At no stage in the reasoning was  the  issue  of  his  British
    citizenship considered "or at least given sufficient weight." That is a
    material error as the  best  interests  of  the  child  are  a  primary
    consideration in addressing whether it is reasonable to expect them  to
    relocate.


34. He submitted that at [33] the Judge  "speculated"  that  the  education
    system in Ghana is similar to that in the UK. [A] had been a pupil at a
    primary school for five years. He had just  started  secondary  school.
    There was no evidence that the education system in Ghana is similar  to
    that in the UK.


35. He referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Azimi-Moayed  and
    Others (Decisions  affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
    00197, where the Tribunal noted that seven years from age 4  is  likely
    to be more significant to a child than the first seven years  of  life.
    Very young children are focused on  their  parents  rather  than  their
    peers and are adaptable.


36. [A] has been resident in the UK for 11 years. He has not lived  in  any
    country apart from the UK. He has established his own private life. His
    mother and siblings are British citizens as well. Mr Lam submitted that
    when balancing those factors against the two limited factors identified
    by the Judge, the finding that his best interests are  only  marginally
    better served by remaining in the UK is not supportable.


37. He also submitted that the assessment of "reasonableness"  with  regard
    to the proposed relocation of the children  represented  a  substantial
    departure from the secretary of state's guidance. That should have been
    considered in line with the Upper Tribunal decision in  SF  and  Others
    (Guidance Post 2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120.


38. The applicable guidance indicated that it is not considered  reasonable
    to expect a British child to leave  the  UK  unless  there  are  public
    interest considerations of such weight to justify removal of a  non-EEA
    parent. Examples of such weighty considerations include significant  or
    persistent criminal offences  and  a  very  poor  immigration  history,
    having repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration  Rules.  Mr
    Lam submitted that  in  this  case  as  the  sponsor  has  an  isolated
    conviction for fraud, a low harm offence  for  which  he  was  given  a
    relatively short sentence of four months; and he had not repeatedly and
    deliberately breached the immigration rules.


39. He submitted that whilst the appellant's immigration history  is  poor,
    as he has not had leave to remain  throughout  his  residence,  he  has
    nevertheless made applications in an effort  to  normalise  his  status
    which were appropriate at the time even if the relationships  on  which
    they were based ultimately ended. There is no suggestion that  he  made
    fraudulent applications or used deception  in  applying  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK.


40. He submitted that the children are not to be blamed or held to  account
    for their parents' wrongdoing. He  referred  to  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 at [32].


41. With regard to the finding that the children have a link to Ghana,  the
    Judge did not have regard to the fact that they are  British  citizens:
    ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 at [30] where Lady Hale stated  that
    although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card",  it  is  of  particular
    importance when assessing the best interests of any child. At [32]  she
    found that the intrinsic importance of citizenship should not be played
    down. As citizens these children have rights which  they  will  not  be
    able to exercise if they move to another country. They  will  lose  the
    advantages of growing up and being educated in their own country, their
    own culture and their own language. They will have  lost  all  of  this
    when they come back as adults.


42. With regard to ground  3  -  the  assessment  of  reasonableness  -  he
    submitted that what tipped the  balance  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was the father's criminal history.


43. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Avery submitted that it  was  difficult
    to see how SF, supra, survives the decision of the Supreme Court in KO.
    He submitted that the policy was based on a misconception of the law.


44. Further, the First-tier Tribunal has looked at  the  situation  of  the
    children at [32] and [33]. He had regard to the changing situation as a
    child gets older and his position  in  the  wider  world  becomes  more
    established. He found that this was the case for [A], who has lived  in
    the UK for all of his 11 years and is a British  citizen.  He  has  had
    proper regard to the disruption to [A]'s  education.  He  balanced  his
    best interests which involved his remaining in the UK against the  fact
    that he has retained strong links to Ghana.


45. The reference to  a  similar  education  system  in  Ghana  'is  not  a
    completely unfounded assertion'. There is no evidence that the  Judge's
    finding was incorrect.


46. With regard to [35] and suitability, he submitted that  the  Judge  had
    properly concluded that he failed to meet the suitability  requirements
    under the Rules. That was open to the Judge. His findings at  [38]  are
    consistent with the decision in KO.  The  immigration  history  of  his
    father is a relevant consideration.


47. The Judge properly considered the factors in  favour  of  removing  the
    appellant when considering Article 8 outside  the  rules  at  [41]  and
    following. The immigration history  of  the  appellant  is  a  relevant
    factor. There is nothing wrong with that. The reality of the  situation
    is his finding that [A]'s best interests are far from clear cut and lie
    as a marginal decision. There were good reasons why his interests would
    be met by living in Ghana.


48. In the event, the findings are sustainable.


49. In reply, Mr Lam submitted that the child is paying the price  for  his
    stepfather's conviction and sentence. He referred to KO, supra at [11].
    The IDI dated 22 February 2018 was considered. The consideration of the
    child's  best  interests  must  not  be  affected  by  the  conduct  or
    immigration history of the parent(s) or primary carer, but  these  will
    be relevant to the assessment of  the  public  interest,  including  in
    maintaining effective immigration control; whether this  outweighs  the
    child's best interests; and whether, in the round, it is reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.


50. He referred to the Home Office document: Family Migration: Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0(b) published for Home Office staff on 19 December 2018.  At
    page 69, regard was had to the decision in KO, supra,  with  particular
    reference to the case of NS (Sri Lanka) where the  Supreme  Court  held
    that "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real world context  in
    which the child finds themselves. The parents' immigration status is  a
    relevant factor to establish that context. The determination  sets  out
    that if a child's parents are both expected to leave the UK, the  child
    is normally expected to leave with them unless there is  evidence  that
    it would not be reasonable.


    Assessment


51. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt has undertaken a lengthy and detailed
    assessment. Having assessed the evidence in detail  he  concluded  that
    the appellant started to live with  Ms  [T]  after  the  appellant  was
    released from detention in November 2015. Accordingly, as at  the  date
    of hearing, they had been living together in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage for at least two years. Further, Ms [T] was a widow  when  she
    met the appellant. She and her late husband had their son, [A], who was
    born in 13 October 2006. It was  also  common  ground  that  [A]  is  a
    British citizen.


52. He also had regard to the fact that the  appellant  was  convicted  and
    sentenced for using a fraudulent document, namely a forged  visa  which
    he used in order  to  obtain  employment.  Having  pleaded  guilty,  he
    received 4 months in prison. They have had two children  together,  [E]
    and [EA].


53. He has  had  proper  regard  to  the  appellant's  immigration  history
    including his various applications which he  has  made  since  February
    2006. He claimed to have entered the  UK  on  15  April  2000.  Appeals
    against the refusal of  his  application  made  in  February  2006  for
    indefinite leave to remain on compassionate grounds were  dismissed  in
    August 2007. Further applications made in March 2009 and May 2010  were
    both refused.


54. It was only on 6 January 2014 that he  applied  for  leave  to  remain.
    Permission to bring judicial review proceedings was  refused  in  March
    2015. His further application in October 2015 was refused on  25  March
    2016.


55. His current application which was the basis for this appeal was made on
    14 July 2016. That was refused on 22 July 2016.  It  was  against  that
    decision that the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was made.


56. He has had full regard to the evidence that the appellant gave  at  the
    hearing which he has set out in some detail from [11-24]. He  carefully
    considered whether the appellant had a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with [A]. He found that the appellant had stepped into the
    shoes of a parent in respect of [A] and had a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with him.


57. He had proper regard to the best interests of  the  appellant  and  the
    children involved pursuant to s.55 of the 2009 Act. He had  had  regard
    to the best interests of [E] and [EA]  which  he  found  would  be  met
    equally in Ghana or in the UK so long as they are with their parents.


58. He had particular regard to  the  best  interests  of  [A],  a  British
    citizen who lived in the UK for all his 11 years. He  referred  to  the
    disruption that would be involved in his education which,  however,  he
    would in any event be subject to as he moves into secondary education.


59. He considered that [A] had visited  Ghana  every  other  year  and  was
    described by his mother as having a close relationship with  his  uncle
    in Ghana. He also found that the education system in Ghana  is  similar
    to that in the UK and includes teaching in  English.  It  is  contended
    that there is no evidence substantiating that assertion. However, there
    has been no contention that the education  system  in  Ghana  would  be
    contrary to his ability to progress in education at secondary school.


60. I have had regard to  the  appellant's  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. There does not appear to be any evidence  relating  to  [A]'s
    educational progress in the UK. There is no evidence that he  would  be
    adversely affected by any move to Ghana. There is  no  suggestion  that
    [A] has any specific learning or educational difficulties for which  he
    has been receiving any specialised attention in the UK.


61. Nor is there any medical evidence that [A] is receiving any specialised
    medical treatment in the UK which would not be available in Ghana.


62. Judge Bulpitt found that [A]'s best interests are  only  marginally  in
    favour of remaining in the UK. He weighed that up against the competing
    considerations including [A]'s  strong  ties  in  Ghana  where  he  has
    grandparents, aunts and uncles. He has been a regular visitor to  Ghana
    throughout his life and has strong cultural ties there.


63. He has assessed whether it would be reasonable to require [A] to  leave
    the UK, which he stated needed to  be  considered  in  the  context  of
    whether the appellant should be granted  leave  to  remain  here.  That
    meant taking into consideration the appellant's "appalling  immigration
    history" and the impact that his being allowed to remain would have  on
    the UK's economic well being.


64. As noted, the parties drew my attention to the decision in KO (Nigeria)
    v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53. Judgment was given by the Supreme  Court  on  24
    October  2018.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bulpitt  promulgated   his
    decision on 15 October 2018.


65. At [19] of KO, Lord Reed held that in considering the  "best  interests
    of the children" in the context of s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
    Immigration Act 2009, there is nothing in the section to  suggest  that
    "reasonableness" is to be considered otherwise than in the  real  world
    in which children find themselves. At [51] he considered  s.117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act. He noted that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  directed  itself
    correctly as to the wording of the sub-section.  The  parents'  conduct
    was relevant in that it meant that they had to leave the country.


66. Lord Reed noted at [18] that  as  the  IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
    seemed to him to be inevitably relevant both in  the  context  of  both
    s.117B (6) as well as paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules to  consider
    where the parents, apart from relevant provision, are expected  to  be,
    since it will normally be reasonable for the children to be with  them.
    To that  extent  the  record  of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
    material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to  remain  here
    and having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,  it  would
    not be reasonable for the child to leave, that the provisions may  give
    the parents a right to remain.


67. At [51] he stated that it was in the context to which he referred  that
    it had to be considered whether it was reasonable for the  children  to
    leave with the parents. Their best interests would have  been  for  the
    whole family to remain here. In the context where the  parents  had  to
    leave, the natural expectation would be that the children would go with
    them and there was nothing in the evidence reviewed  by  the  Judge  to
    suggest that that would be other than reasonable.


68.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Bulpitt   considered   the   appellant's
    conviction, which he found affected the immigration controls which  the
    UK has in place, as he had forged a visa in order to enable him to work
    in the UK. This he found therefore to be more serious  when  considered
    in an immigration context. In addition, the offence followed  his  very
    poor  immigration  history  when  the  several   previous   immigration
    applications were refused. In those circumstances, he  failed  to  meet
    the suitability requirements under the rules [35].


69. He has properly considered as part of his assessment as to  whether  it
    is reasonable to expect [A] to leave the UK the immigration history  of
    the appellant and the impact on the economic  well  being  if  he  were
    allowed to stay [38].


70. He concluded that there would not be insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant continuing family life with Mrs [T] outside the UK. They both
    had transferable skills enabling them to obtain  employment  in  Ghana.
    There has been no appeal against that finding.


71. Finally, he has considered the proportionality of the decision,  having
    undertaken a detailed assessment of the Razgar questions. He identified
    factors in favour of removing the appellant against those in favour  of
    his maintaining of family life in the UK. Having  carefully  considered
    the best interests of [A], he has given sustainable reasons as  to  why
    his interests would be met by living in Ghana. He  has  summed  up  the
    basis upon which he came to that decision at [46].


72. I find that there has been no material error that has been made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


    Anonymity direction not made.






    Signed                              Date 23 January 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

