
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18930/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th November 2020                |On 17th November 2020                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                          RUDOPLH CONSTANTINE RHONE
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wilson, JM Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

 1. The hearing before me on 10th November 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  I sat at the
    Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives
    in exactly the same way as I would have been if the parties had
    attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that this constituted
    a hearing in open court; that the open justice principle has been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as
    necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the
    interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to
    proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need to take
    precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was
    satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with
    fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of
    the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated
    costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
    satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
    proceedings.


The Background


 2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica. He claims to have arrived in
    the UK in 1999.  On 13th September 2012, he applied for leave to remain
    on Article 8 grounds. The application was refused on 28th August 2013.
    The decision did not attract a right of appeal. On 4th September 2019,
    the appellant made a further application for leave to remain in the UK
    on the basis of his private life. The appellant claimed to have lived
    continuously in the UK for 20 years.  The application was refused by
    the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 6th November
    2019.  The respondent concluded that appellant has failed to establish
    that he has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years and he
    could not therefore meet the requirement set out in paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.  The appellant's appeal
    against that decision was dismissed for reasons set out in a decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan promulgated on 17th January 2020.


 3. The appellant was not represented at the hearing of the appeal.  His
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal is summarised at paragraphs [7]
    to [11] of the decision of Judge O'Hagan.  The appellant provided the
    Tribunal with a copy of his passport and in cross examination, it was
    put to the appellant that the endorsements on the passport demonstrate
    that he left the UK and returned in 2000, 2001 and 2002.  The appellant
    denied that he had ever left the UK, and his evidence was that the
    endorsements on his passport merely showed that he was registered with
    the respondent.


 4. The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [14] to
    [44] of his decision. Judge O'Hagan found that the appellant is likely
    to have developed a private life of sufficient intensity to engage
    Article 8.  At paragraph [17] he said:


         "... I say that because, whilst I reject his claim to have been
         here continuously since 1999 for the reasons I will give I find it
         likely that he has been here continuously since February 2002..."


 5. Judge O'Hagan considered the evidence relied upon by the appellant in
    support of his claim that he has been living in the UK since 1999. He
    considered the evidence to be lacking and was surprised how sparse the
    evidence was.  At paragraph [26] Judge O'Hagan states:


         "I have considered the evidence that I do have.  The most
         significant is the appellant's passport. That shows that he entered
         the United Kingdom on 12th July 1999 as he claims. The difficulty
         is that it shows that he re-entered on 2nd February 2000 with leave
         until 14th December 2000, and then on 22 March 2001 with leave
         until 31st October 2001, and finally on 8th February 2002 with
         leave until 7th November 2002.  Mr Khalfey pointed this out to the
         appellant during the hearing. He firmly denied having left the
         United Kingdom after he arrived in July 1999. His explanation for
         these stamps in his passport was that the college stamped his
         passport. I reject that explanation. I do so because it makes no
         sense.  As Mr Khalfey said, colleges do not have access to Home
         Office visa systems, nor do they have any reason to stamp an
         individual's passport."


 6. At paragraph [30], Judge O'Hagan said:


         "The only sensible explanation for the stamps in the passport is
         the obvious one; the appellant came to the United Kingdom in 1999,
         2000, 2001 and 2002 with leave as a visitor. On the first three
         occasions, he returned to Jamaica, obtained further leave, and re-
         entered the United Kingdom. On the last occasion, he overstayed,
         and has been here ever since. That analysis also fits in with the
         documentary evidence, sparse as it is. In particular it is
         consistent with the fact that the earliest piece of evidence is the
         P60 for the year 2002/2003. I find, on the balance of probabilities
         that this is what happened. I am satisfied that the appellant has
         continuously lived in the United Kingdom since 8th February 2002."


 7. Judge O'Hagan therefore concluded that the appellant has failed to
    establish that he has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
    years.  For reasons set out at paragraphs [33] to [36] of his decision,
    Judge O'Hagan also rejected the claim that there would be very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Jamaica.
    Having found that the requirements of the immigration rules cannot be
    met, the judge had regard to the public interest and concluded that the
    public interest outweighs the private interests of the appellant such
    that his removal is not disproportionate and in breach of Article 8.


The appeal before me


 8. The appellant claims Judge O'Hagan proceeds upon a mistake as to fact.
    It is said that the endorsements on the appellant's passport in 2000,
    2001 and 2002 give the appellant leave to remain as a student, and do
    not provide for leave to enter, as the judge appears to believe. The
    appellant has provided clearer copies of the endorsements on his
    passport.  The first is an endorsement stamped on the appellant's
    passport on 12th July 1999 that grants leave to enter the United
    Kingdom for six months.   The second is an endorsement stamped on the
    appellant's passport on 2nd February 2000 that grants leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom until 14th December 2000.  The third is an
    endorsement stamped on the appellant's passport on 22nd March 2001 that
    grants leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 31st October 2001.
    The fourth is an endorsement stamped on the appellant's passport on 8th
    February 2002 that grants leave to remain in the United Kingdom until
    7th November 2002.


 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan
    on 20th May 2020.


10. At the hearing before me, Mrs Aboni quite properly acknowledged that
    the endorsements that appear on the appellant's passport establish that
    the appellant was granted leave to enter the UK in July 1999, and, the
    three subsequent endorsements establish that he was then granted
    further leave to remain until 7th November 2002.  Although it was not
    before the FtT, she confirmed that she has had the opportunity of
    reviewing the respondent's previous decision of 28th August 2013.  In
    that decision, the respondent appears to have accepted that the
    appellant was granted leave to remain in the UK as a student until
    2002.  She submits that a copy of the appellant's passport was not
    provided until the morning of the hearing and it would appear that the
    stamps endorsed on it, have been mis-read. Quite properly, she accepts
    that the FtT Judge appears to proceed upon a mistake as to fact.


11. I am quite satisfied that the decision of Judge O'Hagan is vitiated by
    a material error of law and must be set aside.  I accept Judge O'Hagan
    proceeds upon a mistake as to fact. Judge O'Hagan appears to proceed
    upon the basis that the stamps placed in the appellant's passport show
    that he was granted leave to enter the UK in 2000, 2001 and 2002,
    whereas it is quite clear that the appellant arrived in the UK in July
    1999 and was granted six months leave to enter. He was then granted
    further leave to remain as a student in 2000, 2001 and 2002.   Leave to
    enter is granted to a person who is outside of the UK, whereas leave to
    remain is granted to a person who is present in the UK.


12. As to disposal, in my judgement the appropriate course is for the
    decision to be remade by me in the Upper Tribunal. Judge O'Hagan found,
    at paragraph [30] of his decision, that the appellant has continuously
    lived in the United Kingdom since 8th February 2002. The respondent
    does not challenge that finding.  The respondent has acknowledged that
    following his arrival UK July 1999, the appellant was granted further
    leave to remain until November 2002.  There is no evidence that the
    appellant ever left the UK between July 1999 and November 2002.   I
    find that the appellant has established that he has lived continuously
    in the UK since July 1999 and that he meets the requirements set out in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.


13. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant is that the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act.
    Given the length of the appellant's residence in the UK, Article 8 is
    plainly engaged.  I find that the decision to refuse the appellant
    leave to remain may have consequences of such gravity as potentially to
    engage the operation of Article 8.  I accept that the interference is
    in accordance with the law, and that the interference is necessary to
    protect the legitimate aim of immigration control and the economic well-
    being of the country.  The issue in this appeal, as is often the case,
    is whether the interference is proportionate to the legitimate public
    end sought to be achieved.


14. I have found that the appellant meets the requirements for leave to
    remain on the grounds of private life on the basis that the appellant
    has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years.  The appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 12th July 1999 and the requirement set
    out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules was met in
    September 2019, when the applicant made his application.   I have had
    regard to the public interest considerations set out in s117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  As set out by the Court
    of Appeal in TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, compliance with the
    immigration rules would usually mean that there is nothing on the
    Secretary of State's side of the scales to show that the refusal of the
    claim could be justified. At paragraphs [32] to [34], the Senior
    President of Tribunals confirmed that where a person meets the rules,
    the human rights appeal must succeed because 'considerable weight' must
    be given to the respondent's policy as set out in the rules.


15. Having regard to the policy of the respondent as expressed in the
    immigration rules, and in the absence of any countervailing factors in
    the public interest that weigh against the appellant, I am satisfied
    that on the facts here, the decision to refuse leave to remain is
    disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control.  In the
    circumstances I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.





Notice of Decision


16. The appeal is allowed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    O'Hagan promulgated on 17th January 2020 is set aside.


17. I remake the decision and allow the appeal on Article 8 private life
    grounds.





Signed   V. Mandalia                Date 10th November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
