
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18593/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                 |
|On 19 October 2018                           |On 31 October 2018          |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               MR HAROON FERAZ
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (REF:  SHEFO/266068)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Caswell     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of   the   First-tier Tribunal   (the   tribunal)   which   it   made   on
13 December 2017, whereupon it dismissed his appeal from a decision of  an
Entry Clearance Officer of 28 June 2016, refusing to grant entry clearance
to enable him to come to come to the United Kingdom (UK) in order  to  join
his UK based sponsor with a view to settlement.

2.    This decision is short because there  was  a  comprehensive  level  of
agreement between the  parties  before  me  as  to  whether  the  tribunal's
decision contained an error of law (it was agreed that it did); whether  the
tribunal's decision should be set aside (it was agreed that it  should)  and
how the decision ought to be remade.

3.    To explain, the claimant's appeal had come before  the  tribunal,  for
oral hearing, on 11 October 2017.  Both parties were represented  at  that
hearing.  The claimant was successful in satisfying the  tribunal  that,  as
at  the  date   of   application,   he   met   the   requirements   of   the
Immigration Rules concerning financial matters as contained in Appendix FM
to the Rules and, with respect to specific evidence of such compliance,  FM-
SE (those being the only matters which had  been  placed  in  issue  by  the
entry  clearance  officer).   Such  is  apparent  from  what  it   said   at
paragraph 8.2 of its written reasons.  I did raise  with  the  parties  the
possibility  that  it  might  have  been  deciding  that   the   substantive
requirements  were  met  but  the  evidential  requirements   contained   in
Appendix FM - SE were not.  But both representatives  took  the  view  that
that was not the case and I am content to so conclude.

4.    Concluding that compliance with the Rules at the date  of  application
was not sufficient, of itself, for the tribunal to  be  able  to  allow  the
appeal.  That is because a claimant can no longer succeed in  an  appeal  by
demonstrating that a decision of  an  entry  clearance  officer  is  not  in
accordance with  the  Immigration Rules.   The  appeal  was  brought  under
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)  on  the  basis
that the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998
(see section 84(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act 2002).
But, it had been decided in Mostafa (Article 8 in Entry  Clearance)  [2015]
UKUT 00112 (IAC) that an ability on the part of a claimant to  satisfy  the
Immigration Rules, whilst not the question to be determined by the tribunal
on appeal, was capable of being a weighty though  not  determinative  factor
when deciding the proportionality part of an Article 8 assessment.

5.    The tribunal, though, whilst accepting compliance as at  the  date  of
application, took the view that since this was a human rights appeal it  was
required to undertake a full consideration as to whether or not all  of  the
requirements of the Immigration Rules were  met  as  at  the  date  of  the
hearing of the appeal. It decided, on the basis of the material  before  it,
that it could not be so satisfied. It dismissed the appeal on that basis.

6.    I suggested to the parties that whilst it might have been open to  the
tribunal to take into account what the position with respect  to  compliance
with the rules was as at the date of hearing, it was  nevertheless  required
to factor into its Article 8  deliberations  the  compliance  that  it  had
decided there had been as at the date of application, and that  it  had  not
done that.  Mr McVeety agreed with that and accepted that, on  that  basis,
the decision should be set aside.  Mr Caswell, initially, sought  to  argue
that the tribunal had not been permitted to take into account the  situation
as at the date of hearing at all.  His initial argument was that, since  the
tribunal had decided that the rules were met as at the time of  application,
it had no alternative but to allow the appeal  under  Article 8  (at  least
that is how I understood his argument).  But it became apparent that he  was
basing that argument upon the wording contained within  a  previous  version
of section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act 2002.   The
relevant part now in force reads as follows:

         "  85.  Matters to be considered

            (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall  be
           treated by the Tribunal  as  including  an  appeal  against  any
           decision in respect of which the appellant has a right of appeal
           under section 82(1).

            (2)  ...

            (3)  ...

            (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) against  a  decision  the
           tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to the
           substance of the decision, including a matter arising after  the
           date of the decision."

7.    I do not agree with Mr Caswell's initial submission  because,  in  my
view, the current wording of section 85(4)  as  set  out  above  permits  a
tribunal to have regard to post-decision matters of  relevance  and,  in  an
Article 8 context,  I  consider  that  any  change  of  a  material  nature
concerning compliance  with  the  rules  might  well  have  such  relevance.
Further and in any event, following Mostafa, cited  above,  it  is  not  the
case in any  event  that  mere  compliance  with  the  Rules  of  itself  is
determinative in the context of an Article 8 appeal.

8.    Having regard to  all  of  the  above  I  decided  to  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision because,  notwithstanding  that  the  tribunal  had  the
ability to take post-decision matters into  account  so  long  as  they  had
relevance  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,  this  tribunal  erred  by
effectively disregarding the previous compliance with the rules at the  time
the Secretary of State required compliance for the purposes of those  Rules.
 Notwithstanding any change that there might have been that was a factor  of
relevance.

9.    There was then a discussion as to whether or not  the  decision  could
be remade before me.  In the end both representatives urged me to  do  that.
As  part  of  that  process  Mr Caswell  provided   me   with   additional
documentation  concerning  the  sponsor's   financial   situation.    Having
considered it Mr McVeety said he accepted that,  as  at  the  date  of  the
hearing before me,  the  financial  requirements  were  met.   It  had  been
demonstrated that the sponsor was  receiving  carer's  allowance  (with  the
consequence that it was only necessary for her to  beat  the  income-support
entitlement level for  an  equivalent  family)  and  that  her  income  was,
indeed, such as to beat it.  It was the case, therefore, that  the  claimant
had demonstrated compliance with the Immigration Rules as at  the  date  of
application and then similar compliance  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing
before me which was, by that stage,  concerned  with  the  remaking  of  the
decision.

10.   In those circumstances Mr McVeety accepted that the appeal  ought  to
succeed under Article 8 grounds.  I agree and I have remade the decision to
that effect.

Decision

The decision of the tribunal involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside.

The Upper Tribunal goes on to remake the  decision  in  these  terms:   the
claimant's appeal from the  decision  of  the  entry  clearance  officer  of
28 June 2016 is allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed:                      Dated: 29 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway


Anonymity

I make no anonymity directions.  None was sought.


Signed:                      Dated: 29 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                      Dated: 29 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


