
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18930/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2018                           |On 9 January 2019             |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD MAYNUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, brought with permission that followed the grant of a
    judicial review by Stephen Morris J in the High Court, of a decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal which, following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on
    13 December 2017, dismissed the appellant's human rights appeal.

 2. The crucial issue  in  the  appeal  is  common  ground  -  whether  the
    appellant had used deception  in  connection  with  taking  an  English
    language test in connection with a previous application for leave.

 3.  The  judge  carried  out  a  detailed  examination  of  the  evidence.
    Unfortunately, however, we are compelled to reach the  conclusion  that
    the judge  erred  in  law.   It  is  apparent  from  the  decision,  in
    particular at paragraph 58,  that  the  judge  regarded  the  so-called
    evidential burden on the appellant in matters of this kind as amounting
    to a legal burden.  In any event, the evidential burden was treated  by
    the judge as requiring far more of the  appellant  than  the  case  law
    makes plain it is necessary to raise, by way of a plausible explanation
    that puts the entire task back in the  hands  of  the  respondent,  who
    throughout bears the legal burden of  proving  dishonesty  to  a  civil
    standard.

 4.  This  finding  vitiates  the  conclusions  of  the  judge,  which   is
    regrettable,  given  the  effort  that  was  put   into   writing   the
    determination.  It means that we are not required to  engage  with  the
    second of Mr Biggs's grounds, which relates to an  alleged  failure  by
    the judge to have regard to case law which is not binding on the First-
    tier Tribunal but which Mr Biggs says  nevertheless  should  have  been
    taken into consideration.  We have to say that we find this  submission
    would  have  been  problematic,  notwithstanding  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is a  specialist  tribunal  which  is  supposed  to  know  the
    relevant law.

 5. We set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   We  have
    considered what follows from that.

 6. In the circumstances, we accept Mr Biggs's  submission  that  paragraph
    7.2(b) of the Practice Statement is engaged.  The nature of  the  fact-
    finding task is such that in the circumstances it  is  appropriate  for
    this case to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  rather  than  re-
    heard in the Upper Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                 Date: 20 December 2018


The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
President of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

