
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18573/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 September 2020             |On 17 September 2020             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                  Oyoma [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Vidal, of Haris Ali Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Nigerian national who was born on  28  August  1970.
    She appeals, with leave granted by the First-tier Tribunal,  against  a
    decision which was  issued  by  Judge  Greasley  on  29  January  2020,
    dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  refusal  of  her  human
    rights claim.



Background

 2. The appellant's date of entry to the United Kingdom is in dispute,  and
    is at the centre of this appeal.  She maintains  that  she  entered  in
    1999, using a passport belonging to another person, and remained in the
    UK  unlawfully  thereafter.   In  2010,  she  met  her  husband  and  a
    relationship commenced.  They married on 23  January  2011  and  it  is
    accepted by the respondent that she was present in the  United  Kingdom
    from that point onwards.  Her husband became a British citizen in 2016.
     On 10 May 2018, she made an application for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  The 61-page application form was accompanied by a raft
    of  evidence   and   a   supporting   letter   from   the   appellant's
    representatives.  That letter detailed the circumstances in  which  the
    applicant had come to the United Kingdom in 1999 and the basis  of  her
    claim to remain in the UK with  her  husband.   It  was  submitted,  in
    particular, that their  relationship  could  not  continue  in  Nigeria
    because he was dependent upon the NHS  for  treatment  and  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to her re-integration  to  Nigeria,
    such that she satisfied  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was submitted, in  summary,  that  the  appellant's  removal
    would be in breach of Article 8 ECHR.

The Respondent's Decision

 3. The respondent initially refused the application and certified it under
    section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, thereby
    preventing the appellant from appealing to the FtT.  On  receipt  of  a
    Letter Before Action, however, she withdrew the certificate and  issued
    a further decision, on 30  October  2019,  which  carried  a  right  of
    appeal.   She  accepted  that  the  appellant  enjoyed  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  but  not  that  there   were   insurmountable
    obstacles to that relationship continuing  in  Nigeria.   She  did  not
    accept that the appellant had resided in the  UK  since  1999  or  that
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  to
    Nigeria.   And  she  did  not  accept  that  there   were   exceptional
    circumstances which warranted a  decision  to  grant  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules with reference to Article 8 ECHR.

The Appeal to the FtT

 4. The appellant appealed, and her appeal came  before  the  judge  on  24
    January 2020.  She was represented by a Ms Aziz, who was thought by the
    judge to be a member of the Bar, although her s84 form and her skeleton
    argument suggest  otherwise.   The  respondent  was  represented  by  a
    Presenting Officer, Ms Jones.  The judge heard oral evidence  from  the
    appellant  and  her   husband.    He   heard   submissions   from   the
    representatives and then he reserved his  decision.   In  his  reserved
    decision, the judge concluded that the appellant could not satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules and that her removal would not be contrary to Article
    8 ECHR.  He did not accept that she had entered the  UK  in  1999.   He
    found that there were no insurmountable obstacles to her continuing her
    life with her husband in Nigeria.  He considered the  partner's  health
    problems to have been exaggerated and the appellant  to  have  shown  a
    blatant disregard for immigration control in the United  Kingdom.   The
    public interest in her removal outweighed her rights  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The central complaint  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  is  of  procedural
    impropriety.  Those grounds were settled  by  Ms  Vidal,  who  did  not
    appear below.  She seized upon what was said by the judge  at  [22]  of
    his decision:

         "It was agreed between me and the representatives that there was no
         formal requirement to call oral evidence from two friends, [PM] and
         [RE], both of  whom  provided  witness  statements  of  14  January
         respectively.  Both indicated that they had known the appellant for
         approximately 20 years."

 6. Ms Vidal submitted that it was not open to the judge,  having  declined
    to hear from these two witnesses, to find at [27] of his decision  that
    Ms [E] would not have been able to recall the  precise  date  and  year
    when she first met the appellant in the United  Kingdom.   That  was  a
    finding which cast doubt on the credibility of the witness, and it  was
    procedurally improper to disbelieve an available witness  without  such
    concerns being put to them.

 7. I asked Ms Vidal whether there was any evidence  to  explain  what  had
    happened before the judge.  There was no statement from Ms Aziz in  the
    Tribunal's file and  the  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings,  which  was
    essentially legible, shed no light on the discussion which had  led  to
    the remarks at [22] of the decision.  Ms Vidal had  no  evidence.   She
    submitted that the procedural error  was  plain  on  the  face  of  the
    decision and that further evidence was not necessary.

Discussion

 8. As I put to Ms Vidal in the course of her submissions, I am not so sure
    that her submission in this respect is correct.   The  judge's  comment
    that there was 'no  formal  requirement'  for  the  witnesses  to  give
    evidence really sheds no light on the reasons that they  did  not  give
    oral evidence.  There is no formal requirement for anyone, including an
    appellant,  to  give  evidence  in  an  immigration  appeal.    Adverse
    inferences might properly be drawn when a witness (or an appellant) who
    is available chooses not to give evidence  without  proper  reason  but
    there is no rule, requirement or even a presumption that oral  evidence
    must be given.  To that extent, the statement at [22] is  nothing  more
    than a statement of the law; it does not reflect  the  content  of  the
    discussion in any  meaningful  way.   It  is  clear  from  the  judge's
    decision that there was some sort of discussion  between  him  and  the
    advocates and the substance of that discussion is critical to  deciding
    whether or not there is an error of law in his decision.  I can explain
    why that is so relatively shortly, although it is necessary to refer to
    a number of authorities in order to do so.

 9. The essential rule is often called the rule in Browne v Dunne (1894)  6
    R 67, HL and may be summarised in this way.  Where the court is  to  be
    asked to disbelieve a witness, the witness  should  be  cross-examined;
    and failure to cross-examine a witness on some  material  part  of  his
    evidence or at all, may be treated as an acceptance  of  the  truth  of
    that part or the whole of his evidence.  The  modern  approach  to  the
    rule has been considered in a number  of  decisions  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

10. In MS (Sri Lanka) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1548,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representatives had declined to cross examine the appellant in the  FtT
    and the UT.  Maurice Kay LJ, with whom Munby and Tomlinson LJJ  agreed,
    stated (without citing Browne v Dunn)  that  this  had  'the  necessary
    consequence that the Secretary of State must be taken to accept, or  at
    least not to dispute, the appellant's factual account.': [14].

11. In Markem Corp v Zipher Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 267; [2005] RPC  31,  Jacob
    LJ (with whom Mummery and  Kennedy  LJJ  agreed)  embarked  on  a  more
    fulsome examination of the rule in the context of a patent  entitlement
    action. A key witness ("SB") had given evidence before the trial  judge
    but had not been cross-examined on various matters which the judge  had
    proceeded to hold against him.  Jacob  LJ  characterised  the  rule  in
    Browne v Dunn as  one  of  procedural  fairness,  and  not  as  one  of
    evidence.  At [50]-[61], he considered the modern  application  of  the
    rule in Browne v Dunn, assisted by dicta  from  the  Commonwealth.   He
    cited with approval a passage from an Australian  case,  which  had  in
    turn cited the then current  edition  of  Phipson  on  Evidence,  which
    concluded with the observation that "Failure to cross-examine, however,
    will not always amount to an acceptance of the witness's testimony,  eg
    if the witness has had contrary notice  beforehand,  or  the  story  is
    itself of an incredible or  romancing  character."   I  note  that  the
    current edition of that work also highlights, at [12-12], that the rule
    in Browne v Dunn is 'not an inflexible one'.  The critical  point,  for
    present purposes, is that a judge is not necessarily required to accept
    (and the opposing party is not necessarily deemed not to challenge) the
    evidence of a witness  if  they  have  had  notice  beforehand  of  the
    intention to challenge their evidence.

12. Drawing on that line of authority, there is a conceivable situation  in
    which the judge could have disbelieved the witnesses even if he had not
    heard from them.  Suppose that there had been a discussion between  the
    judge and the advocates at the start of the hearing,  during  which  it
    had been made clear that these two witnesses were present  and  willing
    to give evidence.  Suppose that the Presenting Officer  had  said  that
    she intended to cross-examine them on the accuracy of their  memory  of
    their first meeting with the appellant.  If,  in  those  circumstances,
    the representative had decided not to  call  the  witnesses,  it  could
    properly be said that they had had notice of  the  point  to  be  taken
    against them and that the trial had been fairly conducted.

13. With Ms Cunha's assistance, however, it became clear that the course of
    the hearing before the judge  was  very  far  from  the  lines  I  have
    contemplated above.  Ms Cunha was very helpfully able  to  produce  the
    note of the hearing which had been  made  by  the  Presenting  Officer.
    That note showed that the judge had initiated a  discussion  about  the
    witnesses at the outset of the hearing and had  expressed  the  opinion
    that it would not be 'beneficial' to hear  from  them.   It  was  as  a
    result of that indication that the decision had been taken not to  call
    them to give evidence.

14. However flexible the rule in Browne v Dunn might currently be  said  to
    be, I do not think  that  it  incorporates  sufficient  flexibility  to
    render the proceedings in this case fair.  There is  no  indication  in
    the Record of Proceedings, or  in  the  judge's  decision,  or  in  the
    Presenting Officer's note, that the judge explored with the  Presenting
    Officer what, if anything was to be put to these  witnesses  in  cross-
    examination.  It is wholly unclear, with respect to the judge,  why  he
    felt able to express the view that it would not be 'beneficial' to hear
    from  these  two  witnesses,  both  of  whom  tended  to  support   the
    appellant's claim that she had (at the date of hearing) been in the  UK
    for more than twenty years.  The expression of that  view  was,  in  my
    judgment, premature at best, and led to the witnesses not  being  given
    an opportunity to deal  with  the  point  which  was  ultimately  taken
    against them by the judge.  Procedural fairness in this respect follows
    what  would  be  expected  by  the  witnesses  themselves,  who   might
    legitimately be heard to say in a case such as the present:  "If only I
    had known that the judge was concerned by  that  point,  I  could  have
    explained by reference to the following."

15. Having brought the Presenting Officer's note to my attention, Ms  Cunha
    (who had not previously considered that  note)  recognised  immediately
    that the decision of the judge was marred by  procedural  irregularity.
    She indicated that she had no opposition to the  relief  sought  by  Ms
    Vidal, which was for the judge's decision  to  be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal remitted to the FtT for rehearing de novo.  I am satisfied  that
    this is the proper course, since the effect of the judge's error was to
    deprive the appellant of a fair hearing (paragraph 7.2 of the  Practice
    Statement of 13 November 2014 refers).

16. I should note that Ms Vidal very properly  drew  to  my  attention  one
    matter which was not clear from either  the  judge's  decision  or  the
    skeleton argument prepared by Ms Aziz  for  the  hearing  in  the  FtT.
    Reading those documents, one would be forgiven for thinking  that  this
    was a case in which the appellant contended that her appeal fell to  be
    allowed on Article 8  ECHR  grounds  because  she  satisfied  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (twenty  years  continuous
    residence in the UK).  As Ms Vidal noted, however, this is not  a  case
    in which the appellant could contend that she satisfied  the  terms  of
    that rule in full because the rule applies in terms to  those  who  had
    accrued that length of residence 'at the date of application'.  At  the
    date of this appellant's application, in  2018,  she  had  not  accrued
    twenty's years residence even on her account, since she claimed to have
    entered in 1999.  Ms Vidal explained that the appeal should  have  been
    put to the judge not on the basis considered in  TZ  (Pakistan)  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1109 (that the appeal had to be  allowed  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds because the Rules were met) but, instead, on the basis that the
    accrual of that length of residence at the date of hearing was a matter
    which necessarily militated in the appellant's favour  in  the  balance
    sheet of proportionality.

17. Even though the appellant was unable, on her own account, to  establish
    that she met the terms of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) before the FtT, I am
    satisfied that the procedural error  into  which  the  judge  fell  was
    sufficient to vitiate the decision he reached.  Even if  the  appellant
    could not meet the precise, temporal terms of that Rule, the  fact  (if
    established) that she had accrued twenty years' residence at  the  date
    of hearing was relevant to  the  assessment  of  proportionality.   The
    logic which underpins Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, as  reflected  in  what
    was said by Lord Reed at [51] of Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11,  is  of  some
    application in the present context.  If the appellant would be bound to
    be granted leave to remain on  private  life  grounds  if  she  made  a
    further application to the respondent, that fact is plainly relevant to
    the assessment of proportionality, although it cannot be  determinative
    for the reasons explained in Younas [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC).   It  is  in
    those circumstances that the judge's failure to reach a lawful decision
    on  the  appellant's  length  of   residence   renders   his   decision
    unsustainable.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law
and that decision is hereby set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  FtT
to be reheard afresh, by a judge other than Judge Greasley.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                           16 September 2020
