
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/18870/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 February 2018                         |On 12 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                         mRS NADA ABDULHAQ TAQIADEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ENTYR CLEARANCE OFFICER AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Koka, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Iraq. She sought entrance  clearance  to
    enter the UK as a partner under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.
    This was refused on the grounds that she has  not  passed  the  English
    language test. She appealed that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal was refused by Judge NMK Lawrence by a decision  promulgated
    on 29 August 2017. Before the FtT the  appellant  maintained  that  for
    medical reasons she was unable to complete an English language  course.
    She produced a medical certificate but  Judge  Lawrence  rejected  this
    evidence. Leave to appeal on this ground was refused.

 2. In the alternative the appellant submitted that a  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance would interfere  with  her  rights  and  those  of  her
    partner and children under article 8 ECHR. Her partner is  British  and
    can support her  in  the  UK.  The  children  are  British  though  are
    currently living with their mother in Iraq. That ground was refused  by
    Judge Lawrence. Permission to appeal against that decision was  granted
    by Judge Saffer on 8 December 2017. He said that it was  arguable  that
    there  were  insufficient  reasons  given  as  to  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances such as to engage an article 8 assessment, and
    regarding any proportionality assessment required.

 3. At the start of the hearing Mr Duffy conceded that Judge  Lawrence  had
    failed to carry out an adequate proportionality assessment and that the
    article 8 ground of appeal required to be reheard.

 4. I am satisfied that Judge Lawrence has failed to  carry  out  a  proper
    article 8 assessment and accordingly the appeal must be  allowed.  Both
    parties were agreed that the case should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In doing so it is agreed that  the  appellant  cannot  comply
    with the rules as she has not passed an English language test.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                             Date 09 February 2018


Lord Boyd of Duncansby
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

