
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18954/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 9th October 2018                 |On: 16th October 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Umut Kahraman
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Istanbul
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Wood, Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Turkey born on the 5th October 1975.  He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    A.M.S Green) to dismiss his appeal on human rights grounds.

    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. This appeal is formally concerned with the Appellant's  application  to
    be granted entry clearance as the spouse of a British national, but  it
    is the Appellant's immigration history, and the extent to which he made
    disclosure of it, which is at the heart of the matters  in  dispute.  I
    therefore begin by setting that history out as  best  I  can  from  the
    materials before me.

 3. The Appellant first came to the  UK  on  the  12th  February  2003.  He
    entered the country unlawfully in the back of a truck. He remained here
    without permission to do so.

 4. In early 2007 he was encountered by police and on the 18th January 2007
    he was removed.  The name that he gave officials  was  Ummet  Kahraman.
    His date of birth was recorded as being the 10th May 1975.

 5. By 3rd December 2007 he had made his way back to the UK,  again  making
    illegal entrance in the back of a truck. He was by  then  spelling  his
    name Umut Kahraman and his date of birth was recorded as being the  5th
    October 1975.  He remained here until he made a voluntary departure  on
    the 16th November 2015.

 6. Upon his return to Turkey in 2015 the Appellant made an application for
    entry clearance on the basis of his marriage to a British  national,  a
    Mrs Mandy Kahraman. The couple met in 2009 and were married in Scotland
    on 31st August 2012. They lived together in Aberdeen between  2012  and
    2015.

 7. That application was refused on the 11th February 2016  with  reference
    to paragraph 320(11)(iii) of the Immigration Rules. This is  a  general
    ground for refusal which provides that an application  should  normally
    be refused:

         (11)      where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in   a
         significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

             (i) overstaying; or

             (ii)      breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)     being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv)       using  deception  in  an  application   for   entry
             clearance, leave to enter or remain  or  in  order  to  obtain
             documents from  the  Secretary  of  State  or  a  third  party
             required in support of the application (whether successful  or
             not);

         and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as  absconding,
         not meeting  temporary  admission/reporting  restrictions  or  bail
         conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the re-documentation process.

 8. It was obviously not in dispute that the Appellant had been an  illegal
    entrant, and it was the Respondent's position that  the  Appellant  had
    aggravated the offence by using the name 'Umut'  instead  of  the  name
    'Ummet',  the use of two different dates of birth, and the  failure  to
    declare three matters on his application form, those  being:  a  police
    caution, the refusal of a visit visa, and the fact  that  he  had  been
    removed from the United Kingdom  by  immigration  enforcement,  all  of
    those events having  taken  place  in  2007.   That  decision  was  not
    appealed.

 9. On the 30th March 2016 the Appellant made the application that  is  the
    subject of this appeal. Again, he sought entry clearance as the  spouse
    of Mrs Mandy Kahraman.  The application was  once  again  refused  with
    reference to paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules. The Respondent
    considered the provision to be engaged by the fact that  the  Appellant
    had been an illegal entrant. This time  the  aggravating  factors  were
    identified as:

          i) That when  he  completed  his  online  application  form,  the
             Appellant only said that he had been in the  UK  between  2003
             and 2007. Although he had volunteered  the  information  about
             his second period of residence in the  United  Kingdom  (2007-
             2015) at interview, the ECO considered that  the  omission  to
             mention this period on the application form was material;

         ii) The fact that the Appellant changed his name between Umut  and
             Ummet and apparently used two different dates of birth;

        iii) The ECOs conclusion that it was  highly  likely  that  he  was
             working when he was in the UK;

         iv) Repeated attempts to evade immigration control.

10. For good measure the Respondent  also  refused  the  application  under
    paragraph  S-EC.2.2  (b).  By  operation  of  paragraph  S-EC.2.1  this
    'suitability' requirement under Appendix FM introduces a  discretionary
    refusal where an application has been refused for false information  or
    material non-disclosure:

         S-EC.2.1. The applicant will normally  be  refused  on  grounds  of
         suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.2.2. to 2.5. apply.

         S-EC.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge-

             (a) false information, representations or documents have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or

             (b) there has been a failure to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application.

11. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant  had  entered  the  UK
    illegally in the past, that he had worked in  this  country  illegally,
    lived here for a lengthy period of time without permission  to  do  so,
    and importantly, that he had been deliberately misleading when  he  had
    failed to disclose, on his application  form,  the  fact  that  he  had
    worked without permission and that  he  had  been  here  twice  before,
    rather than simply in the period 2003 to 2007. In respect of Article  8
    the Tribunal says this:

         "Whilst I note  that  the  skeleton  argument  also  addresses  the
         Appellant's family life and the impact of the decision upon  it,  I
         have not considered this given the  fact  that  Mr  Outtara  orally
         submitted at the hearing that it was accepted  that  there  was  no
         appeal outside the immigration rules under Article 8".

12. The appeal was, on those facts, dismissed.  The Appellant  now  appeals
    on the grounds that in reaching its conclusions the Tribunal omitted to
    consider material facts.

    Discussion and Findings

13. Before me the parties agreed that the application of paragraph  320(11)
    of the Rules requires the decision-maker to go through four stages.

14. First, the rule must be engaged by one of the  four  offences  at  (i)-
    (iv).  If the applicant  has  not  overstayed,  breached  a  condition,
    entered the country illegally or used deception in an application,  the
    rule cannot be applied to him.

15. Second, it must be established that in committing the offence  at  (i)-
    (iv) the applicant contrived in a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intentions of the Rules. Whilst it would normally be the case that such
    an intention could be inferred from the action itself, that  would  not
    always be the case. For instance I think it doubtful that 320(11) would
    be properly applied to a person who had by innocent mistake  overstayed
    in the UK, or to a child who was brought  into  the  country  illegally
    without any understanding of the consequences.

16. Third, there must be some aggravating circumstance, such as absconding,
    using multiple identities or refusing to comply with the  documentation
    process. This again, is a compulsory feature: absent  some  aggravation
    the rule cannot be invoked even if the applicant is guilty  of  one  or
    more of the offences at (i)-(iv).

17. The  fourth  and  final  stage  of  the  process  is  the  exercise  of
    discretion, imported into the rule by the  words  "should  normally  be
    refused". This rebuttable presumption leaves  room  for  the  decision-
    maker to consider  matters  such  as,  for  instance,  mitigation,  the
    passage of time or the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8.

18. As for paragraph S-EC.2.2, this is a provision drafted in very  similar
    terms to the general ground for refusal paragraph 320 (7A) that was the
    subject of discussion in AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773:

         "(7A) where false representations have been made or false documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application."

19. Notwithstanding the express stipulation that the rule applies to  false
    representation whether or not it was to the applicant's knowledge,  the
    Court held that the terms 'false', and the rule overall,  must  require
    some intention to deceive on the part of the applicant.

20. I consider the First-tier Tribunal's approach to each of these rules in
    turn.




    320 (11)

21. In this case it cannot be denied that the Appellant is  an  immigration
    offender. He has twice  entered  the  UK  illegally,  and  by  his  own
    admission remained here for long periods without permission to  do  so.
    No error can therefore  be  alleged  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for finding this element of the rule to be engaged.

22. The Tribunal appeared to proceed on the assumption  that  in  being  an
    illegal entrant  the  Appellant  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to
    frustrate the intentions of the rules. Again, I do not think that there
    could be any serious objection to that finding. He twice climbed in the
    back of a lorry and remained here for long periods at  a  time  knowing
    that he had no leave.

23. As to whether there were 'aggravating circumstances'  it  would  appear
    (although it is not stated in terms) that the Tribunal agreed with  the
    ECO that there were. The factors identified in  the  determination  are
    that he worked illegally, and that he had failed to disclose all of the
    relevant information on his application form.

24. I remain to be satisfied that working illegally could in itself be said
    to constitute a feature aggravating illegal entry or overstaying, since
    such work is "part and parcel of illegal residence": ZH (Bangladesh)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 8.    It  is
    no doubt for that reason that illegal working does not feature  in  the
    list of examples of aggravating circumstances in the rule itself.  That
    leaves the deliberate  omission  to  declare  the  full  facts  of  his
    immigration history.

25. The Appellant makes two related  complaints  about  the  way  that  the
    Tribunal reached its conclusion that  the  Appellant  was  deliberately
    seeking  to  conceal  facts  from  the  Respondent  when  he  made  his
    application.

26. The first concerns the obligations arising when one fills  in  a  form.
    Before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  had  placed  reliance  on
    (unidentified)  Court  of  Appeal  authority  to  the  effect  that  an
    applicant can only be expected to answer the  questions  he  is  asked.
    When completing a form such as this there is a duty of candour upon the
    applicant but this does not extend to supplying  information  that  the
    applicant does not apprehend to be pertinent, if the direct question is
    not put to him.  The Tribunal had preferred the opposing view taken  by
    Mostyn J on this matter in Aafia Thebo v Entry Clearance Officer [2013]
    EWHC 146 (Admin). If there are competing authorities on this  point  it
    is because, no doubt, it depends on the facts. In this  case  the  form
    itself is  capable  of  supporting  either  argument:  nowhere  is  the
    Appellant asked whether he has worked unlawfully in the UK, but  he  is
    asked whether there is any other relevant matter that he would like  to
    draw to the ECOs attention. In respect of the periods of  stay  in  the
    UK, the Appellant has completed the question with  reference  to  2003-
    2007, but not mentioned the second period that  he  spent  here.  There
    could be a number of reasons for that. There may not have been room; he
    may have pressed the wrong button on the drop-down menu (on this online
    form); he may have thought he did not need  to  give  that  information
    since the ECO already had it; whether he was attempting to deceive  can
    only be gleaned from the other evidence, and the context.   The  second
    limb of the Appellant's argument addresses just that.

27. The First-tier Tribunal found that when the  Appellant  filled  in  his
    form he deliberately sought to conceal from the Respondent  the  extent
    of his immigration offending,  in  particular  the  fact  that  he  had
    returned to the UK after he was removed in 2007. I am satisfied that in
    reaching that finding the  Tribunal  appears  to  have  overlooked  the
    following matters:

          i) That this application was  supported  by  documentation  which
             clearly established that the Appellant was  in  the  UK  after
             2007.  This  included  his  marriage  certificate  issued   in
             Scotland in 2012 and statements from himself and his wife that
             they had met, formed a relationship and  married  during  this
             period.   The Tribunal failed to consider whether someone  who
             was deliberately trying to conceal that he had  come  back  to
             the UK after being removed in 2007 would  include  documentary
             evidence that plainly revealed that to be the  case,  or  base
             his entire application on an Article 8 family  life  that  was
             formed during the period in question;

         ii) That this application was made a matter  of  weeks  after  the
             first refusal, at which time the Respondent had  plainly  been
             made aware that the Appellant had had two extended periods  of
             unlawful stay in the UK;

        iii) When interviewed the Appellant openly  admitted  that  he  had
             returned to the UK after being removed.

28. All of these factors were highly pertinent to the question  of  whether
    the omission on the application form was in fact an  innocent  mistake,
    quite possibly arising from the fact that the Appellant had 'no box  to
    tick' or no room to give more information. The failure to weigh them in
    the balance renders the Tribunal's findings on deception unsafe.

29. The decision on 320(11) must therefore be set aside.  I would add  that
    the Tribunal's decision not to address Article 8 appears to be based on
    a misunderstanding of the Appellant's position:  that  the  Appellant's
    representative Mr Outtara was not seeking to  make  Razgar  submissions
    'outside of the rules' did not obviate the Tribunal's responsibility to
    consider  whether  the  discretion  under  320(11)  should  have   been
    exercised at all.  His family life with his wife was obviously relevant
    to that matter.

    S-EC.2.2.

30. It perhaps follows from what I have said above that the findings on  S-
    EC.2.2 cannot stand.  I am not satisfied, in  light  of  the  evidence,
    that this provision should ever have been invoked at all. The rule  can
    be applied if it is established that the Appellant failed  to  disclose
    facts material to the application. But it  cannot  be  so  established.
    He divulged the facts in question during the course of  his  interview,
    and in the documentation that supported his application. At its highest
    what can be said therefore, is that he  omitted  to  mention  pertinent
    information on his application form. That form was  only  one  part  of
    application.

    The Re-Made Decision

31. Before me the parties agreed that the only matter in issue arising from
    the Respondent's decision was whether the Appellant should  be  refused
    entry clearance on 320(11) grounds. For reasons I have explained above,
    the reference to S-EC.2.1 was misconceived.

32. The question before me is therefore whether the  Respondent  has  shown
    that 320(11) was properly applied in this case.

33. For the reasons set  out  above  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    previously contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the  intentions
    of the Rules, and that he has been an illegal entrant.

34. The Respondent asserts that the Appellant aggravated that offending  by
    "using an assumed identity" and seeking to deceive the ECO  in  respect
    of how long he had spent in the United Kingdom in the past.

35. Mr Wood's simple submission was that it was incumbent  on  the  ECO  to
    look at all of the evidence before him  before  reaching  the  decision
    that the Appellant was trying to conceal the fact that he had  been  in
    the United Kingdom between  December  2007  and  2015.    The  material
    pertinent to that enquiry included:

          i) The transcript of the interview with the  Appellant  conducted
             by an immigration officer in the British Embassy  in  Istanbul
             on the 22nd June 2016.   The transcript shows that when  asked
             about when he went to the United Kingdom  the  Appellant  told
             the officer that he had entered the country illegally in 2003,
             had remained illegally until 2007, returned in December  2007,
             again in a truck, before going back to Turkey with his wife in
             November 2015.  He says that he met his wife  in  Aberdeen  in
             October 2010, got engaged in 2011 and married in  August  2012
             at Aberdeen Registry Office;

         ii) The said marriage certificate;

        iii)  A  letter  and  photographs  confirming  the  same  from  the
             Appellant's wife Mandy;

         iv) An extract from  the  Turkish  government  citizenship  record
             (NUFUS) which shows an individual born on the  10th  May  1988
             with the name 'Umut Kahraman';

36. Mr Wood submits that it is quite plain from items (i)-(iii), all before
    the ECO, that the Appellant cannot possibly have been trying to conceal
    the fact that he was in the United Kingdom between  December  2007  and
    November 2015. I  agree.  The  entire  application  was  based  on  his
    residence in this country during that period, since that is when he met
    and married Mandy.  Mr Wood further submits that the use  of  the  name
    'Umut' adds little. The NUFUS record demonstrates that this is in  fact
    the correct spelling, and that the Appellant was born on the  10th  May
    1988. That an immigration officer recorded it in  2007  as  Ummet,  and
    that the day and month of the birthdate were  subsequently  transposed,
    takes the Respondent no further forward.  The only conceivable point in
    using a different identity deliberately would be to  conceal  the  fact
    that the Appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom  between  2003  and
    2007, during which time  he  received  a  police  caution.  Since  both
    matters were declared on the face of the application form I agree  that
    it is very difficult to discern what the point might have been.  Having
    had regard to all of  those  facts  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the
    Respondent had discharged the burden  of  proof  and  established  that
    there were any aggravating  features  in  the  Appellant's  immigration
    offending.   Accordingly  I  am  satisfied  that  320(11)  was  wrongly
    applied.

37. Mr McVeety accepted that if that was my finding, there was no need  for
    me to weigh in the balance  the  Article  8  issues  arising  from  the
    relationship with Mandy.   That is because  it  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant meets all of the relevant requirements of Appendix FM.

    Decisions

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside.

39. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows: "the appeal is allowed
    on human rights grounds".

40. There is no direction for anonymity.



                                                                       [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            9th October 2018

