
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18702/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|via Microsoft Teams                  |On 27 August 2021                    |
|On 10 August 2021                    |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Mr Thewarapperuma Arachchige Don                  |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain, Solicitor advocate, of Zyba Law.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

The appellant also attended via Microsoft Teams.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka born on 17 March  1977,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mace  (hereafter
    the "judge") promulgated on 26 March 2021 following  a  hearing  on  18
    March 2021 held via a live link by which the judge dismissed his appeal
    on human rights grounds against a  decision  of  the  respondent  of  1
    November 2019 to refuse his application of 7 March 2019  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  his  family  and  private
    life.

 2.  The  appellant's  private  life  claim  was  based  on  private   life
    established since his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2004  as  a
    visitor. He has not had leave since although he has  made  applications
    for leave to remain as a partner and also an asylum  claim  which  have
    been refused and his appeal dismissed (para 6 of the judge's decision).



 3. The appellant's family life claim in his application of  7  March  2019
    was  based  on  his  relationship  with  his  children.  He   began   a
    relationship with his partner, Ms Shanika Perera, in 2010. They have  a
    daughter born in June 2011 and a  daughter  born  in  July  2013.  Both
    children were born in the United Kingdom. The appellant's  partner  and
    children have limited leave to remain, granted in February 2019 (para 6
    of the judge's decision).  At  para  19  of  her  decision,  the  judge
    recorded that the elder daughter was aged 9, nearly 10  years  and  the
    younger daughter was aged 7, nearly 8 years.

 4. Certain concessions were made on the  appellant's  behalf  and  on  the
    respondent's behalf at the hearing before the judge which she  recorded
    at para 5 of her decision. This reads:

         "... After the evidence was concluded the  representative  for  the
         Home Office helpfully and sensibly  conceded  the  point  that  the
         appellant does have contact with both of his children on a  regular
         basis and  that  he  does  exercise  parental  responsibility.  The
         relationship between him and the children is genuine. On behalf  of
         the appellant it was accepted that the protection issues raised  in
         the grounds of appeal were not relevant for the  purposes  of  this
         hearing. It was also accepted that the appellant could not  succeed
         under paragraph EX. 1. as a partner and now that he and his partner
         have  resumed  their  relationship,  he  could  not  succeed  under
         EX.2.[pic] either."

 5. The judge found that  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's children to leave the  United  Kingdom.  I  agree  with  Mr
    Hussain's submission at the hearing before me that the judge made  this
    finding for the purposes of s.117B (6) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") because she referred to s.117B  at
    para 7 of her decision and (I note) also at para  22  of  her  decision
    where  she  stated  her  finding.  Her  reasons  for  her  finding  are
    summarised in part and quoted in part below.

 6. Having made her finding that it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom, the judge  stated  at
    para 23:

         "I have also considered whether there [sic] any other circumstances
         that would render the decision disproportionate in terms of Article
         8. There is clearly family life and the  [pic]decision  would  have
         consequences of such gravity to engage those rights.  The  decision
         is in accordance with  the  law.  At  this  stage  the  immigration
         history of the appellant can be taken into account. There have been
         periods during which he has remained in the UK unlawfully  although
         he has made  repeated  attempts  to  remedy  [pic]his  status.  The
         aspects of his private  and  family  life  built  up  during  those
         times[pic] should be given little weight. However, even  were  that
         not to weigh heavily against the appellant,  for  all  the  reasons
         discussed above, I am not satisfied that the decision constitutes a
         disproportionate  breach  of  the   Article   8   rights   of   the
         family.[pic]"

 7. Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shaerf  (hereafter  the
    "permission  judge")  granted  permission  to  appeal.   Although   the
    permission judge described the grounds of appeal as "verbose and prolix
    and amount to no more than a disagreement with the Judge", it is  clear
    from his final paragraph  that  he  also  granted  permission  on  "the
    express grounds" notwithstanding that he observed  that  the  appellant
    would need to consider carefully before the next hearing whether  there
    was any substance in any of them.

 8. The permission judge stated that he granted permission to appeal:

         "... on the basis that it is  "Robinson  obvious"  first  that  the
         Judge recorded at paragraph 5 of her decision the  concession  that
         Section EX.1 did not apply "as a partner" but did not  subsequently
         address the applicability or otherwise of Section EX. 1 (a)  "as  a
         parent" having regard to the nature  of  the  Appellant's  parental
         relationship also recorded at  paragraph  5  and  second  that  the
         Judge's assessment of the proportionality of  the  refusal  of  the
         Appellant's claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention
         outside the Immigration Rules is inadequate because it puts in  the
         balance only the legal nature of the Appellant's continued presence
         in the United Kingdom without reference to his agreed  relationship
         with his two children, his partner and their two children, both  of
         whom were born in the United Kingdom and by the time of the hearing
         both of whom had lived here for more than seven years."

 9. The grounds of appeal do not state, in terms, that the challenge was to
    the judge's finding that it would be  reasonable  for  the  appellant's
    children to leave the United Kingdom but the inference to be  drawn  is
    that the grounds of appeal were indeed  directed  at  challenging  that
    finding, as Mr Deller accepted at the hearing.

10. I turn now to the judge's decision.

The judge's decision

11. It is clear from the judge's decision that the appellant was  estranged
    from Ms Perera at the time of his application of 7 March 2019 for leave
    to remain. The children lived with Ms Perera in northern England.

12. The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  Ms  Perera.  To
    summarise:

    (i)  (Para 9 of the  judge's  decision)  the  appellant's  partner  and
         children were in the process of moving to the  south  so  that  the
         children could be nearer the appellant. Their  new  home  was  less
         than 5 minutes from the appellant's home.  The  appellant  and  his
         partner had looked at schools together and had chosen one together.
         Even during the time that the appellant was  not  living  with  the
         children he continued to  see  them  regularly.  In  addition,  the
         children had always had access  to  a  phone  and  have  frequently
         communicated with the appellant.

    (ii) (Para 12 of the judge's decision) the appellant's daughters do not
         speak Sinhalese. They know one or  two  words  of  greetings.  They
         cannot go to Sri Lanka as they are used to the United  Kingdom  and
         the customs and rules here. The appellant said that, if he tries to
         get his daughters to eat Sri Lankan food, they  will  say  no.  The
         children are healthy and  very  bright  and  doing  well  in  their
         studies but the appellant said that adapting is not that easy. They
         have been educated here. He would need to find an English  speaking
         school in Sri Lanka. There may be some around Colombo but they  are
         too expensive for him. There  is  a  vast  difference  between  the
         standards of [pic]education here and there and it is very unfair on
         the children.

    (iii)    (Para 13) The appellant said that he has lived in  the  United
         Kingdom for 17 years and Ms Perera has not returned  to  Sri  Lanka
         since she arrived in the UK in 2010.  His mother,  who  is  in  Sri
         Lanka, has mental health difficulties. She is being looked after by
         his brother. His father has another family in which there are  half
         siblings.

    (iv) (Para 14) Ms Perera said that she would not be  prepared  to  take
         the children to Sri Lanka. However, she also said that if it  "came
         to it", she would go there with them.

13. At paras 11 and 15 of her decision, the judge referred to the fact that
    the appellant had submitted many letters of reference from friends  and
    his church describing him as a loving  and  hardworking  father.  There
    were also  letters  from  former  colleagues  that  detailed  that  the
    appellant is a talented actor and an invaluable asset in productions as
    an actor, videographer and composer. He has worked on  commercials  and
    other projects and was described as a  well-known  personality  in  the
    community. He was described as an [pic]inventive talent.

14. Given the evidence that was before her, the judge said (para 15):

         "While the letters are dated 2015, [pic]that  is  still  some  time
         after the appellant left Sri Lanka and would indicate that he still
         has contacts there who hold him in high regard and may be  able  to
         assist him in obtaining employment.  Photographs  of  the  projects
         indicate that the appellant has  remained  involved  with  the  Sri
         Lankan community in the UK, and an article from Newslanka shows his
         involvement with a cricket event supporting Sri Lankan youth talent
         at the Surrey cricket festival."

15. At para 16, the judge said  that  the  appellant's  dedication  to  his
    children was well-established by the evidence.

16. The judge then considered the remainder of the evidence before  her  at
    paras 17-22 which read:

         "17. The starting point is that it is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children to be with both of their parents. Both the  appellant
             and his partner are loving and  committed  parents.  The  best
             interests of these children lie in them continuing to be cared
             for on a daily basis by both of their parents.  Continuity  of
             their education is also in  their  best  interests.  While  Ms
             Perera stated that she would take the children and follow  the
             appellant to Sri Lanka, her initial answer on being  asked  to
             consider that was that she would not take them. The  appellant
             was clear that he would rather be separated from the  children
             than have them leave the  UK.  Both  the  children  and  their
             mother have the right to be in the UK.

         18.  In Runa v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 514 it was  held  that  in  the
             question of whether it was reasonable for the child  to  leave
             the UK, the focus had to be on the child. Parliament  had  not
             said that whenever one parent had a right to remain in the  UK
             [pic]and  the  other  parent  did  not,  that  it   would   be
             unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  UK.  In  KO
             (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 it was held that  the  reasonableness
             of the child leaving the UK is to be considered on  the  basis
             that the facts are as they are in the real world, so  that  if
             one parent has no right to remain, but the other does, that is
             background against which  the  best  interests  assessment  is
             conducted. The ultimate question is whether it  is  reasonable
             to expect the child to follow the  parent  with  no  right  to
             remain to their  country  of  origin.  Consideration  must  be
             undertaken regardless of whether the child is  actually  going
             to leave the UK. In SSHD v AB (Jamaica) & Anor [2019] EWCA Civ
             661 also stated that there is only a  single  question  to  be
             addressed; is it reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
             UK? The fact that the [pic]child will not be expected to leave
             does not obviate the need to ask the question. If it would  be
             reasonable for the child to leave the UK with the parent being
             removed, [pic]then the decision does not constitute  a  breach
             of the Article 8 rights of the family.

         19.  The children are aged 9, nearly 10  years,  and  7,  nearly  8
             years. At their ages, school [pic]has become an important part
             of  their  lives  and  they  have  a  wider  focus  than  they
             [pic]would have done at a younger age. The longer a child  has
             lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of  at  least  seven
             years preceding the date of  the  application,  the  [pic]more
             they will have started to put down roots  and  integrate  into
             life in the UK. The age from which they have spent  that  time
             in the UK is also relevant. The older the age  at  which  they
             have done so, the more the balance will begin to shift towards
             it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave.

         20.  The children's parents have experienced life in Sri Lanka  and
             there is immediate family there who would also be able to help
             the children settle and integrate. The appellant accepted that
             there is schooling  available  where  the  children  could  be
             taught in English to a good  standard.  He  asserted  that  he
             would not be able to access that for  them  due  to  cost  and
             possible distance from his in laws home. However, there was no
             supporting evidence as to the cost of schooling. Further,  the
             documents referred to above demonstrate that the appellant was
             involved in the film industry previously  and  was  reasonably
             well known as such. He has continued that work in the  UK  and
             appears to have maintained links with previous  colleagues  in
             Sri Lanka who clearly thought highly of him. It is  reasonable
             to assume, even given the passage of time, that  he  would  be
             able to  turn  to  his  contacts  for  assistance  in  finding
             [pic]employment again in  order  to  support  his  family  and
             access a good standard of education for the children.

         21.  The children are in good health and are intelligent and  doing
             well at school. It is  without  question  that  a  move  to  a
             country  they  have  never  lived  in   before   would   cause
             considerable disruption to their lives  and  would  require  a
             considerable period of  adjustment  for  them.  Leaving  their
             friends and the country they have grown up in so far will,  no
             doubt, be upsetting  for  them.  However,  that  must  be  set
             against a  background  of  the  facts  outlined  above.  Their
             parents are from Sri Lankan. The [pic]language will have  been
             spoken in the home. They are  familiar,  at  least,  with  the
             [pic]sounds of the language and understand some words, even if
             it is not  their  first  language.  In  any  event,  there  is
             schooling available in Sri Lanka where they could continue  to
             be educated in English. The appellant has great  ambition  for
             his children to study to a level of higher education but  that
             need not be prevented by a return to Sri Lanka now. They  will
             not be deprived of the opportunity to apply to study in the UK
             in the future. The appellant has maintained links with the Sri
             Lankan  community  through   his   filming   activities,   his
             cricketing interests and friends. The  culture  of  Sri  Lanka
             will not be entirely alien to the children. There is family in
             Sri Lanka, including grandparents, who will be able to welcome
             the children and assist them, along  with  their  parents,  in
             integrating. The children are healthy and bright and have  the
             support of parents who clearly put their interests above their
             own. That will also assist in helping the children  to  manage
             change.

         22.  I have given very  careful  consideration  to  whether  it  is
             reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK given  their
             ages and their particular circumstances and the [pic]undoubted
             distress such a decision will cause them. However, for all the
             reasons given above I have come to the conclusion that section
             117B is not met and that it [pic]would not be unreasonable  to
             expect them to leave the UK."

Assessment

The first "Robinson obvious" point

17. The first "Robinson obvious" point raised by the permission  judge  was
    that the judge had failed to consider the parent route in EX.1  (a)  of
    Appendix FM. In his  opening  submissions,  Mr  Hussain  submitted,  in
    reliance upon the grant of permission, that the judge had  referred  to
    the concession on the respondent's behalf  that  the  appellant  had  a
    genuine relationship with his daughters and that he exercised  parental
    responsibility but (in Mr Hussain's submission) the judge had failed to
    conduct any consideration of the parent route in  EX.1  (a)  which  she
    failed to mention.

18. Given that the judge had considered whether it was reasonable  for  the
    appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom for  the  purposes  of
    s.117B(6), I asked Mr Hussain whether it was a material  error  of  law
    for the judge not to have considered the same  factual  issue  for  the
    purposes of the parent route in EX.1 (a) of Appendix  FM.  He  conceded
    that  he  could  not  contend  that  it  would  have  made  a  material
    difference.

19. In effect, therefore, Mr Hussain accepted that there was nothing in the
    first "Robinson obvious" point identified by the permission judge  that
    could materially assist the appellant. I will therefore make no further
    reference to it.

The second "Robinson obvious" point

20. The second "Robinson obvious" point relates to the  judge's  assessment
    at para 23 of her decision, i.e. that the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the refusal of the appellant's claim under Article 8
    of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules (my  emphasis)
    is inadequate, in that, "it puts in the balance only the  legal  nature
    of the appellant's continued presence in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    reference to his agreed relationship  with  his  partner  and  his  two
    children who were born  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  were  qualifying
    children."

21. At the hearing, Mr Hussain submitted that the judge found  at  para  23
    that the appellant's family life was engaged. One would  then  normally
    expect  a  full  analysis  of  Article  8  and  an  assessment  of  the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

22. I asked Mr Hussain what factors were not considered by the  judge  that
    she should have considered. He submitted that the fact that  the  elder
    daughter was nearly 10 years old and therefore had nearly qualified  to
    become  a  British  citizen  was  a  relevant  consideration   in   the
    proportionality balancing exercise in assessing the appellant's Article
    8 claim outside the Immigration Rules. As a British child, she would be
    entitled to pursue her education in  the  United  Kingdom.  If  she  is
    expected to leave the United Kingdom, she  would  lose  the  chance  of
    becoming a British citizen and also the rights that went  with  British
    citizenship.  This should  have  been  considered  by  the  judge  when
    assessing the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules
    which she failed to do.

23. Mr Hussain accepted that the "near-miss" principle was not available to
    the appellant. However, he submitted  that  the  argument  was  couched
    differently on the appellant's behalf, i.e.  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's elder daughter would have attained the age of 10  years  by
    the time the appellant had exhausted his appeal rights was  a  relevant
    consideration which the judge failed to take into account.

24. In response, Mr Deller submitted that it is not the case that the  two-
    step approach in considering an individual's Article 8  claim  involves
    an assessment of an individual's Article 8 claim under the  Immigration
    Rules followed by an assessment of the  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules if the Article 8 claim under the Immigration Rules is
    unsuccessful. This is because there is no longer  a  ground  of  appeal
    that a decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules,
    although it was not inherently wrong for the judge to have  dealt  with
    Article 8 following the two-step approach that she followed.

25. Mr Deller submitted that, given that the judge had considered s.117B(6)
    and whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, she had had proper regard to  the  s.117B  factors  and
    therefore did not err in  law.  All  the  factors  that  needed  to  be
    considered in the appellant's case were considered by the judge.

26. Mr Deller submitted that the fact that the appellant's  elder  daughter
    was nearly ten years did not mean that she should have been treated  by
    the judge as a British citizen. Mr Deller submitted that the  appellant
    was attempting to rely upon the "near-miss"  principle  notwithstanding
    Mr Hussain's attempt to couch his case on this issue differently.

27. In response, Mr Hussain submitted that it is necessary for the judge to
    have conducted a standalone assessment of  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim outside the Immigration Rules. Para 23 of  her  decision  was  an
    inadequate assessment.  It  only  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    immigration history and failed to take into account the fact  that  the
    appellant's elder daughter was nearly ten years old and would  be  able
    to apply for British citizenship within three  months  of  the  hearing
    date, before the appellant had exhausted his appeal rights.

28. I have carefully considered the  submissions  of  the  parties.  It  is
    plainly the case that there is no longer a right of appeal to challenge
    a refusal under the Immigration Rules. The appellant's  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave to remain
    on the basis of his family and private life was  brought  on  the  only
    ground available to him, i.e. on human rights grounds. Since  there  is
    no right of appeal against the refusal under the Immigration Rules, the
    judge's entire assessment of the appellant's Article  8  claim  was  an
    assessment of his Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules.

29.  In  undertaking  that  assessment,  the  first  issue  that  fell  for
    consideration in the circumstances of this case was  whether  s.117B(6)
    was satisfied, i.e. whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's daughters to leave the United Kingdom.  If  the  judge  had
    found that s.117B(6) was satisfied, it would not  have  been  necessary
    for her to consider whether  any  other  factors  that  also  fell  for
    consideration in the proportionality  balancing  exercise  cumulatively
    rendered the decision disproportionate. This is because the  fact  that
    s.117B(6)  was  satisfied  would  have  meant  that  the  decision  was
    disproportionate for that reason alone. That conclusion would have been
    reached in the assessment of the appellant's Article  8  claim  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

30. Given that the judge found that it would not be unreasonable to  expect
    the appellant's daughters to leave the United Kingdom, it was necessary
    for her to proceed to consider whether there were any other factors  in
    the  applicant's  case  that  also  fell  for  consideration  and  that
    cumulatively render the decision disproportionate.  That  is  precisely
    the approach the judge took.

31. It is therefore  important  to  note  that  the  two-step  approach  in
    assessing an individual's Article 8 claim  is  undertaken  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. The appellant's submission, that there is  first  an
    assessment under  the  Immigration  Rules  followed  by  an  assessment
    outside the Immigration Rules, is misconceived.

32. Given that the judge's entire assessment, in relation to both s.117B(6)
    and at para 23, related to the appellant's Article 8 claim outside  the
    Immigration Rules, the submission that  the  judge's  findings  in  the
    second and third sentences of para 23 (that there was family life, that
    the decision would have consequences of such gravity as to engage those
    rights and that the decision was in accordance  with  the  law)  should
    have been followed by a full proportionality exercise is devoid of  any
    substance. The judge's assessment of whether it would be reasonable  to
    expect the appellant's daughters to leave the United Kingdom was itself
    part of the proportionality balancing exercise that she was required to
    undertake in assessing the appellant's  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

33. I acknowledge that it would have been better if the judge had commenced
    her assessment of  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim  by  making  the
    findings she made in  the  second  and  third  sentences  of  para  23,
    followed by her assessment of whether it would be reasonable to  expect
    the appellant's daughters to leave the United Kingdom. However, that is
    a matter of form, rather than substance.

34. I therefore reject the appellant's submission that the judge  erred  by
    failing to conduct a  full  proportionality  balancing  exercise  after
    making her findings in the second and third sentences of para 23 of her
    decision. She did conduct a full  proportionality  balancing  exercise.
    Her reasoning in relation to whether or not it would be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom was part of
    that assessment.

35. The permission judge was  misconceived  in  stating  that  the  judge's
    assessment  of  proportionality  outside  the  Immigration  Rules   was
    inadequate because it put in the balance only the legal nature  of  the
    appellant's continued presence in the United Kingdom without  reference
    to his relationship  with  his  daughters  and  his  partner.  This  is
    because, as I have said, the judge's entire assessment  of  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the appellant's daughters  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom (in the context of  which  she  took  into  account  the
    appellant's relationship with his daughters and his  partner  and  that
    his daughters were born in  the  United  Kingdom  and  were  qualifying
    children) related to her assessment of  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise in relation to the appellant's Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

36. Para 18 of the  grounds  of  appeal  relies  upon  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's elder daughter would be 10 years old very  soon  and  could
    then become naturalised. At the hearing, Mr Hussain submitted that  the
    judge  erred  in  failing  to   take   into   account,   in   assessing
    proportionality, the fact that the appellant's elder daughter was three
    months short of being eligible to apply  for  British  citizenship  and
    that the judge should have taken into account  that  she  would  become
    eligible to apply for British  citizenship  before  the  appellant  had
    exhausted his appeal rights.

37. However, in the first place, this issue was  not  relied  upon  in  the
    appeal before the judge. There is no mention  of  it  in  the  skeleton
    argument that was before the judge.

38. In any event, I agree with Mr Deller that this is a near-miss  argument
    notwithstanding Mr Hussain's  attempt  to  couch  it  differently.  The
    appellant's elder daughter was not a British citizen as at the date  of
    the hearing before the judge and therefore could not be treated  as  if
    she was.

The remaining grounds

39. I shall deal first  with  the  issues/grounds  that  were  specifically
    addressed by Mr Hussain at the hearing and in his skeleton argument.

40. Para 17(v) of the grounds  of  appeal  and  para  11  of  Mr  Hussain's
    skeleton argument contend that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to
    consider certain country guidance  information  that  it  is  contended
    "supported the difficulty that anyone would have as  a  female  in  Sri
    Lanka and the difficulties in having a fulfilling and inclusive life as
    opposed to the restrictions that general Sri Lankan society places upon
    a person."

41. However, the fact is there was no country guidance  evidence  submitted
    to the judge, as Mr Hussain accepted. The appellant's skeleton argument
    that was before the judge made no mention of this  issue.  Furthermore,
    and as I said at the hearing, all that is before the Upper Tribunal  is
    the view of the author of the grounds concerning the situation  that  a
    female in Sri  Lanka  would  face  on  the  country  guidance  evidence
    considered by the author. That is no basis for any suggestion that  the
    judge erred in law in failing to take into account a view not expressed
    to her that has been taken on country guidance evidence  not  submitted
    to her in support of a submission not made to her.

42. I turn to paras 10 and 17 of the grounds of appeal and para  12  of  Mr
    Hussain's skeleton argument.

43. Para 10 of the grounds contends that there was "evidence from objective
    third party sources that suggested the significant harm that  any  such
    move [by the appellant's daughters to Sri Lanka]  would  cause  to  the
    children generally but in particular their wellbeing."

44. However, there was no such evidence before the  judge,  as  Mr  Hussain
    accepted. To the contrary, the evidence before the judge was  that  the
    children were healthy (paras 12 and 21 of the judge's decision).

45. Para 17 of the grounds of appeal reads:

         "17. In relation to KO (Nigeria) & Others v  SSHD  [20181  UKSC  53
             which set out a list of factors, it is  submitted  that  there
             are several factors in this case such  which  [sic]  were  not
             considered adequately;

             i)   There would be  a  significant  risk  to  the  children's
                  mental health

             ii)  The Appellant has not been to Sri Lanka  since  he  first
                  arrived in the UK nearly 17 years ago, his partner has not
                  been in Sri Lanka since she arrived in the UK the children
                  have never been to Sri Lanka.

             iii) The children cannot speak, read or  write  Sinhalese  and
                  there was no evidence to suggest  that  they  could  learn
                  this within a reasonable time period

             iv)  The children had never attended school in Sri  Lanka  and
                  had no familiarity with the system nor a comparable system

             v)   Country guidance  information  supported  the  difficulty
                  that anyone would have as a female in Sri  Lanka  and  the
                  difficulties in having a fulfilling and inclusive life  as
                  opposed  to  the  restrictions  that  general  Sri  Lankan
                  society places upon a person

             vi)  The significant private life of both qualifying  children
                  in the UK which demonstrated that taking  them  away  from
                  this would be unduly harsh  and  risk  their  mental  well
                  being

             These  matters  were  not   fully   applied   in   the   final
             determination."

46. At the hearing, Mr Hussain relied upon the  fact  that  the  judge  had
    referred at para 21 of her decision to it being without question that a
    move to a country the children have never lived in before  would  cause
    considerable disruption in their lives and would require  a  period  of
    adjustment for them, and that it would be no doubt upsetting  for  them
    to leave their friends and the  country  they  have  grown  up  in.  He
    therefore submitted that the judge  accepted  that  there  would  be  a
    psychological impact on the children which  he  submitted  should  have
    been considered  in  the  general  proportionality  balancing  exercise
    outside the Immigration Rules.

47. However, I revert to the point I have made above  in  relation  to  the
    second "Robinson obvious" point. The judge's entire assessment  of  the
    case  related  to  her  assessment  of  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise outside the Immigration Rules. Thus, by  taking  into  account
    what she considered would be the psychological impact on  the  children
    of leaving the United Kingdom in the absence of any  medical  or  other
    expert evidence, she went as far  as  she  could  in  considering  this
    aspect of the appellant's case.

48. Mr Hussain submitted that the psychological impact on  the  appellant's
    children of leaving the United Kingdom as  acknowledged  by  the  judge
    taken together with the remaining factors relied upon at para 12  (ii)-
    (vi) of the grounds should have been sufficient to "get  the  appellant
    over the line".

49. I have dealt with the point raised at  para  17(v).  I  agree  with  Mr
    Deller that the remainder of para 17 of the grounds, which is  mirrored
    in para 12 of Mr Hussain's skeleton argument, amounts to  a  perversity
    challenge. Alternatively, para 17 of the grounds  and  para  12  of  Mr
    Hussain's skeleton argument amount to no more than a disagreement  with
    the judge's reasoning and findings. She did consider the factors relied
    upon.

50. It is not necessary for me to set out in terms the  remaining  grounds,
    which the permission judge correctly described as verbose  and  prolix,
    and the remainder of Mr Hussain's skeleton argument  given  that  these
    documents are in file. I am satisfied  that  these  grounds/submissions
    amount to no more than a disagreement with the reasoning  and  findings
    of the judge. The judge did consider all relevant factors.

51. For all of the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the  judge  did
    not err in law.

    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of any error of law sufficient  to  require  it  to  be  set
    aside.

    The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Upper Tribunal Judge Gill       Date: 11 August 2021


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

