
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18672/2016
                                                               hu/20140/2016
                                                               hu/20142/2016
                                                               hu/20143/2016
                                                               hu/20146/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th January 2019                          |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                            f h (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           S H (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           A M A (THIRD APPELLANT)
                          M S A (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                            S A FIFTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Ali of Counsel instructed by IAM Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, a Home Office Presenting Officer



Anonymity under Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  3rd  September
    1977.  The second appellant was born on 23rd December 1978 and  is  the
    wife of the first named appellant.  The third named appellant was  born
    on 19th May 2008 and is now a British subject.   The  fourth  appellant
    was born on 18th February 2010, the fifth appellant was  born  on  18th
    May 2012 and the last two appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan  along
    with their parents, the first two appellants.

2.   At the hearing before me today Ms Aboni told me that  she  and  Mr  Ali
    had already had the  opportunity  of  discussing  matters  and  it  was
    accepted that there was an error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge in that the judge failed to apply Home Office policy.  I  suspect
    that that may well have been because the Secretary of State also failed
    to follow Home Office policy.

3.   The situation now is that one of the appellants has  become  registered
    as a British subject and, in accordance with  Home  Office  policy,  Ms
    Aboni told me all the appellants are entitled  to  have  their  appeals
    allowed.  She invited me to prepare a short determination setting aside
    the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien  promulgated  on
    5th September 2017 and to substitute his decision with my own  allowing
    all the appeals.  I am happy to do so.

4.   The decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien contains  a  material
    error of law and is hereby set aside.  I  substitute  my  decision  for
    that of judge O'Brien.  All the appellant's appeals are allowed.


Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.

    Had the respondent followed Home Office guidance, the application would
    have been granted obviating the need for an appeal.



Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal

31st January 2019
