
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18520/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 16 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                  Faiza [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M [R], Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jackson promulgated 5 June 2019  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 20 August 2018  to
    refuse her application made on 4 June 2018 for  entry  clearance  as  a
    partner of Muhammad [R], a person present and settled in the UK.

 2. Mr [R] appeared in person.  He told me he was not legally  represented.
    He produced a short summary of his case  notes  and  did  not  seek  an
    adjournment.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  a
    single ground only, in relation to the  issue  of  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the best interests of
    the child of the appellant and the sponsor, who is a  British  citizen.
    Permission  was  refused  on  all  other   grounds.    Apparently   the
    application for permission was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal  but  on
    that occasion Upper Tribunal Judge  Frances  refused  permission  on  4
    November 2019, noting that the renewed grounds did  not  challenge  the
    refusal of permission on the remaining grounds.  It  follows  that  the
    sole issue for the Upper Tribunal to consider relates to the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's treatment of the best interests of the British citizen
    child who is and always has been since birth resident in Pakistan  with
    the appellant.

 4. Prior to the hearing, the Tribunal received a letter and bundle from Mr
    [R] seeking to adduce further evidence.  The bundle contains 151  pages
    and includes updated witness statements  from  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor as well as other documentary  materials.   Those  matters  were
    considered by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  22  November  2019  when  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins asked the appellant to be reminded that she  can
    only rely on material that was not before the First-tier Tribunal  with
    the Upper Tribunal's permission, and if she  makes  an  application  in
    accordance with Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  It is said "the judge deciding the appeal  on  6  December
    2019 will decide to what extent the appellant can rely  on  the  bundle
    but it would be helpful that Mr [R] reads Rule 15(2A) and shows how his
    application complies with the Rule".  Before  me  today  there  was  no
    formal Rule 15(2A) application.

 5. Mr [R] told me he did want to rely on the materials in his new  bundle.
    However, I had to explain to him that the ambit of the  Upper  Tribunal
    at this stage is confined to determining whether there is an  error  of
    law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  is  further
    confined by the restriction of the permission to appeal to  one  ground
    only, namely the best  interests  of  the  British  citizen  child.   I
    explained on a number of occasions to Mr [R] that to  that  extent  the
    materials in his bundle seeking to re-argue the appeal are not relevant
    to the issue of an error of law and that I could  not  take  them  into
    account and would not be referring to them in my decision.

 6. I have, however, taken account of Mr [R]'s single typed sheet  of  case
    notes in which he sets out that he believes that he and  his  wife  are
    victims of  injustice,  that  the  refusal  of  their  application  was
    immoral, that there was no  valid  reason  for  the  refusal,  that  no
    consideration or compassion had been shown towards them or their child,
    and that they were all suffering  by  this  "ill-fated  decision".   He
    suggested that  they  are  being  punished  for  "being  down-to-earth,
    truthful and law-abiding citizens".  He  states  that  it  is  now  two
    years, three months and 27 days since their marriage,  which  has  been
    ruined by the "cruel separation" imposed upon them.  He said  he  would
    prefer to be dead rather than suffer from worry from pain to  his  wife
    and son by the separation imposed on them.

 7. I have taken those matters into account as best I can but, in  reality,
    they are a plea for compassion and reconsideration which is outside the
    ambit of what the Upper Tribunal  has  to  decide  in  this  case.   As
    explained to Mr [R] I have to determine whether or  not  there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that that decision should be set aside to be re-made.  However, it
    remains the case that the sole issue for consideration is that  of  the
    judge's treatment of the best interests of the British citizen child.

 8. The background to the case  is  unusual,  as  the  sponsor  in  the  UK
    obtained indefinite leave to remain in 2017 on  the  basis  of  a  long
    term, same-sex relationship with a civil  partner.   That  relationship
    has now terminated, but in what circumstances is  not  entirely  clear.
    However, the marriage to the appellant took place on  10  August  2017,
    within a month of first meeting  in  July  2017,  and  apparently  very
    shortly after the termination of the same-sex relationship. The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge took into account that sexual  orientation  may  be
    fluid.  The judge also rejected  the  respondent's  concerns  that  the
    sponsor was already married or in a civil partnership and therefore not
    free to enter into a marriage.

 9. At paragraph 37 of the decision, the judge noted that the appellant and
    the sponsor had a child who was a British citizen but stated, "the  law
    does not require me to bear in mind the interests  of  the  appellant's
    child, but I do so nonetheless".  The first part of that  statement  is
    obviously based on the fact that Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 applies to a child in  the  UK.  However,  the
    judge confirmed that, in any event, that  the  best  interests  of  the
    child were taken into account.  It is worth noting that at the date  of
    the application the child had not yet been born; it  appears  that  the
    child was born a month after the decision of the Secretary of State  in
    August 2018.

10. It is important to understand  that  the  overall  findings,  in  which
    context permission to appeal has twice been refused, were to the effect
    that the judge found the appellant had failed to  discharge  the  civil
    burden of proof to demonstrate that there was  a  genuine  relationship
    between herself in Pakistan and the sponsor in the UK. As  I  explained
    to Mr [R], that  finding  must  stand,  so  the  consideration  of  the
    outstanding issue of the best interests of the child  must  proceed  on
    the basis that there is no family life between the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor sufficient to meet the  Rules  or  to  engage  Article  8  ECHR
    outside the Rules.  It follows that whatever the best interests of  the
    child, whether to remain in Pakistan with the appellant or to  come  to
    the UK to join his father as he is entitled to by  virtue  of  being  a
    British citizen, there is no basis to grant leave to the  appellant  to
    come to the UK to join the sponsor, as they have no extant family life.
     At the present time, the child is in Pakistan with the  appellant  and
    all the appellant's family life is there, with that child, and  not  in
    the UK.

11. Of course, it is open to the sponsor to return  to  Pakistan  to  enjoy
    family life there.  He has had no difficulty visiting them and he  told
    me that he financially supported them but said he could not go to  live
    in Pakistan with them because he had established employment in the  UK,
    was settled here and could not go.  He said it was not "practical"  for
    him to live in Pakistan.  The UK is not obliged to give effect  to  the
    sponsor's  convenience.  His  reasoning  for  not  going  to  join  the
    appellant in Pakistan is  long  way  from  there  being  insurmountable
    obstacles to the claimed family being continued in Pakistan.  As he has
    been to visit them on a number of occasions, and as he originates  from
    Pakistan, there seems no valid reason why he could not, if he so chose,
    continue any claimed family life with the appellant and  his  child  in
    Pakistan. However, he chooses not to do so.

12. It is also relevant that the child is still in Pakistan and  has  never
    been in the UK.  It is the decision of the  sponsor,  Mr  [R]  and  the
    appellant as to where the child lives. As he is a British citizen,  the
    child cannot be prevented from coming to the UK. This Tribunal  has  to
    consider the situation in the real world, in which the child is in fact
    living with his mother in Pakistan.  On that basis, I cannot  see  that
    the best interests of  the  child  could  be  anything  other  than  to
    continue to live with his primary carer in Pakistan, the country of his
    birth and ethnic background. At some stage he may be brought to the  UK
    but at the present time he is  far  too  young  to  make  any  decision
    himself  and  will  not  be  conscious  of  being  separated  from  the
    appellant, since he will have seen him only very infrequently since his
    birth.

13. Looking at the decision in the round and bearing in mind the limitation
    that the Upper Tribunal can only  interfere  with  the  decision  on  a
    material error of law by the First-tier Tribunal, and bearing  in  mind
    the limited grant of permission relating to the best interests  of  the
    child, I find that even though the First-tier Tribunal Judge could have
    set out more clearly within the decision  the  best  interests  of  the
    child, the failure to do so is not  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  As the judge stated at paragraph 38, the primary question  was
    whether the appellant had established a genuine  relationship  with  Mr
    [R] in the UK. Unfortunately for Mr [R] the judge's conclusion on  that
    was that she had not. At paragraph 59 the judge stated:

         "I find that the appellant has not proved to the necessary standard
         that there is a genuine and long-standing relationship with Mr [R].
          Article 8 does not therefore come into play as the  appellant  has
         not to my  mind  shown  a  genuine  private/family  life  with  her
         sponsor. As such, I do not consider whether any interference  would
         be disproportionate."

14. As already stated above, I have to proceed on the basis that there is a
    finding that cannot be challenged that  the  appellant  does  not  have
    family life with Mr [R]. In the circumstances, I cannot  see  that  any
    further consideration of the best interests of  the  child  could  have
    made any material difference to the outcome of that appeal.



Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point law.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                       Dated                 12 December 2019




To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 12 December 2019

