
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18508/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 March 2021                      |On 9 March 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                        NESHALKUMAR DALSUKBHAI NANDHA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik instructed by Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 30 June 2020 the Upper Tribunal set  aside  a  decision  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal, finding a judge of that Tribunal had erred  in
        law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  by
        failing  to  properly  conduct  the   article   8   proportionality
        assessment.
     2. Directions were given for the provision  of  further  documents  to
        enable the Upper Tribunal to consider this  matter  afresh  with  a
        view to substituting a decision to  either  allow  or  dismiss  the
        appeal.




Background


     3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 14 August  1986.  There
        are a number of preserved findings  from  the  First-tier  decision
        including procedural history,  the  finding  the  appellant  cannot
        establish 10 years lawful residence in the United Kingdom and  that
        the appellant had worked in breach of a condition attached  to  his
        leave. It is also recorded as not being disputed that the appellant
        has family life in the United Kingdom with  his  wife  and  son  in
        addition to his private life.
     4. The Secretary  of  State  filed  her  skeleton  argument  dated  18
        September 2020 in which it is written:


        3.   The error of law decision  preserves  the  findings  that  the
             Appellant did work in breach of his conditions  and  that  his
             statement  of  additional  grounds  did  not   constitute   an
             application  which  triggered  an  extension  of  leave  under
             section 3C(2)(a). It is not known whether the Appellant  still
             seeks to argue otherwise.


        4.   It is envisaged therefore that the Tribunal will now provide a
             decision weighing the factors relevant Article 8  against  the
             requirements of  the  relevant  statute,  including  the  best
             interests of the UK-born child Dishal Nandha, who has now been
             in the country for six years and eight months. Dishal  barring
             the case making up  good  a  case  under  paragraph  276  ADE,
             success can only follow a conclusion  that  the  circumstances
             here are such as to compel a  conclusion  in  the  Appellant's
             favour.


        Conclusion


        5.   On the assumption that the matters preserved in the  error  of
             law decision remain intact, the Tribunal's task is  to  decide
             whether the circumstances make out a case that  removal  would
             be unlawful under section 6  (1)  HRA.  The  Secretary  States
             asserts that they do not.


     5. It is also accepted that the appellant was  never  made  liable  to
        removal  under  section  10(1)(a)  and  that  his  leave  was   not
        curtailed, lawfully or otherwise. The respondent accepts there  are
        errors on the  face  of  the  notice  under  challenge  failing  to
        recognise changes to section 10. This does not, however, change the
        fact that the appellant's leave expired on 2 May 2016.
     6. A further development in relation to the factual matrix is that the
        appellant's child Dishal, who was born on 14 November 2013,  became
        a 'qualifying child' on 14 November  2020  having  completed  seven
        years residence in the United Kingdom.

Discussion

     7. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a  person  who
        is under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British  citizen,  or  (b)
        has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  seven
        years or more.  If a child is a qualifying child for  the  purposes
        of section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  as  amended,  the  issue  will
        generally be whether it is not reasonable for that child to return.
     8. The Court of Appeal have stated that  the  tribunal  must  ask  the
        question whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
        UK even if there is no question of the child actually  leaving  the
        UK.  Singh LJ said in SSHD v AB (Jamaica)  &  AO  (Nigeria)  [2019]
        EWCA Civ 661 "It is clear, in my view, that the question which  the
        statute requires to be  addressed  is  a  single  question:  is  it
        reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK? It does not consist
        of two questions, as suggested by the Secretary of  State.  If  the
        answer to the single question is  obvious,  because  it  is  common
        ground that the child will not be expected to leave  the  UK,  that
        does not mean that the question does  not  have  to  be  asked;  it
        merely means that the answer to the question is: No." The Court  of
        Appeal also made clear that the conduct of the parent is irrelevant
        to s 117B(6)  of the 2002 Act unless  of  course  the   parent   is
        the  subject  of  deportation  proceedings  so  that  S117C  is  in
        play.
     9. This is not a deportation appeal.
    10. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  lawfully  in  2008  as  a
        student. His wife entered the United Kingdom as a dependent in 2011
        with their son being born in 2013.
    11. The child has only lived in the United Kingdom  and  is  completely
        dependent in respect of both his family life and the main  core  of
        his private life upon his mother and father, neither of  whom  have
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom in their own right.  This  is
        therefore not a case where reasonableness of  the  child's  removal
        has to be considered against the background where  one  parent  may
        remain in the United Kingdom.
    12. It is necessary to consider the issue of reasonableness in the real
        world. The child, who remains an Indian national  and  who  is  the
        holder of an Indian passport, is said to only speak English whereas
        the appellant's evidence in cross examination was that he  and  his
        wife speak both English and Gujrati. The  appellant's  evidence  in
        English was heavily accented and it  may  well  be  that  the  more
        common language used in the home environment is Gujarati as well as
        English, of which the child will have some knowledge.
    13. Taking the appellant's case at its highest, that his son  can  only
        speaks English, it is not made out that this makes his leaving  the
        UK to live in India unreasonable, per se.  English  is  a  language
        commonly spoken in India. Whilst Hindi is described as the official
        language English is the associated official language  and  is  used
        widely throughout India. Mrs Pettersen's submission that the  child
        could be educated in English,  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of
        English language schools in India, was not countered by Mr Malik in
        his submissions.
    14. The appellant described his son as a  very  bright  boy.  There  is
        within the appeal bundle a report from  Dishal's  school  based  on
        learning between September 2019 - March 2020  indicating  areas  of
        expected attainment, science and other curricular  activities  with
        accelerated progress in relation to English reading and maths.  The
        teachers end of year comments read:

Dishal has been a pleasure to teach during Year 1.  He  has  achieved  above
aged related  expectations  in  maths  and  reading  subjects  and  this  is
testimony to how hard he  has  worked  throughout  the  year.  Dishal  is  a
pleasant, polite and well mannered child who appears happy at school. He  is
developing self-confidence and becoming  more  independent  in  thought  and
action. Recently he has impressed me with his improved  handwriting.  During
maths  lessons  Dishal  appears  to  be  more  confident  in  responding  to
questions and enjoys practical work in maths.

...

    15. Whilst it is accepted any change in school, let alone  a  different
        educational system in a different country, can be challenging there
        was no evidence provided to show that Dishal will be unable to cope
        with the same, especially with the support of his parents.
    16. The appellant was particularly vocal  about  Dishal's  interest  in
        astronomy but his claim that he will not be able continue with such
        interest or learning if returned to India was not made out  on  the
        evidence. India has recently joined the 'space race' by  sending  a
        satellite into orbit and opportunities for those wishing  to  learn
        about such issues has not been shown not to be available to a child
        such as Dishal. It was not, in any event, made out that there would
        be  any  impairment  to  Dishal's  ability  to  attain   his   best
        educationally, or beyond, if he left the United Kingdom.
    17. There was little evidence  led  in  relation  to  ties  to  school,
        friendship groups, or the  wider  community  in  the  UK,  to  show
        Dishal's removal would have an unacceptable impact upon  the  child
        if the same was lost to  him  and  he  had  to  reform  such  bonds
        elsewhere.
    18. In terms of having to move to a different country and  adapt  to  a
        different lifestyle within that country, the foundation of Dishal's
        life is his relationship with his parents who lived  in  India  and
        have experience of living there  until  they  came  to  the  United
        Kingdom, and who is not been shown will not be able to support  and
        assist their son in making the necessary transition.
    19. Mrs Petterson asked the appellant about the presence of  family  in
        India and it is clear that there  are  family  members,  from  both
        sides.  It was not made out such family would not be able  to  also
        provide assistance to Dishal if required in addition  to  providing
        support  for  the  family  generally   whilst   they   re-establish
        themselves in India.
    20. It was not made out that Dishal will experience destitution as both
        his father and mother are educated and it was not been  shown  they
        will be unable to  secure  employment;  enabling  them  to  provide
        adequately for their family's needs.
    21. The best interests of  Dishal  are  to  remain  with  his  parents.
        Although the family would prefer to remain in the United Kingdom to
        enable both the adults and Dishal to continue to benefit  from  all
        the UK offers, it is not made out it is not reasonable in  all  the
        circumstances to expect Dishal to leave United  Kingdom  to  go  to
        India with his parents or that the child's best  interests  require
        him to remain in the UK.
    22. In relation to the family life aspect of the claim, as  the  family
        will return as a unit there will be no disruption with family  life
        sufficient to warrant a finding that article 8 will be  engaged  on
        this basis.
    23. In relation to the private life element, the appellant entered  the
        United Kingdom as a student with  his  leave  continuing  until  it
        expired on the 2 May  2016  as  noted  above.  The  nature  of  the
        appellant's lawful leave was as a student which has always been  of
        a  temporary  nature  making  his  status  in  the  United  Kingdom
        precarious. The appellant's wife entered as a  dependent  upon  him
        with leave in line. Her status has also been precarious too.
    24. It is a preserved finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
        appellant worked in breach of a  condition  of  his  entry  to  the
        United Kingdom. Whilst the  appellant  seeks  to  raise  again  his
        objection to this finding, repeating his claim that he was  subject
        to abuse by the immigration officers who encountered him working in
        breach, this has not been shown to have any merit or to warrant the
        finding that the appellant had worked in breach of a  condition  of
        entry being overturned. As noted  at  [24]  of  the  Error  of  Law
        decision:

        24.  Working in breach of a condition of entry is a serious  matter
             as recognised by the Court of Appeal in  ZS  (Jamaica)  [2012]
             EWCA Civ 1639 where it is written:


             27.  Overall, the judge seems to me, with all respect, to have
                  approached the assessment of the  best  interests  of  the
                  second appellant on an inadequate  basis  and  also  seems
                  almost entirely  to  have  downplayed  the  countervailing
                  matters requiring assessment in  the  balancing  exercise.
                  Thus the judge virtually explains away the serious  breach
                  of the Immigration Rules by the first appellant - who as a
                  Jamaican national had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
                  temporary purposes with no legitimate expectation of being
                  allowed to remain permanently and with, as  she  knew,  no
                  right to work for the hours she did - by  saying  that  it
                  was driven "by necessity"  and  by  describing  it  almost
                  dismissively  as  a  "transgression"  which  was  not  "so
                  heinous" as to require removal. But this was on any view a
                  serious matter and should have been accorded  commensurate
                  seriousness as a countervailing factor  in  the  balancing
                  exercise in the assessment of the proportionality  of  the
                  proposed removal.

    25. As submitted by Mrs Petterson the appellant is unable to  meet  the
        suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules as  a  result  of
        his conduct.
    26. It was not made out that the appellant or his  wife  could  succeed
        under  the  Immigration  Rules  making  the  question  whether  any
        interference with the private life formed by the appellant and  his
        wife in the United Kingdom, whilst accepting it engages article  8,
        will result in consequence is sufficiently serious to outweigh  the
        public interest relied upon by the Secretary of State.
    27. Section 117A and B of the Nationality, Immigration Asylum Act  2002
        read:

        ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


        117A Application of this Part

        (1)   This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
         family life under Article 8, and
             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.
         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
         117B, and
             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's right
             to respect for private and family life is justified under
             Article 8(2).


         117B Article8:public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases:
         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
    the public interest.
         (2)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-
             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
         (3)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4)      Little weight should be given to-
              (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
             established by a person at a time when the person is in the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.
         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-
             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
         the United Kingdom.

    28. The private life relied upon by the appellant and  his  wife  is  a
        private life  that  has  been  formed  during  a  time  when  their
        immigration status is precarious. Whilst case law has made it clear
        that this is not a rigid test it is not made out on  the  facts  of
        this appeal that there is any aspect  of  the  appellant's  private
        life that warrants other than little weight being attached to it.
    29. Mr Malik submitted that even though the appellant's  leave  expired
        in 2016 he remained in the United Kingdom thereafter  awaiting  the
        outcome of various applications that he made  as  set  out  in  his
        immigration  history,  leading  to  the  refusal  in  2018  of  the
        application for indefinite leave to remain which  was  the  refusal
        under appeal before the First-tier   Tribunal.  Those  applications
        did not have the effect of conferring leave upon the  appellant  as
        the appellants letter of 15 February 2016 did not have  the  effect
        of extending his leave pursuant to section 3C  of  the  Immigration
        Act 1971 (as amended); as section 3C is triggered  specifically  by
        an application which is undecided when leave  expires  whereas  the
        letter of 15 February 2016 was not an application. The  application
        process is  governed  by  the  immigration  rules  and  includes  a
        requirement that the relevant form is used and the fee paid neither
        of which occurred in this case. The letter did not  seek  leave  to
        remain but rather to  resist  removal.  Circumstances  required  to
        engage section 3C were not made out on  the  facts  of  this  case.
        Nothing was established at the hearing to warrant  a  finding  that
        the appellant's  leave  was  anything  other  than  precarious  and
        expired on 2 May 2016.
    30. Whilst the appellant speaks English and he and his wife have a good
        level  of  education  the  ability  to  speak  English  and  to  be
        financially  independent  is  a  neutral  matter  so  far  as   the
        assessment is concerned in this case. The ability to speak  English
        and be financially independent means no  adverse  finding  is  made
        against the appellant on the basis he is unable to  satisfy  either
        of these requirements.
    31. The appellant has never been given any reason to  believe  that  he
        will be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom unless  he  could
        establish lawful reason for so doing.
    32. In this case it is not made out he will not have family support  in
        India or be able to re-establish himself into a  country  where  he
        lived prior to entry to the United Kingdom.  It has not  been  made
        out  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to   his   ability   to
        reintegrate himself and his family. The appellant and his wife have
        contacts within India on  both  sides  of  the  family,  speak  the
        language, and there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  an
        entitlement to leave pursuant to paragraph 276ADE on the  basis  of
        insurmountable obstacles.
    33. Mr Malik referred to paragraph EX.1. of the Immigration  Rules  but
        this is not a freestanding provision. The rule reads:

        EX.1. This paragraph applies if

        1. (a)
               (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
               relationship with a child who-
                        (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the
                        age of 18 years when the applicant was first granted
                        leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;
                        (bb) is in the UK;
                        (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                        continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                        preceding the date of application; and
               (ii) taking into account their best interests as a primary
               consideration, it would not be reasonable to expect the child
               to leave the UK; or
        2. (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
           a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in
           the UK, or in the UK with refugee leave, or humanitarian
           protection, in the UK with limited leave under Appendix EU in
           accordance with paragraph GEN.1.3.(d), or in the UK with limited
           leave as a worker or business person under Appendix ECAA
           Extension of Stay in accordance with paragraph GEN.1.3.(e), and
           there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
           partner continuing outside the UK.

        EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
        obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
        faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
        life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
        would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
        partner.


    34. As noted above the evidence does not support a  finding  that  when
        taking into account the best interests of the child  as  a  primary
        consideration it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
        leave the United Kingdom. Similarly, it has not been  made  out  on
        the evidence that there are any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
        family as a whole returning to and  re-establishing  themselves  in
        India or continuing the family life that they enjoy in  the  United
        Kingdom in India.
    35.  Whilst  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  although  the  appellant   had
        overstayed it was only for a limited period of time the fact is  he
        did overstay. The finding the appellant worked  in  breach  of  the
        conditions of his leave is a serious matter  as  confirmed  by  the
        Court of Appeal.
    36. It is not made out section 55 issues and the best interests of  the
        child warrant a finding that the only option is for  the  child  to
        remain in the United Kingdom even though the child has been born in
        this country and attends school. The  question  of  whether  it  is
        reasonable for the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  has  been
        considered with  the  required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny,  but
        insufficient evidence  provided,  as  noted  above,  to  warrant  a
        finding in the appellant's favour.
    37. The question in all cases of this nature when one is assessing  the
        proportionality balance  is  whether  the  weight  given  to  those
        matters relied upon by the appellant  outweigh  the  right  of  the
        Secretary of State to have an effective  and  workable  immigration
        policy. In this case I find the Secretary of State has  established
        that any interference in the private lives of any  member  of  this
        family unit, including the  child,  is  not  enough.  The  evidence
        relied  upon  by  the  appellant  in  opposing  the   decision   is
        insufficient to establish that the weight that can be attributed to
        the same is sufficient to outweigh the public interest in removal.


Decision

    38. I dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    39. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 5 March 2021


