
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: HU/18806/2019 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2020                             |On 18 January 2021            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                               OSAMUDIAMEN [E]

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Mr M Moksud, Lincoln Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
indicated that I would allow the appeal but reserved  my  reasons,  which  I
now give. The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Nigerian national with date  of  birth  given  as
   5.2.96, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  12.3.20,  dismissing  on
   all grounds his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 5.11.19, to refuse his application for Leave to Remain in the UK on
   article 8 ECHR family and private life grounds as the father of a British
   citizen daughter (date of birth  7.8.16)  and  his  relationship  with  a
   national of Sierra Leone having settled status in the UK.

2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  on  17.6.20.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Kamara  granted  permission  on  30.7.20,  considering  it
   arguable that in view of the fact that there were  ongoing  Family  Court
   proceedings, evidence from the  Family  Court  would  have  assisted  the
   judge, and the failure to invoke the Family Court Protocol left the judge
   to make assumptions about the  progress  of  those  proceedings  and  the
   quality of the appellant's contact with his British child.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  I  have  also  received  the
   respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 21.8.20,

4. The appellant has sought to  adduce  further  evidence  from  the  Family
   Court, said to have been attached to a late-submitted  fax  sent  to  the
   Upper Tribunal on 4.1.21. However, no such attachment was  provided  with
   the single-page fax letter. The letter purports that the Family Court has
   authorised  the  disclosure  of  certain  documents  to  the  appellant's
   immigration legal representatives but prohibits the public disclosure. It
   is not  clear  from  this  whether  authority  has  been  given  to  make
   disclosure to the Upper Tribunal for  the  purpose  of  considering  this
   appeal.

5. In any event, at this stage this appeal is  limited  to  considering  not
   whether the appellant has or  has  not  been  granted  contact  with  his
   daughter, but whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  its
   handling of the issue of there being Family Court proceedings relevant to
   the issues before the First-tier Tribunal, including the  extent  of  the
   appellant's family life with his daughter and her best interests. In  the
   premises,  at  this  stage  I  decline  to  consider  any  Family   Court
   proceedings or related  material  that  was  not  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and in respect of which it remains unclear whether the appellant
   is entitled to disclose the documentation to the Tribunal. As this matter
   is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, for  the  reasons  set  out
   below, it will be open to the appellant to seek permission of the  Family
   Court to disclose the materials and decisions he wishes to  rely  on,  or
   for the First-tier Tribunal to  invoke  the  Family  Court  Protocol,  if
   deemed appropriate.

6. Contrary to the understanding  of  the  judge  granting  permission,  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge was aware of and did consider the Family  Court
   Protocol, as can be seen from the reference to the Protocol  at  [34]  of
   the decision. The judge set  out  from  [31]  onwards  the  very  limited
   information  provided  to  the  Tribunal  as  to  the  progress  of   the
   appellant's attempt to obtain contact with his daughter in  the  face  of
   opposition by her mother. The judge was told that a  Cafcass  report  had
   been commissioned but that by the date of the First-tier Tribunal  appeal
   hearing the appellant had  not  then  been  contacted  for  interview.  I
   understand that report has now been completed, although I have  not  seen
   it.

7. At [34] of the decision, the judge found that the considerable  delay  in
   pursuing contact with his daughter seriously undermined  the  appellant's
   credibility. The judge concluded  that  the  belated  institution  of  an
   application for contact was motivated by an intention to delay or prevent
   his removal from the UK, rather than any genuine interest  or  commitment
   on his part. It was in those circumstances that  the  judge  declined  to
   invoke the Family Court Protocol. The judge then went on at [37]  of  the
   decision to observe that no evidence had been adduced to show that it was
   in the child's best interests to see the father she has  not  seen  since
   May 2017, and then only briefly. Ultimately, the judge concluded that the
   appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  in  respect  of
   either daughter or current partner, and in consideration  of  family  and
   private life outside the Rules pursuant to article 8 ECHR, concluded that
   the respondent's refusal decision was proportionate to those rights.

8. At [34] of the decision the judge also  referenced  the  guidance  of  RS
   (India) [2012] UKUIT 00218 (IAC), which held that, (i) Where  a  claimant
   appeals against a decision to deport or remove and there are  outstanding
   family proceedings relating to a child of the claimant, the judge of  the
   IAC should first consider: a) Is the outcome of the  contemplated  family
   proceedings likely to be material to the  immigration  decision?  b)  Are
   there compelling public interest reasons to exclude the claimant from the
   United Kingdom irrespective of the outcome of the family  proceedings  or
   the best interest of the child? c) In the  case  of  contact  proceedings
   initiated by an appellant in an immigration appeal, is there  any  reason
   to believe that the family proceedings have been instituted to  delay  or
   frustrate removal and  not  to  promote  the  child's  welfare?  (ii)  In
   assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want to  consider:
   the degree of the claimant's previous interest in and  contact  with  the
   child, the timing of contact proceedings and the  commitment  with  which
   they have been progressed, when a decision is likely to be reached,  what
   materials (if any) are already available or  can  be  made  available  to
   identify pointers  to  where  the  child's  welfare  lies?  (iii)  Having
   considered these matters the judge will then have to decide: a) Does  the
   claimant have at least an Article 8 right to remain until the  conclusion
   of the family proceedings? b) If so, should the appeal be  allowed  to  a
   limited extent and a discretionary leave be directed as per the  decision
   on MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133? c)  Alternatively,  is  it  more
   appropriate for a short period of an adjournment to be granted to  enable
   the core decision to be made in the family proceedings? d) Is  it  likely
   that the family court would be assisted by a view on the present state of
   knowledge of whether the appellant would be  allowed  to  remain  in  the
   event that the outcome of the family proceedings is  the  maintenance  of
   family contact between him or her and a child resident here.

9. Although referencing RS, the First-tier Tribunal did not make a  reasoned
   assessment of the above considerations. Clearly,  the  judge  formed  the
   opinion that the belated contact proceedings did not  reflect  a  genuine
   interest in his young child, whom he had only briefly last  seen  in  May
   2017. However, the judge did not identify compelling reasons  to  exclude
   the appellant notwithstanding whatever the child's best  interests  might
   be. Neither did the judge overtly consider whether the outcome  of  those
   proceedings would likely be relevant to the article 8 private and  family
   life considerations in the appeal against refusal of an  application  for
   leave to remain on article 8 grounds. Essentially, the  judge  jumped  to
   the third consideration set out above  and  effectively  disregarded  the
   others.

10. Further, as the judge granting permission pointed out,  paragraph  6  of
   the Protocol provides:

      "It is not the role of judges in either jurisdiction  to  predict  the
      outcome of the  proceedings  in  the  other  jurisdiction.  Where  the
      decision in the Family Court is likely to be a  weighty  consideration
      in the immigration decision, it is anticipated that it  will  normally
      be necessary for the Tribunal to wait until the Family Court judge has
      reached a decision on the issue relevant to the immigration appeal. If
      so, either the appeal will be allowed by the Tribunal in  anticipation
      of a short period of leave  being  granted  or  the  hearing  will  be
      adjourned, depending  on  the  anticipated  timescale  of  the  family
      proceedings."

11. The facts of this case  seem  to  fall  entirely  within  the  situation
   described above. I am satisfied that  even  on  the  limited  information
   available to the First-tier Tribunal, the issue of contact was likely  to
   be relevant to the issues in the appeal and a "weighty  consideration  in
   the immigration decision", so that the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
   either invoked the Family Court Protocol or, at the very  least,  awaited
   the outcome of the Family Court proceedings or further  information  from
   that court. This was not a deportation case and a further period of  time
   whilst the contact proceedings were resolved would not seem unreasonable,
   given the relevance to the article 8 issues, including the best interests
   of the child. To his credit, in his submissions Mr McVeety accepted  that
   there were no compelling reasons for removal regardless of the outcome of
   contact proceedings.

12.  In the premises, and  for  the  reasons  summarised  above,  I  find  a
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside to be  remade.  I  am  conscious  that  I  have  not
   addressed the second ground of appeal, which relates to  the  appellant's
   relationship with his present partner. However, it would, in  any  event,
   be entirely artificial to preserve any part  of  the  decision  where  an
   overall proportionality assessment of family life considerations will  be
   necessary; to do so would hamper a tribunal remaking the decision.


13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors of the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge vitiate all findings of fact and the conclusions from  those  facts
   so that there has not been a valid determination of  the  issues  in  the
   appeal.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both  parties
   to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  I
   do so on the basis that this is a case which falls  squarely  within  the
   Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The effect of the
   error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing  and  that  the
   nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary for  the
   decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard  to  the
   overriding objective in rule 2 to deal  with  cases  fairly  and  justly,
   including with the avoidance of delay, I find that it is  appropriate  to
   remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine  the  appeal
   afresh.
Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  remitted  to
      the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  remade  afresh  with  no  findings
      preserved.

      I make no order for costs.

      I make no anonymity direction.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       7 January 2021



