
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18026/2016
     HU/16927/2016
     HU/18036/2016
     HU/18047/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  (1) A O-D
                                  (2) C O-D
                                  (3) E O-D
                                  (4) F O-D
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A. J. M. Baldwin, promulgated on 16th  March  2018,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 8th March 2018, where the Secretary of State
    dismissed the appeals  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter came before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family of four.  The first two Appellants are  the
    father and the mother.  The remaining  two  Appellants  are  their  two
    children.  The four Appellants were respectively born on  13th  January
    1972, 1st August 1974, 29th March 2008, and on 23rd December 2009.  All
    are citizens of Nigeria.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim arises from a refusal  by  the  Respondent  in  a
    decision letter dated 27th May 2016, when they  applied  for  leave  to
    remain.  The Respondent was satisfied that neither adult was a  British
    citizen and none had settled status in this  country.   The  Respondent
    also took the view that there was no proven insurmountable obstacles to
    the family returning to Nigeria where the two Appellants had spent most
    of their lives, and where it would be reasonable for  the  children  to
    live with them, given that neither parent had resided here  for  twenty
    years and the obstacles that they might face in relocating  to  Nigeria
    was not very significant.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge upheld the decision of the Respondent Secretary of State.  He
    refused the appeal.  He recognised that this was  a  case  where  "both
    children only have personal experiences  of  the  UK  where  they  were
    born".  However, this was only because "their parents chose  to  remain
    here unlawfully in the full knowledge that they would have to return to
    Nigeria back in 2008, when their leave expired, but they failed  to  do
    so.

 5. At the same time, the judge also recognised that the fourth  child  had
    behavioural problems which were "extremely challenging  at  school  and
    that it required the school to provide one-to-one  oversight  of  him".
    The judge further noted how,

         "It was also clear that the parents have accepted his condition and
         have shown themselves to be exceptionally good parents who have the
         skills and understanding to cope with him.  It is  clear  that  the
         head teacher holds the parents in very high regard in this respect,
         particularly given the backdrop  of  them  struggling  financially"
         (paragraph 21).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to consider  the
    best interests of the children, and failed to decide on a proper  basis
    why it would be reasonable to expect the children to relocate from  the
    United Kingdom to Nigeria, given that the eldest child had been  living
    here now for over eight years, and had been born in the United Kingdom.



 8. On  21st  June  2018,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted,  with  the
    observation that the judge had recorded (at  paragraph  21)  that  both
    children, who were born in the UK, would have to return to Nigeria, but
    had failed to recognise that one of the children had now been in the UK
    for over seven years, and  the  Respondent's  Family  Migration  Policy
    (February 2018), stood to be applied.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, the Appellants  were  not  represented.   The
    first and second Appellants appeared in  person.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Mills.  That being so, Mr Mills submitted  that  this
    was a case where he would be prepared to concede that there had been an
    error of law in the judge's determination in failing to have regard  to
    the Family Migration Policy of the Home Office, and in failing to  give
    proper weight to the fact that the eldest child was in  the  UK  for  a
    period of over seven years.  Indeed, by the time of this decision,  the
    facts had changed to such an extent that the eldest  child  now  was  a
    British citizen, and had been so for the last one and half years.   The
    second child, will turn 10 years of age in December 2019, and will also
    be eligible to apply for British citizenship.

10. In the circumstances, given the concession, I find that there has  been
    an error  of  law  in  the  judge's  determination.   I  come  to  this
    conclusion because  the  "Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b  Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
    parent) and Private life: 10 Year Routes" makes it clear that,

         "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the seven years  immediately
         preceding the date of the application, recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the  UK
         ..."

11. Indeed, the guidance goes on to say that in these circumstances,  where
    the balance swings more in favour of a child  such  that  it  would  be
    generally unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK,  the
    position is that "strong reasons will be required in order to refuse  a
    case with continuous UK residence of more  than  seven  years".   Given
    that this was the case, the judge should have  referred  to  this  Home
    Office policy before carrying out the balancing exercise  at  paragraph
    21 of the determination.

Remaking the Decision

12. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before the judge, and the submissions that  I  have
    heard today.  I am allowing this  appeal  for  the  reasons  that  have
    already been set out above.  This is a case where the eldest child  now
    is a British citizen.  The Secretary of State  does  not  say  that  it
    would be reasonable for that eldest child to leave the UK.  The parents
    will also therefore be able  to  stay  in  this  country.   The  fourth
    Appellant, is 9 years of age, and suffers from Asperger's, and  as  the
    judge below recognised "presents very considerable challenges  for  his
    parents and his school", and the judge observed also  that,  "I  accept
    that a change in [this child's] routine  can  cause  a  high  level  of
    anxiety and disorder" (paragraph 22).  So the  application  of  Section
    117B(6) will fall in the Appellant's favour in these circumstances.   I
    accordingly allow this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law, such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed.


An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019
