
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18793/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Skype for Business                |                              |
|                                              |On 23 February 2021           |
|On 3 December 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                              Dumitru Tricolici
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Sardar instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
(Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Moldova who was born on  13  March  1987.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 September 2002  as  a
    minor and claimed asylum.  That application was refused on  29  October
    2002 but the appellant was granted exceptional leave to  remain  as  an
    unaccompanied minor.  That leave was valid until 12 March 2005.  On  28
    February 2005, he applied for further leave to remain  and  on  16  May
    2011 he was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 2. Between 3 December 2015 and 17 June  2019,  he  was  convicted  on  six
    occasions of 24 offences including 14 offences  against  property,  one
    offence relating to the administration of justice, four drugs  offences
    and four miscellaneous offences.  Most recently on 28 May 2019, at  the
    Cardiff Crown Court he was convicted of offering to supply a controlled
    drug in class B, namely cannabis and possession with intent to supply a
    controlled drug, in class B, namely cannabis, and  breach  of  previous
    court orders.  On 17 June 2019, he was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  15
    months' imprisonment.

 3. On 27 June 2019, the appellant was notified  of  his  liability  to  be
    deported.  In response, the appellant made submissions under Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

 4. On 30 September 2019, the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim under Art 8.  On 29 September 2019, a deportation order was  made
    against the appellant under s.32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and
    s.5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Povey on 4 August 2020.

 6. The appellant and his partner,  "SR"  gave  oral  evidence  before  the
    judge.  The appellant relied upon  Exception  1  in  s.117C(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) ("the NIA Act
    2002");  Exception  2  in  s.117C(5)  of  the  NIA  Act  2002  and,  in
    particular, that  his  deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  on  his
    partner, SR and their two children born in 2010 and 2015; and, finally,
    that his deportation  was  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    private and family life because the public interest was  outweighed  by
    "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2" applying s.117C(6) of the NIA Act 2002.

 7. Judge Povey accepted that the appellant had a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with SR and genuine and subsisting parental  relationships
    with their two children (as well as his step-child).  However, although
    it would be "unduly harsh" for his partner or children to  relocate  to
    Moldova, Judge Povey found that it would not be unduly harsh  for  them
    to remain in the UK if the appellant were deported.  Consequently,  the
    judge found that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Exception 2.

 8. Secondly, Judge Povey found that Exception 1 did  not  apply.   It  was
    accepted that the requirements in s.117(4)(a) and (b) were met,  namely
    that the appellant had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
    life and was socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK.   However,
    Judge Povey found that the requirement in  s.117C(4)(c)  was  not  met,
    namely it had not been established that there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles " to the appellant's "integration" on return to Moldova.

 9. Thirdly, applying s.117C(6) Judge Povey found that the public  interest
    outweighed the appellant's circumstances on the basis that  there  were
    not "very compelling circumstances".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  First, the judge had failed properly  to  apply  the  "unduly
    harsh" test in s.117C(5).  Secondly, the judge had  erred  in  applying
    s.117C(6) in that he had failed to make any findings as  to  the  "best
    interests"  of  the  appellant's  children  which   were   a   "primary
    consideration" when  assessing  whether  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" sufficient to outweigh the public interest.

11. On 3 September 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Adio)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

12. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
    Centre on 3 December 2020.  I was based in court in the Cardiff CJC and
    Ms  Sardar,  who  represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Howells,   who
    represented the Secretary of State,  joined  the  hearing  remotely  by
    Skype for Business.

The Submissions

13.  Ms Sardar relies upon the two grounds of appeal.

14. As regards the judge's conclusion that Exception 2 did  not  apply,  Ms
    Sardar focused upon the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  HA  (Iraq)
    and another v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 decided  since  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.   She  submitted  that  the  correct  approach  to
    determining  whether  the  impact  upon  the  appellant's  partner  and
    children would be "unduly harsh"  was  set  out  in  [51]-[53]  of  the
    judgement of  Underhill  LJ.   She  submitted  that  Underhill  LJ  had
    concluded that the underlying test was whether the level  of  harshness
    on  the  appellant's  partner  and  children  reached  the   "elevated"
    threshold to outweigh the public interest.  However, Underhill  LJ  had
    concluded that a judge should not seek to determine that issue  through
    the touchstone of whether the degree of  harshness  went  beyond  "that
    which is ordinarily to be expected of the deportation of a parent"  or,
    in relation to a partner, expected by the deportation of a partner.  Ms
    Sardar submitted that the judge had fallen into error  because  he  had
    applied that touchstone in reaching his finding  that  the  impact,  in
    particular upon the appellant's children, would not be unduly harsh.

15. Ms Sardar drew my  attention  to  the  evidence  before  the  judge  in
    particular from an expert social worker (Deborah Orre) dated  11  March
    2020, including her conclusion at para 6.19 that the  impact  upon  the
    children would be devastating as the children might need  care  outside
    of the family, i.e. local Social Services involvement.  She also placed
    reliance upon the witness statement of the appellant's partner speaking
    to the stress caused to her.

16. Ms Sardar submitted that the judge's  approach,  albeit  in  accordance
    with how the law was understood at the time, nevertheless  amounted  to
    an error of law  as  the  Court  of  Appeal's  approach  in  HA  (Iraq)
    represented the law.

17. Secondly, Ms Sardar submitted that in assessing the  appellant's  claim
    outside the Rules under Art 8, and in applying  s.117(6),  in  reaching
    his findings at paras 44 - 46, the judge made no finding in relation to
    the "best interests" of the appellant's children  and,  by  failing  to
    take those into account, the judge erred in law in reaching his adverse
    finding under Art 8 outside the Rules.

18. Mr Howells accepted that in HA (Iraq) the Court  of  Appeal  recognised
    that there was a "elevated" threshold (see [51]-[53] and [56]) but that
    had not lowered the threshold of the "unduly harsh" test as  recognised
    by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2018] UKSC  58.
    He submitted that each case must turn upon its own facts and the  judge
    had not misdirected himself by applying the comparator test of  whether
    the degree of harshness went beyond that ordinarily to be  expected  by
    the deportation of a parent.

19. Secondly, as regards the judge's decision outside the Rules, Mr Howells
    accepted that if the judge had erred in his conclusion in  relation  to
    Exception 2 then the judge's finding as to  whether  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances over and above those" described in Exception 2
    could not stand.  Otherwise, Mr Howells acknowledged that the judge had
    not specifically referred to  s.55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and the children's "best interests".  However, the
    judge had done so in the context of determining Exception 2 and whether
    the impact upon the children would be  "unduly  harsh".   Following  HA
    (Iraq) at [55], it was clear that "best interests" of a child was  part
    of that test.  Providing the judge's finding in relation to Exception 2
    was sustainable, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had considered the
    children's best interests" at paras 44 and  45  of  his  determination.
    The judge had correctly set out the factors in favour of the  appellant
    and in favour of the public interest and then at para 46 carried out  a
    balancing exercise in reaching his fining on proportionality.

20. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had not, therefore, erred in law as
    set out in Grounds 1 and 2.

Discussion

21. It was common ground that the judge's decision that the appellant could
    not succeed under Exception 1 in s.117C(4) of the NIA Act 2002 was  not
    challenged in the grounds and so stands.

22. The principal challenge, set out in Ground 1 as developed by Ms  Sardar
    in her submissions, relies upon the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  HA
    (Iraq) and what was said there about the proper approach to the "unduly
    harsh" test in Exception 2 in s.117C(5) of the  NIA  Act  2002.   Under
    Exception 2, so far as relevant to this appeal, the appellant, who  was
    found to have genuine and subsisting parental  relationships  with  the
    children and a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  partner,
    had to establish that the impact of his deportation  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" upon them.  It was accepted that, as  it  is  sometimes  called,
    "the go scenario", fell to be decided in his  favour,  namely  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for them to accompany the appellant  to  Moldova.
    The judge made that finding at para 19 and it has not been  challenged.



23. The issue for the judge was to determine, what is  sometimes  described
    as, the "stay scenario", namely whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant's partner and children to remain in the  UK  if  he  were
    deported.  The focus of the submissions before me related to whether it
    would be "unduly harsh" upon the appellant's children.

24. The leading decision is that of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).  The
    principal issue in that appeal, in respect of s.117C(5),  was  whether,
    in applying the "unduly harsh" test, a balancing exercise was  required
    taking into account the public interest.  The Supreme  Court  concluded
    that was not the correct approach and that the focus should exclusively
    be upon the child or  parent  in  respect  of  whom  it  was  said  the
    appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh".  The Supreme Court (in
    the judgment of Lord Carnwath with  whom  the  other  justices  agreed)
    provided guidance  on  the  "unduly  harsh"  test.   Having  cited  the
    relevant passages from Lord Carnwath's judgment, in HA (Iraq) Underhill
    LJ drew together the points made by Lord Carnwath as follows (at  [50]-
    [53]):
         "50. What light do those passages shed on the  meaning  of  "unduly
            harsh"  (beyond  the  conclusion  on  the  relative  seriousness
            issue)?
         1. The essential point is that the  criterion  of  undue  harshness
            sets a bar which is "elevated"  and  carries  a  "much  stronger
            emphasis"  than  mere  undesirability:  see  para.  27  of  Lord
            Carnwath's judgment, approving the  UT's  self-direction  in MK
            (Sierra Leone), and para. 35. The  UT's  self-direction  uses  a
            battery of synonyms and antonyms: although these should  not  be
            allowed to become  a  substitute  for  the  statutory  language,
            tribunals may find them of some assistance as a reminder of  the
            elevated nature of the test.  The  reason  why  some  degree  of
            harshness is  acceptable  is  that  there  is  a  strong  public
            interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  (including
            medium offenders): see para. 23.  The  underlying  question  for
            tribunals is whether the harshness which  the  deportation  will
            cause for the partner and/or child is of a sufficiently elevated
            degree to outweigh that public interest.
         1.  However,  while  recognising  the  "elevated"  nature  of   the
            statutory test, it is important not to lose sight  of  the  fact
            that the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by  the
            test of "very compelling circumstances" in section 117C (6).  As
            Lord Carnwath points out in the second part of para. 23  of  his
            judgment,  disapproving IT  (Jamaica),  if  that  were  so  the
            position of medium offenders and  their  families  would  be  no
            better than that of  serious  offenders. It  follows  that  the
            observations in the case-law to the effect that it will be  rare
            for the test of "very compelling circumstances" to be  satisfied
            have no application in this context (I have  already  made  this
            point  -  see  para.  34  above).  The  statutory  intention  is
            evidently that the hurdle representing the  unacceptable  impact
            on a partner or child should be set somewhere between the  (low)
            level applying in the case of persons who are liable to ordinary
            immigration removal (see Lord Carnwath's  reference  to  section
            117B (6) at the start of para. 23) and  the  (very  high)  level
            applying to serious offenders.
         1. Observations of that kind are, I hope, helpful, but they  cannot
            identify an objectively measurable standard. It is  inherent  in
            the nature of an exercise of the kind required by  section  117C
            (5) that Parliament intended that tribunals should in each  case
            make an informed evaluative assessment of whether the effect  of
            the deportation of the parent  or  partner  on  their  child  or
            partner would be "unduly harsh" in the  context  of  the  strong
            public interest in the deportation  of  foreign  criminals;  and
            further exposition of that phrase will never  be  of  more  than
            limited value."

25. At [55] - [56], Underhill LJ addressed two further points.   The  first
    relates to whether the "unduly harsh" test had embedded  within  it  an
    assessment of a  child's  "best  interests"  and,  secondly  what  Lord
    Carnwath had said in relation to the degree of harshness required under
    s.117C(5) going beyond that "ordinarily expected by the deportation  of
    a parent.  Underhill LJ said this:
         "55. The first is that what Lord  Carnwath  says  in  the  relevant
            parts  of  his  judgment  in KO makes  no  reference  to  the
            requirements of section 55 of the 2009 Act  and  is  likely  to
            lead tribunals to fail to  treat  the  best  interests  of  any
            affected child as a primary consideration. As to  that,  it  is
            plainly not the case that Lord  Carnwath  was  unaware  of  the
            relevance of section 55: see para. 15 of his  judgment,  quoted
            at para. 41 above. The reason why it was unnecessary for him to
            refer explicitly to section 55 specifically in the  context  of
            his discussion of Exception 2 is that the very purpose  of  the
            Exception, to the extent that it is concerned with  the  effect
            of deportation on a child, is to ensure that the best interests
            of that child are treated as a primary consideration.  It  does
            so by providing that those interests should, in the case  of  a
            medium  offender,  prevail  over   the   public   interest   in
            deportation where the effect  on  the  child  would  be  unduly
            harsh. In other words, consideration of the best  interests  of
            the child  is  built  into  the  statutory  test.  It  was  not
            necessary  for  Lord  Carnwath  to  spell  out  that   in   the
            application of Exception 2 in any particular  case  there  will
            need to be "a careful analysis of all relevant factors specific
            to the child"; but I am happy to confirm that that  is  so,  as
            Lord Hodge makes clear in his sixth proposition in Zoumbas.
         56.  The second point focuses on what are said to be the  risks  of
            treating KO as establishing a touchstone of whether the degree
            of harshness goes beyond "that which is ordinarily expected  by
            the deportation of a parent". Lord Carnwath does  not  in  fact
            use that phrase,  but  a  reference  to  "nothing  out  of  the
            ordinary" appears in UTJ Southern's decision. I see rather more
            force in this submission. As explained above,  the  test  under
            section 117C (5) does indeed require an appellant to  establish
            a degree of harshness going  beyond  a  threshold  "acceptable"
            level. It is not necessarily  wrong  to  describe  that  as  an
            "ordinary" level of harshness, and I note  that  Lord  Carnwath
            did not jib at UTJ Southern's use  of  that  term.  However,  I
            think the Appellants are right to point  out  that  it  may  be
            misleading if used incautiously. There seem to  me  to  be  two
            (related)  risks.  First,  "ordinary"  is  capable   of   being
            understood as meaning anything which is not exceptional, or  in
            any event rare. That is not the correct approach: see para.  52
            above. There is no reason in principle  why  cases  of  "undue"
            harshness may not occur quite commonly. Secondly, if  tribunals
            treat the  essential  question  as  being  "is  this  level  of
            harshness out of the ordinary?" they may  be  tempted  to  find
            that Exception 2 does not apply simply on the  basis  that  the
            situation fits into  some  commonly-encountered  pattern.  That
            would be dangerous. How a child will be affected by a  parent's
            deportation will depend on an almost infinitely variable  range
            of circumstances and it is not possible to identify a  baseline
            of "ordinariness". Simply by way  of  example,  the  degree  of
            harshness of the impact may be affected by the child's age;  by
            whether the parent lives with  them  (NB  that  a  divorced  or
            separated father  may  still  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
            relationship with a child who lives with the  mother);  by  the
            degree of the child's emotional dependence on  the  parent;  by
            the  financial  consequences  of  his   deportation;   by   the
            availability  of  emotional  and  financial  support   from   a
            remaining   parent   and   other   family   members;   by   the
            practicability of maintaining a relationship with the  deported
            parent; and of course by all the individual characteristics  of
            the child."

26. Then, at [57], Underhill LJ concluded:

         "Tribunals considering the parent case under Exception 2 should not
         err in law if in each  case  they  carefully  evaluate  the  likely
         effect of a parent's deportation on the particular child  and  then
         decide whether that effect is not merely  harsh  but  unduly  harsh
         applying KO (Nigeria) in accordance with the guidance at paras.  50
         - 53 above."

27. Ms Sardar relies upon what Underhill LJ said in [56] about the test not
    being equated to harshness going beyond that  "ordinarily  expected  by
    the deportation of a parent".

28. In his concurring  judgment,  Peter  Jackson  LJ  also  identified  the
    importance of determining as a "primary consideration" a  child's  best
    interests in applying the "unduly harsh" test  or,  indeed,  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" test (see [152] - [151].  Then,  he  observed
    at [156] that  there  were  two  ways  where  a  decision  maker  might
    inadvertently fail to apply the proper approach.  He said this:
         "There are two broad ways in which it seems to me that a  decision-
         maker  may  inadvertently  be   deflected   from   giving   primary
         consideration to the best interests  of  the  child  of  a  foreign
         criminal. One is by focusing on the position of children  generally
         rather than on the best interests  of  the  individual  child.  The
         other  is  by  treating  physical  harm   as   intrinsically   more
         significant that emotional harm. I will take these in turn."

29. At [157]-[158], Peter Jackson LJ agreed with  Underhill  LJ  about  the
    dangers of using, what he described as the "any child"  approach  as  a
    notional comparator.  He said this:
         "157. In order to maintain focus on the individual child,  it  will
            be helpful for the decision-maker to apply  the  words  of  the
            statutory tests themselves. By their  nature,  commentaries  on
            the tests may be illuminating, but they are not,  as  Underhill
            LJ has shown at [56], a substitute for the  statutory  wording.
            For example, Lord Carnwath's reference in paragraph  23  of KO
            (Nigeria) to undue harshness to "any child" cannot  have  been
            intended to set up a notional comparator, if only because it is
            not possible to know what the circumstances  of  such  a  child
            might be. For some children the deportation of a largely absent
            parent may be a matter of little or no real  significance.  For
            others, the deportation of a close caregiver parent where  face
            to face contact cannot continue may be akin to a bereavement. A
            decision that gives primary consideration to the best interests
            of the child will instead focus on the reality of that  child's
            actual situation and the decision-maker will be  more  assisted
            by addressing  relevant  factors  of  the  kind  identified  by
            Underhill LJ at the end of  [56]  than  by  making  generalised
            comparisons. Likewise, as explained in the  footnote  to  [48],
            the aphorism "That is what deportation does"  is  an  important
            truth, but it is not a substitute for a proper consideration of
            the  individual  case.  The  full  citation  from   Sedley   LJ
            in Lee makes this clear:
                  "The tragic consequence is that this  family,  short-lived
                  as it has been, will be broken up for ever because of  the
                  appellant's bad behaviour. That is what deportation  does.
                  Sometimes the balance between its  justification  and  its
                  consequences falls the other way, but whether it  does  so
                  is a question for an immigration judge."
         158. It can be seen that the aphorism frames the question; it  does
            not provide the answer. In that case, the parent was a supplier
            of Class A drugs who had received a seven year sentence and was
            facing deportation to Jamaica, and the balance not surprisingly
            fell in favour of deportation despite the  impact  on  the  two
            young children. In the same way, I agree  with  Underhill  LJ's
            observations at [34] and [35] that  decision-makers  should  be
            cautious about transposing statements  of  principle  from  one
            statutory context to another;  likewise  his  consideration  at
            [129] of the limited value of cross-checking outcomes  in  more
            or less similar cases. The task of the decision-maker  in  this
            respect is to consider the effect of this deportation  on  this
            child."

30. Finally, reverting to the issue of a child's  "best  interests",  Peter
    Jackson LJ cautioned (at [159]) against not treating  'emotional  harm'
    in a similar way to potential 'physical harm'.  He said this:

         "My other general observation concerns the treatment  of  emotional
         harm. Section 31(9) of the Children Act 1989 defines harm  as ill-
         treatment or the impairment of health  or  physical,  intellectual,
         emotional,  social  or  behavioural  development.  Reflecting   our
         contemporary  understanding  of   the   importance   of   emotional
         development and mental health, there is  no  hierarchy  as  between
         physical  and  non-physical  harm.  It  must  therefore  always  be
         recognised that for the child the consequences of going with both
         parents may be experienced as far less harsh than staying with  one
         parent. Despite this, it  may  be  easier  for  decision-makers  to
         envisage the harm that  may  be  done  by  expecting  a  family  to
         experience precarious or even dangerous physical conditions than to
         factor in at full worth the lifelong emotional harm of  terminating
         the relationship between a child and  a  close  parent  during  the
         child's minority and possibly forever. Both situations are grim but
         for the child neither is intrinsically grimmer than the other."

31.  Peter  Jackson  LJ  concluded  (at  [159])  that,   nevertheless,   in
    appropriate circumstances the  public  interest  in  deportation  could
    prevail over a child's best interests:

         "Provided the decision-maker faces up to the reality of the child's
         situation and gives it primary consideration the public interest in
         deportation may prevail,  but  it  will  not  do  to  minimise  the
         emotional impact on the child of severing of ties by  reference  to
         the doubtful prospect of maintaining relationships over many  years
         by indirect means only, or bey reciting the fact that this is  what
         deportation does."

32. In my judgment, the Court of Appeal in  HA  (Iraq)  has  explained  and
    realigned the "unduly harsh" test.  The Court maintained, in accordance
    with KO (Nigeria), the  "elevated"  threshold  it  requires.   However,
    locating  that  threshold  as  being  above  the  impact   that   would
    "ordinarily" be experienced by a child (or partner) by the  deportation
    of an individual is not an appropriate comparator to determine  whether
    the "elevated" threshold has been reached.

33. Prior to HA (Iraq), the Court of Appeal had in a  number  of  decisions
    used the "any child" approach, on the face of it, to reflect a level of
    harshness that would not engage the "unduly harsh" test.  For  example,
    in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213, the  Court  said  this  at
    [39] in relation to the impact on a child that it did not

         "go beyond the degree of harshness which  is  necessarily  involved
         for the partner or child of a foreign criminal who is deported".

34. Likewise, in SSHD v KF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2051 at [30] the Court
    recognised that  the  test  of  "unduly  harsh"  required  evidence  to
    establish:

         "consequences characterised by  a  degree  of  harshness  over  and
         beyond what every child would experience in such circumstances".

35. Not surprisingly, as this was the  (then)  approach  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, Judge Povey in this appeal adopted the same approach.  He cited
    passages from the cases of PG (Jamaica) and KF (Nigeria) in  which  the
    "any child" approach to the unduly harsh test was stated (see his paras
    34 and 35).

36. The judge did recognise that there would be an impact on  the  children
    and, indeed the appellant's partner if he were deported.  At paras  31-
    32, he cited the expert social work report by Ms Orre and said this:

         "31. In respect of the  impact  upon  the  children,  reliance  was
             placed upon the report of Ms Orre, who met the appellant, [SR]
             and the children and consulted  with  the  children's  primary
             school and social worker.  Ms Orre concluded that:

             31.1 The appellant's deportation  would  'cause  the  children
                  significant emotional harm ... given the strength  of  his
                  relationship with [them]' at (Paragraph 6.11), which  'may
                  in turn effect their general development  and  well-being,
                  even with the continued relationship  with  their  mother.
                  If would be likely to cause emotional harm and potentially
                  negatively impact upon all areas of  the  development  ..'
                  [at Paragraphs 6.15], including their educational progress
                  (at Paragraph 6.17).

             31.2 There  is  an  even  greater  need  for  the  appellant's
                  availability to support and care for his children, because
                  of [SR's] health (at Paragraph 6.19).

         32.  The largely uncontested evidence in this appeal clearly showed
             both [SR]  and  especially  the  children  will  suffer  great
             distress if the appellant were  no  longer  in  the  UK.   The
             impact upon the children was documented by Ms Orr.  There will
             undoubtedly be emotional harm to them if  the  appellant  were
             deported."

37. Having cited the cases to which I have already referred, the judge then
    reached his conclusion in para 37 as follows:

         "In my judgment, the facts in this appeal do not lead  me  to  find
         that the appellant's deportation would  cause  undue  harshness  to
         either the children or [SR].  I do not underestimate the  scale  of
         the  emotional  impact  or  the  distress  that  would  be  caused,
         particularly to the children.  But it could not be said that  those
         consequences, as detailed in Ms Orr's report and explained  in  the
         witness statement, went  over  and  above  what  any  family  would
         experience."

38. In reaching his finding, the judge  clearly  applied  the  "any  child"
    approach which the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq)  disapproved.   Reading
    the judgment as a whole, it is not  possible  to  discern  whether  the
    judge thought that the impact, which he related in  his  determination,
    reached the "elevated" threshold of the "unduly harsh" test because  he
    assessed whether that test was satisfied simply by asking  whether  the
    impact upon the appellant's children would be greater than that on  any
    child separated from its  parents.   In  applying  that  test,  and  in
    reaching that finding, the judge  erred  in-law  given  the  subsequent
    decision of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq).

39. I should add, however, that it is a little surprising  that  the  judge
    saw the evidence in this case as identifying "emotional  harm"  to  the
    children that was necessarily commonplace.  Bearing in mind what  Peter
    Jackson LJ said at [159], the judge may, in any event,  have  minimised
    the emotional impact on the children of severing their  ties  with  the
    appellant.

40. In any event, having misdirected himself in law, albeit  understandably
    in the light of the case law at the time of  his  decision,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the evidence before the judge was incapable  of  meeting
    the "unduly harsh" test as explained by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  HA
    (Iraq).  For that reason, therefore, the judge erred in law in  finding
    that Exception 2 did not apply to the appellant.

41. Mr Howells  accepted  that  if  the  judge's  finding  in  relation  to
    Exception 2 could not  be  sustained,  then  the  judge's  finding,  in
    relation to whether there were "very compelling circumstances" over and
    above those in Exception 2 so as to outweigh the public interest  under
    s.117C(6), also could not be sustained.  Despite  the  judge's  careful
    assessment of the evidence in paras 44 and 45 of his  determination,  I
    am driven to accept that conclusion must follow and  that  the  judge's
    finding in relation to s.117C(6) also is unsustainable.  Whether or not
    Ms Sardar is correct that the judge failed to  take  into  account  the
    children's "best interests", he necessarily erred in law in reaching  a
    finding in relation to the latter.

42. For these reasons, the judge's findings in relation to Exception 2  and
    in applying s.117C(6) cannot stand and are set aside.

Decision

43. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law  and  that  decision
    cannot stand.  The decision is, accordingly,  set  aside  and  must  be
    remade.

44. Both representatives indicated that, if that were  my  conclusion,  the
    proper disposal of the  appeal  was  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order to remake the decision in  relation  to  Exception  2
    and, to the extent necessary, applying s.117C(6).

45. Both representatives agreed that the judge's findings under Exception 1
    should be preserved as they were  not  challenged.   In  addition,  his
    positive findings in relation to Exception 2 should also be  preserved.
    Those are that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his partner SR and genuine and subsisting  parental  relationships
    with the children.  It is also accepted that the judge's  finding  that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect SR or his children  to  relocate  to
    Moldova is preserved.

46. The outstanding issue under Exception 2 is whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh for the appellant's partner and children to remain in the UK (the
    "stay scenario") if he were deported.  Of course, if he cannot  succeed
    under Exception 2, there remains the issue of whether  his  deportation
    would be disproportionate applying s.117C(6).

47. With those findings preserved, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to remake the decision to the extent I  have  indicated  by  a
    judge other than Judge Povey.


Signed

Andrew Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal         18 December 2020
