
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18247/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th February 2019                |On 13th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  ahmed [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance - letter produced
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco born 3rd January 1957.   On  27th
    April 2015 the Appellant had made a human rights application for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his private life.  That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal  dated  16th  March  2016.
    The Appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 10th January
    1998.  Consequently, at the date of hearing of this appeal he has  been
    in  the  country  for  over  twenty  years  although  at  the  date  of
    application and decision he had been here  for  a  period  considerably
    longer.

 2. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  sitting  at
    Taylor  House  on  11th  October  2018.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 19th November 2018 the Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed
    under Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. Judge Herbert made some comments which are pertinent to  the  facts  of
    this matter.  Unfortunately, the Appellant is  seriously  ill  and  the
    overall consensus from the medical professionals is that he is entirely
    dependent upon others for his physical needs.  He had a  severe  stroke
    in 2013 and spent a whole year in a coma before being  released  to  be
    cared for initially in hospital and then in a specialist care home  now
    in London.  He cannot wash, dress or move about independently and if it
    was not for the provision of the health services  and  Social  Services
    that care for him he would have clearly died a very sad and undignified
    and, as Judge Herbert states, quite probably painful  death.   In  such
    circumstances, Judge Herbert considered that the threshold in  relation
    to Article 3 and Article 8 had been reached.

 4. The Secretary of State on 23rd November 2018 lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The main thrust of those grounds was  that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer had been  prevented  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge from making submissions.  On 9th January 2019 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on that basis granted permission to appeal.

 5. Such issues raised the question that I was  going  to  consider  as  to
    whether or not,  if  there  was  a  concession,  that  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness due to the Home Office Presenting  Officer  being
    prevented from making submissions  as  to  whether  that  was  material
    bearing in mind the tragic circumstances of the Appellant.

 6. However, matters moved on and  there  is  presented  to  me  a  letter,
    firstly asking that their attendance  be  excused  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors and secondly advising, which  Ms  Jones  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State confirms, that the Secretary of  State  has  granted
    discretionary leave to the Appellant to remain  in  the  UK  until  7th
    February 2022.

 7. On  that  basis  and  without  making  further  concessions,  Ms  Jones
    indicates that she is prepared to withdraw the appeal.  What happens in
    2022 is a matter of course for the Secretary of State to consider.  No-
    one knows what the condition of the Appellant will be at that time  and
    of course he will by then have been in the UK for some 24 years.

 8. In order for there to be a withdrawal under the Upper Tribunal Rules it
    is appropriate for both parties to consent and I note that  they  both,
    on that basis, do so.

Notice of Decision

 9. The Secretary of State withdraws the appeal  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert on the basis that  the  Secretary  of
    State has granted discretionary leave to the Appellant to remain in the
    UK until 7th February 2022.

10. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris











