
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18001/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2020                   |On 3 November 2020                   |


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SAMINA ALVI
                       (ANONIMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 18  December  1962.  Her
    appeal against the refusal of leave to remain was allowed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas on 23 March 2020 on human rights grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the judge failed to
    consider the requirements for bereaved  partners  in  Appendix  FM  and
    section 117B of the 2002 Act when considering proportionality.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic,  on  29
    June 2020, on the grounds that it was arguable  that  "the  very  brief
    determination and brief findings  contained  no  consideration  of  the
    relevant rules or indeed any reference to them and no clarification  as
    to the basis on  which  the  appeal  was  allowed.  The  assessment  is
    arguably inadequate."

 4. There was no objection to the error of law hearing  proceeding  without
    an oral hearing in response to specific directions. I  have  considered
    the submissions made by the Appellant and the Respondent in response to
    directions. I am satisfied that, in  the  interests  of  justice,  this
    appeal can be decided without a hearing.

The Respondent's submissions

 5. The Respondent submitted the Appellant  could  not  satisfy  paragraphs
    BPILR 1.1(b) or E-BPILR 1.2 because she did not make an application for
    indefinite leave to remain and her last grant of leave  was  not  as  a
    partner or bereaved partner, but under Article  8.  Further  the  judge
    failed to consider section 117B of the 2002 Act. The  judge  failed  to
    consider the public interest in the proportionality balancing exercise.
    The error of law was material and the decision should be set aside.

The Appellant's submissions

 6. The Appellant submitted that the  failure  to  refer  to  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules was not fatal to the  decision  and  the  conclusions
    reached were lawfully  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge
    approached the appeal as a human  rights  appeal  which  was  the  only
    ground available to the Appellant. It was accepted  the  Appellant  had
    not applied for indefinite leave to remain and had made a human  rights
    application. It was submitted this was immaterial  in  the  context  of
    this  appeal  and  the  judge's  subsequent   findings   as   well   as
    acknowledgment of the public interest.

 7. The Appellant submitted the judge correctly referred  to  the  previous
    decision allowing the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 on account  of
    her marriage to a British citizen. It was open to  the  judge  to  find
    that the Appellant  was  a  bereaved  partner  which  encapsulated  the
    eligibility requirements of  paragraph  E-BPILR  of  Appendix  FM.  The
    judge's conclusion that there was no realistic public interest  in  the
    Appellant's removal was open to him on the evidence.

 8. On the facts, the Appellant satisfied the eligibility requirements as a
    bereaved partner. Her application for leave to remain,  as  opposed  to
    indefinite leave to remain, was  not  capable  of  attracting  material
    weight in the proportionality assessment.

Conclusions and reasons

 9. The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor and overstayed. She married a
    British citizen on 9 November 2016. Her application for leave to remain
    outside the Immigration Rules was refused, but her appeal  was  allowed
    in January 2017. Judge Swaney found that,  if  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain on the basis of her  relationship,  her
    application  would  be  successful  under  the  partner  provisions  of
    Appendix FM. Judge Swaney concluded the Appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate. The Appellant was granted  leave  to  remain  from  5
    March 2017 to 5 September 2019. Sadly, the Appellant's husband died  in
    December 2017.

10. Judge Lucas quite properly relied on the decision of Judge  Swaney  and
    concluded that the Appellant was  married  to  a  British  citizen  and
    granted leave to remain on the basis of  that  relationship.  He  found
    that it was difficult to see how the Appellant was anything other  than
    a bereaved partner for the purpose of the Immigration Rules.

11. I am of the view that this  finding  was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence  before  him.  On  the  facts,  the  Appellant  satisfied  the
    eligibility requirements as a  bereaved  partner.  Her  last  grant  of
    limited leave was as a result of her marriage to a British citizen  and
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting at the time the Appellant's
    husband died.

12. This is a human rights appeal  not  an  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. The Appellant's ability to  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    relevant to the weight to be  attached  to  the  public  interest.  The
    Appellant made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the  basis
    that her husband had died. It was immaterial that she did not apply for
    indefinite leave to remain. This  did  not  affect  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest such that it outweighed the Appellant's
    Article 8 rights. The judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant's  removal
    would be disproportionate was open to him on the evidence before him.

13. There is nothing in section 117B of the 2002 Act which would lead to  a
    different conclusion given the findings in  the  previous  decision  of
    January 2017. The brevity of  the  decision  of  Judge  Lucas  and  the
    failure to refer to specific paragraphs of the  Immigration  Rules  was
    not material to the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds. The grant of leave pursuant to the appeal being allowed  is  a
    matter for the Respondent.

14. I find there was no material error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, dated 23 March 2020, allowing the appeal  under  Article
    8. I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 29 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
