
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18970/2018
                                                               HU/20852/2018
                                                               HU/20853/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 October 2019                   |On 23 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Sujata [K]
                                  Ishor [R]
                               [A R] (a minor)
                         [ANONYMITY ORDER not made]
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Steven Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondents:   Ms M Gherman, Counsel instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimants'  appeals  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision on 31 August 2018 to refuse them leave to
    remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The claimants are Nepalese citizens, a husband and  wife  and  their  6
    year old daughter.



Background

 3. The following chronology is extracted from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal letter, the other documents in the Home Office bundle, and  the
    evidence recorded in the First-tier  Judge's  decision,  all  of  which
    would have been before the First-tier Judge.

 4. The principal claimant married the second claimant  in  June  2008  and
    came to the United Kingdom  to  pursue  her  accounting  and  marketing
    studies here.  They entered the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  student
    migrant and dependant on 28 January 2010, just under 10 years ago  (the
    second claimant's passport contains a dependant Tier  4  visa  in  line
    with that of his wife).  They both had leave to remain  on  that  basis
    until 23 June 2014 but unfortunately, the principal claimant's  College
    lost its sponsor licence and she  was  unable  to  obtain  another  CAS
    despite being given the usual 60-day letter and an  opportunity  to  do
    so.

 5. The principal and second claimants have had no valid  leave  to  remain
    since her curtailed  leave  expired  on  23  June  2014.    The  second
    claimant has had some health problems arising from  osteoarthritis  and
    hip surgery.

 6. In November 2010, the third claimant was born here.  She is a  Nepalese
    citizen.  In November 2011, when she was just a  year  old,  the  third
    claimant returned to Nepal to live with her grandparents there.

 7. The principal and second claimants have relatives in Nepal, who do  not
    provide them with financial  support.   The  family  are  not  able  to
    maintain  themselves  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  are  depending  on
    financial support from friends here.

 8. The principal claimant's parents live near Kathmandu,  and  the  second
    claimant's live in east Nepal, in a joint household  with  his  married
    brother, who has two  children.  The  principal  claimant  also  has  a
    widowed grandfather living in Nepal, and  two  brothers,  one  of  whom
    lives with her grandfather, and the other in separate accommodation.

 9. In October 2016, the third claimant returned to the United  Kingdom  to
    join her parents,  accompanied  by  the  grandfather.   The  child  was
    becoming too much for him.  They entered on a family visit  visa  valid
    for 6 months, which expired on 4 April 2017. It appears that the  child
    began to attend school immediately, as school records  exist  from  the
    end of 2016. She has not had very much time at school here and there is
    no other evidence of her having developed links outside the family.

10. The third claimant did not return to  Nepal  in  April  2017  with  her
    grandfather and became an  overstayer,  albeit  this  was  not  of  her
    making.   She has remained in the United Kingdom  without  valid  leave
    since then.

11. The third claimant has spent a total of one year just after  her  birth
    and 6 months in 2016/2017 lawfully in the United Kingdom, and a further
    11 months  unlawfully  before  the  decision  under  challenge.  It  is
    accepted that she is not a qualifying child.

12. The principal claimant made four attempts to  regularise  the  family's
    immigration situation after the expiry of her student leave on 23  June
    2014.  On 23 June 2015, she made an application  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules which was refused on 28 September 2015  and  was  not
    challenged.

13. On 25 August 2017, the claimants  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and dependant which was refused on
    10 August 2017 and the  refusal  maintained,  following  administrative
    review, on 15 September 2017.

14. On 25 September 2018, the couple  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  which  was  refused  on  26
    January 2018 and the decision maintained on 3 March 2018.

15. On 14 March 2018, the claimants made a further human rights claim under
    Article 8 ECHR on the basis  of  family  and  private  life  which  was
    refused on 31 August 2018.    That is the decision under  challenge  in
    this appeal.



Secretary of State's decision (31 August 2018)

16. In her refusal letter, the Secretary of State  noted  that  the  second
    claimant was neither a British citizen,  nor  was  he  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom as a refugee or by way of humanitarian protection.   The
    claimants' claim was considered and rejected  on  the  basis  that  the
    claimants could not bring  themselves  within  the  Rules  because  the
    principal claimant had spent only 8 years here, and her  daughter  even
    less.  The family were being supported in the United Kingdom by friends
    and extended family here.

17.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the  claimants  had
    demonstrated very significant obstacles to  returning  to  Nepal  as  a
    family and  reintegrating  there.  The  claimants  had  all  spent  the
    majority of their lives there, and in the case  of  the  principal  and
    second claimants, their formative years.  They would have the advantage
    of skills and knowledge developed in their time in the  United  Kingdom
    to assist them in resettling in Nepal on return.

18. The Secretary of State did not consider that there were any exceptional
    circumstances for which leave to remain should be granted  outside  the
    Rules with reference  to  Article  8  ECHR.   She  considered  that  no
    unjustifiably harsh consequences of return had been  demonstrated.   In
    particular, she considered the situation of the claimant's daughter who
    although aged 7 had lived in Nepal until the age of 6.   The  Secretary
    of State considered it reasonable for the child to  return  and  go  to
    school in Nepal.

19. The Secretary of State considered the claimant's assertion that she was
    6 months pregnant with her second child (in August 2018) but considered
    that there was no evidence that she was unable to travel nor that there
    was any medical reason why she should not  return  to  Nepal  and  give
    birth to her second child there.

20. The claimants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.



First-tier Tribunal decision

21. The First-tier Judge had no Home Office Presenting  Officer  to  assist
    her at the hearing.  She heard  submissions  from  Ms  Gherman  to  the
    effect that 'there  was  uncertainty  whether  [the  first  and  second
    claimants]  were  overstayers  and  living  illegally  in  the   United
    Kingdom'.  I find it difficult to understand why there was  thought  to
    be any uncertainty, given the chronology I have set  out  above,  which
    was plain from the Home Office documents.

22. The First-tier Judge accepted the claimants' account  as  truthful  but
    found that the claimants could not bring themselves within  the  Rules.
    Ms Gherman did not rely at the hearing on Farani Taylor's assertion  in
    section 120 grounds that leave should be  granted  on  a  discretionary
    basis.

23. The Judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules, by way of  a
    full Razgar 5-step assessment.  She noted that the second claimant  had
    been a charge on the public purse as he had significant  NHS  treatment
    during  his  time  here,  but  did  not  consider  that  the   proposed
    interference with the  family's  private  life  was  proportionate  and
    allowed the appeal.

24. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.



Permission to appeal

25. The Secretary of State argued that the First-tier Judge had  failed  to
    give adequate weight to the public interest under section 117B and that
    the  children  (the  second  child  now  having  been  born)  were  not
    qualifying children and that no exceptional or compelling circumstances
    for the grant of leave to remain outside the Rules had been identified.

26. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on  the
    basis that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  erred  in
    allowing  these  appeals  outside   the   Immigration   Rules   without
    identifying  the  justification  for  so   doing,   having   found   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of family life in Nepal.



Rule 24 Reply

27. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the claimants.

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

29. For the Secretary of State, Mr Kotas relied on the  grounds  of  appeal
    and noted that there was in the First-tier Tribunal's decision no self-
    direction as to the requirement  of  unjustifiable  harshness  for  the
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

30. For the claimants, Ms Gherman argued  that  the  First-tier  Judge  was
    entitled to decide as she had.  The principal claimant and her  husband
    had acquired 9 years' residence in the United Kingdom at  the  date  of
    decision.  They met the (neutral) requirements of  subsections  117B(2)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

31. Ms Gherman acknowledged that sub-paragraphs 117B(3), (4) and  (5)  were
    not of assistance to the claimants, and  that  subsection  117B(6)  was
    inapplicable, but argued that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to
    reach the decision it had and that sufficient reasons  had  been  given
    for the decision.  She contended that the Secretary of  State's  appeal
    was no more than a disagreement with the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Judge.

32. Ms Gherman relied on the concise summary of the relevant considerations
    in GM (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ   at [24]-[32].  She had not brought a copy of that  decision,
    but I decided to reserve my  decision  in  order  to  consider  the  GM
    judgment.  I now give my decision in these appeals.



Analysis

33. The first point is that the First-tier Judge's finding  of  fact,  that
    she was unsure of the length of overstaying, cannot be sustained.   The
    situation is clear: the principal and second claimants overstayed  from
    23 June 2014 and the third claimant, although she  was  born  when  her
    mother had leave to remain and returned to Nepal during the currency of
    that leave, re-entered as a visitor, but  immediately  began  attending
    school and overstayed from 4 April 2017, when her  6-month  visit  visa
    expired.  Of course, that is not her fault: a 6-year old does not  make
    decisions as to where she lives or whether she goes to school, but  the
    principal claimant and her husband would have been well aware that  not
    only were they overstayers, but that their daughter  had  no  leave  to
    remain.

34. I begin by considering the  effect  of  part  VA  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  Section 117A requires  a
    court or Tribunal to consider the 'public interest question' that is to
    say, whether an interference with the right to respect for  family  and
    private life is justified under Article 8(2).

35.  Sub-section  117B(1)  states  that  the   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.   Section 117B(2)  says
    that it is in the interest of the public and the economic wellbeing  of
    the United Kingdom for persons wishing to enter or remain here to speak
    English.  These parties  do  speak  English  but  that  is  neutral  in
    relation to this application.

36. Sub-section 117B(3) states that  it  is  in  the  public  interest  for
    persons wishing to enter  or  remain  to  be  financially  independent.
    These parties are not: they do not have  permission  to  work  and  are
    depending on financial assistance from friends in the United Kingdom.

37. Subsection 117B(4) states that little weight can be given to a  private
    life developed when a person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  That
    was the case for the principal and second claimants from June  2014  to
    the date of decision in August 2014, that is to say for over  4  years.
    For the third claimant, she has been in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully
    since April 2017.

38. Subsection 117B(5) states that little weight can be given to a  private
    life which was developed while a  person  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    precariously.  These claimants have been  precariously  in  the  United
    Kingdom, on student and dependant leave, for all of the time when  they
    were not here unlawfully.

39. It follows that little weight can be given to these claimants'  private
    life.  The family life between these claimants and the  new  baby  will
    not be affected since there are at present no removal directions and if
    removed, they would be removed as a family unit.   The children are  at
    an age where their best interests are to be with their parents.

40. I have considered the summary in GM to  which  I  was  referred  by  Ms
    Gherman.  I do not recite it here.  I note, particularly, that at  [29]
    the Court states that the proportionality test is to be applied to  the
    circumstances of the particular case, evaluated in a real-world  sense,
    and that there is a requirement for proper evidence (see [30]).   There
    was very little evidence before the First-tier Judge of  strong  social
    family or social ties in the United Kingdom; on the other  hand,  there
    is a significant extended family in Nepal to whom this  family  retains
    ties, as the evidence indicated.

41. There was no evidence of significant obstacles to  their  returning  to
    Nepal and reintegrating there.  The principal claimant has a number  of
    qualifications obtained here which she could use on  return,  and  they
    have a wider family to support them as they settle  back  in  to  their
    country of nationality.  All members of the family had  lived  most  of
    their lives in Nepal.

42. I am satisfied, having reviewed  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Judge, that her conclusion that the appeals should be  allowed  outside
    the Rules is perverse, because it fails to give  sufficient  weight  to
    the public interest or to strike a proper balance between that interest
    and the relatively weak ties which this small family has  developed  to
    the United Kingdom.

43. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    remake the decision by dismissing all three appeals.



DECISION

44. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the claimants' appeals.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:  21 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
