










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18634/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 20 November 2017              | On: 6 December 2017                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                          Mr Tafseer Shahzad Shani
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      entry clearance officer: Pakistan

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  "the  claimant"  and  the  "ECO"
      respectively.

   2. The claimant's appeal was stood down until 1pm. Attempts were made  to
      contact his representatives, namely UNQ Immigration, as  well  as  the
      sponsor. However, only voicemail was reached.

   3.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  claimant,  sponsor  and  the  claimant's
      representatives have been notified of the hearing. I consider that  it
      is in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

   4. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, born on  4  January  1990.  He
      appeals with permission granted  on  15  February  2017,  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin, promulgated on 27 February
      2017, in which he dismissed the claimant's appeal against the decision
      of the ECO to refuse his human rights claim.

   5. There was no appearance by the parties on 15 February 2017, which  was
      the scheduled date of appeal. The claimant had requested to  have  his
      appeal determined on the papers only.

   6. Judge Amin noted that the claimant appealed against  the  decision  of
      the respondent against his application made on 7 April 2016 for  entry
      clearance as a partner of a person  present  and  settled  in  the  UK
      pursuant to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

   7. He noted that  the  claimant  met  the  suitability  and  relationship
      requirements of the Rules but failed to meet the financial and English
      language requirements set out in the refusal letter.

   8. The claimant lodged an  appeal  against  that  refusal  and  submitted
      documents listed in the solicitor's letter dated 26 July 2016.

   9. Following the notice of appeal, the entry clearance  manager  conceded
      that the claimant had met the financial and relationship requirements.
      However, the manager was not satisfied that the claimant had submitted
      information that he had passed a valid English language test  and  the
      refusal was therefore upheld.

  10. The Judge had regard to the bundles from the parties - [8-9].

  11. In relation to the  English  language  test,  the  appellant  enclosed
      payment receipt verification that he had booked an IELTS test  for  28
      July 2016 and that he would forward the pass certificate in due course
      [12]. Just prior to the hearing, he produced an IELTS test certificate
      showing that he had passed the test [13].

  12. The Judge noted that the claimant made his application on 7 April 2016
      which was refused on 5 July 2016. At the date of refusal, he  did  not
      have the required certificate and therefore failed to meet the English
      language test requirements  under  the  rules.  The  evidence  of  the
      certificate post-dated the refusal decision. The Judge noted  that  he
      was not entitled to have regard  to  that  evidence  at  the  date  of
      hearing [14].

  13. He went on  to  find  that  as  the  claimant  had  not  met  all  the
      Immigration Rules, '...his appeal fails and is dismissed' [15].

  14. Notwithstanding that he dismissed the appeal, the Judge stated in  his
      "Notice of Decision" directly below paragraph  [15]  that  the  appeal
      '.....is allowed under the Immigration Rules'. He also stated that  as
      he has allowed the appeal, and a fee has been paid or is  payable,  he
      makes no award as many of the key documents were  not  submitted  with
      the application form.

  15. Following the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  the  claimant  applied  for
      permission to appeal against the decision promulgated on  27  February
      2017.

  16. Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McClure  granted  the
      claimant permission  to  appeal.  He  noted  that  the  Rules  require
      documentation be submitted with the application. The  certificate  now
      produced is dated 17 August 2016 and is therefore a  month  after  the
      refusal and more than four months after the application.  It  was  for
      the claimant to ensure that he could  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Rules at the date of application and not at any subsequent  review  by
      an entry clearance manager. There is no breach of anyone's  rights  to
      expect an applicant to comply with the requirements under  the  Rules.
      The Judge was entitled on the  basis  of  the  evidence  presented  to
      expect the claimant to comply with the Rules.

  17. However, he noted that there was a  clear  inconsistency  between  the
      'notice of decision' and paragraph 15 of the decision. He  also  noted
      that this is an appeal on human rights and  consideration  has  to  be
      given as to whether or not there were factors warranting consideration
      of the appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

  18. It was on that basis that leave to appeal was granted.

  19. Ms Ahmad accepted that there was a contradiction between  the  finding
      at paragraph 15 and the notice of decision. She referred to the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision in Katsonga v  SSHD  ("slip"  rule:  First  tier's
      general powers) [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC).

  20. The Tribunal noted that the  slip  rule  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Procedure Rules cannot be used to reverse the effect  of  a  decision.
      The decision has been given in  a  particular  sense  and  it  may  be
      subject to setting aside under Rule 32 or the  appellate  process.  In
      all other respects, having made and sent out the decision,  the  Judge
      was functus.

  21. There has been an obvious error made by the Judge. He clearly  had  no
      intention to allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  had
      earlier set out  his  reasons  for  his  conclusion  at  [15]  of  his
      decision.

  22. I accordingly set aside the "notice of decision"  and  substitute  for
      that decision the  following:  "The  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the
      Immigration Rules."

  23. As noted by Judge McClure, this is  an  appeal  on  human  rights  and
      consideration  must  be  given  as  to  whether  there  were   factors
      warranting  consideration  outside  the  rules.  Judge  Amin  did  not
      consider this at all.

  24. In the claimant's grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, he
      expressly relied on Article 8, contending that  the  sponsor  had  now
      been married for "an excessive period of  time".  They  have  remained
      apart from one another throughout this period except for short  visits
      made by the sponsor. Keeping them apart is not contrary to the  public
      good [sic].

  25. In the circumstances I set aside Judge Amin's decision and re-make it.



  26. The decision to refuse entry clearance is treated  by  the  ECO  as  a
      refusal of a human rights claim. In the  result  the  claimant  has  a
      right of appeal pursuant to s.82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act. The grounds of
      appeal found at s.84(2). The  appeal  under  s.82  (Refusal  of  Human
      Rights Claim) must be brought on the  grounds  that  the  decision  is
      unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

  27. The claimant's claim is that the ECO's decision breaches his right  to
      respect for his private  and  family  life  under  Article  8  and  is
      therefore unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

  28. The burden lies on the claimant to establish that  Article  8  (1)  is
      engaged. If that is achieved the burden lies on the ECO to  show  that
      the  decision  appealed  against   is   proportionate   in   all   the
      circumstances. The standard of proof is a balance of probabilities.  I
      must consider evidence up to the date of hearing.

  29. I have had regard to the  five  stage  approach  advocated  in  Razgar
      [2004] UKHL 27.   Although  Razgar  related  to  a  removal  case  the
      guidance is nevertheless appropriate when considering entry clearance.

  30. Article 8 is engaged on  the  basis  of  family  life  that  has  been
      established between the claimant and sponsor.

  31. I find the ECO's decision is in accordance with the law as he/she  was
      entitled  to  refuse  entry  clearance.  It  was  believed  that   the
      requirements of the relevant Rules were not met and that  there  would
      be no breach of Article 8.

  32. I move to the fourth question which involves  considering  the  public
      interest in maintaining effective immigration control.  That  in  turn
      involves considering whether or  not  the  claimant  can  satisfy  the
      requirements under the Rules. It is for the claimant to prove that the
      Immigration Rules can be satisfied on the balance of probabilities.

  33. The claimant needed to provide an English language certificate or  his
      unique reference number (URN) from a  provider  or  test  approved  by
      UKVI, listed in Appendix 0 of the Rules. The certificate  he  provided
      did not show a URN and his test is no longer acceptable.

  34. His application was accordingly refused under paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of
      Appendix FM of the Rules.

  35. I have had regard to Appendix  FM-SE  which  requires  in  respect  of
      family members that specified evidence be  produced.  At  D(a)  it  is
      provided that in deciding an application in  relation  to  which  this
      Appendix states that specified documents must  be  provided,  the  ECO
      considers documents which have been submitted with the application and
      will only consider documents submitted after the application where sub
      paragraph (b) or (e) applies. Those sections  did  not  apply  in  his
      case.

  36. The English language  requirement  at  E-ECPT.4.1  provides  that  the
      appellant must provide specified evidence as set out. He is not exempt
      from that requirement - E-ECPT.4.2.

  37. In Ali and Bibi, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2015] UKSC  68  the
      Supreme Court held at [45] that the rule does have  a  legitimate  aim
      (or a series of aims or links to  the  promotion  of  integration  and
      within the larger aim of community  cohesion)  and  that  the  aim  is
      sufficiently important to justify  interfering  with  the  fundamental
      rights to respect for family  life  of  British  citizens  or  persons
      settled here who wish to be joined here  by  partners  from  overseas.
      Nevertheless, the aim is not as important as the other aims  to  which
      the pre-entry qualifications of foreign partners  are  addressed.  The
      aim of a pre-entry language requirement is not as important as the aim
      of ensuring that all migrants learn English once they are here.

  38. Whilst it may be doubted that requiring a very basic level  of  spoken
      English before entry makes a great contribution to the overall aim  of
      promoting integration, it cannot be said that it makes no contribution
      towards it at all.

  39. In Agyarko and Ikuga, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2017] UKSC  11
      the Supreme Court noted at [47-48] that the rules and instructions are
      compatible with Article 8. The Home Secretary's policy is qualified by
      the scope allowed for leave to remain to be granted outside the rules.
      If the applicant or his or her partner  would  face  very  significant
      difficulties in continuing their family life together outside the  UK,
      which could not be overcome or would  entail  very  serious  hardship,
      then "the insurmountable obstacles" test will be met and leave will be
      granted under the Rules.

  40. Similarly if there are "exceptional circumstances". In the absence  of
      either "insurmountable obstacles" or "exceptional  circumstances",  as
      defined, it is not apparent why it should be incompatible with Article
      8 for leave to be refused. That is not to say that decisions  applying
      the rules and instructions in individual  cases  will  necessarily  be
      compatible with Article 8: that is a question which if a  decision  is
      challenged must be determined independently by the Court  or  Tribunal
      in the light of the particular circumstances of each case.

  41. With that in mind, I move to the fifth Razgar question which  concerns
      proportionality. This involves the balancing exercise. In  considering
      proportionality and whether the interference with his right to respect
      for family life is justified under Article 8(2), I have regard to  the
      considerations set out in s.117B of the 2002 Act.

  42. The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the  public
      interest. It is also in the public interest that a person  seeking  to
      enter the UK can speak English.

  43. Although it is contended that the sponsor and  the  claimant  wish  to
      live together in the UK, I follow the guidance in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
      EWCA Civ 387 in that compelling circumstances  would  be  required  to
      justify a grant of leave to enter when the immigration rules  are  not
      satisfied. At paragraph [51]  it  is  specifically  stated  that  this
      applies when the evidence rule set  out  in  Appendix  FM-SE  are  not
      complied with.

  44. I have had regard to the guidance in Patel and Others [2012] EWCA  Civ
      960 at [57] where it was held that it is important  to  remember  that
      Article 8 is not a general dispensing power. It is to be distinguished
      from the secretary of state's discretion  to  allow  leave  to  remain
      outside the rules which  may  be  unrelated  to  any  protected  human
      rights.

  45. In my view I must attach significant weight to the public interest  in
      maintaining  effective  immigration  control  which  means   attaching
      significant weight to the fact that the immigration rules which relate
      to entry clearance are not satisfied.

  46. I do not find  that  the  claimant  has  demonstrated  any  compelling
      circumstances warranting allowing the appeal, notwithstanding that the
      relevant immigration rules were not satisfied.

  47. The Judge noted that the claimant made  his  application  on  7  April
      2016. As at the date of refusal, he did not have  the  required  IELTS
      certificate and therefore failed to meet  the  English  language  test
      requirements. Evidence of the certificate was produced  prior  to  the
      hearing, post dates the refusal decision. I am not  entitled  to  have
      regard to that evidence as at the date of hearing.

  48. It is open to the claimant to make a  further  application  for  entry
      clearance  to  provide  evidence   which   satisfies   the   mandatory
      requirements under the Rules.

  49. On the evidence presented to the Tribunal however I do not  find  that
      the respondent's decision disproportionate and therefore  there  could
      be  no  breach  of  Article  8  if  the  appeal  were  dismissed.  The
      respondent's decision was not unlawful under s.6 of the  Human  Rights
      Act 1998.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. Having set it aside I  re-make  the  decision
      refusing the appeal under the Immigration Rules as well as  on  Shuman
      rights (Article 8) grounds.


      Anonymity direction not made.


Signed                              Date 30 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer
