
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18350/2018
                                                               HU/18349/2018
                                                               HU/18354/2018
                                                               HU/18357/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2019                   |On 08 November 2019                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                         mrs L C K (first Appellant)
                         miss M B (second Appellant)
                         miss C B (third Appellant)
                        master C B (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Lee, counsel instructed by Eldons Berkeley
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appeals came before me for a hearing on whether or not there was an
    error of law on 21 August 2019.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated
    on 11 September 2019, I found material errors of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal and adjourned the appeal for a resumed  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal.  The decision and reasons is appended.

 2. The appeals next came before me for hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Manchester  on  16  October  2019.   At  the  outset  the  issues  were
    clarified, which were that the appeal was being brought on the basis of
    human  rights  viz  Article  8  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  Despite directing that the first  Appellant  should
    be provided with  a  Malayalam  interpreter  none  had  been  provided.
    However upon Mr McVeety indicating that he did not have extensive cross-
    examination for the first Appellant, the hearing proceeded  in  English
    on the basis that if difficulties arose the appeal would  be  adjourned
    in order to obtain the assistance of an interpreter.

 3. Mr Lee sought to rely on a  bundle  that  had  been  prepared  for  the
    hearing and which included  supplementary  witness  statements  by  the
    first Appellant, her son, C. her daughter C. and her daughter M. and  a
    report by an independent social worker,  Ms  Francisca  Serrette  which
    runs to 32 pages and is dated 9 October 2019.

 4. I heard evidence from the first Appellant, who confirmed  the  contents
    of her statement and that prior to coming to the UK she  had  lived  in
    Kerala with her family.  She had never lived anywhere else in India and
    she spoke only Malayalam which  is  a  language  local  to  Kerala  and
    English.  When asked what she thought would happen to her  if  she  was
    returned to India, she said she did not  have  her  parents,  they  had
    passed away.  She only had her children and her  husband's  family  and
    words to the effect  that  if  she  went  back  the  violence  she  had
    experienced from her husband before would happen again.

 5. The first Appellant was cross-examined by  Mr  McVeety.  He  asked  the
    first Appellant to clarify where in Kerala she was from, to  which  she
    responded she was  from  a  village  about  ten  kilometres  away  from
    Kottayam.  The village consisted of some small houses  and  farm  areas
    and was a rural area.  She said her parents were from that  village  as
    well.  Her husband's parents were from about five kilometres  away  and
    she had no siblings.  She said when her father passed away that he  had
    left her a small house, however due to  the  serious  floods  that  had
    taken place in Kerala, the house had been flooded and  was  broken  and
    that she had found this out both from Facebook and from  somebody  that
    she met in Liverpool who is from the same local  area.   She  said  her
    father had a sister, her aunt, but she had now also passed away and she
    had no other relatives.

 6. The Appellant confirmed that she had not formally divorced her husband.
     She did not know where he was but thought he  was  probably  with  his
    family because he had nowhere else to go.  Mr McVeety asked  the  first
    Appellant if she had had contact with her husband since he returned and
    she said that she had had no direct contact.  Sometimes  he  makes  bad
    comments using a different identity on Facebook or social media but she
    knows it is him and that he has also asked  one  of  her  good  friends
    questions about her and the children.  When asked if her ex-husband had
    tried to contact the children, the first Appellant said he had made bad
    comments about her daughter C. on social media in the past.

 7. I then asked the first Appellant questions  in  order  to  clarify  her
    history.  She confirmed that she came to the UK on 17 February 2011 and
    that her husband had at that time stayed to look after  their  children
    and her  father,  but  he  then  joined  her  three  months  later  and
    thereafter her father had looked after the children.

 8. The first Appellant confirmed that after her marriage  she  lived  with
    her husband and his family for a year and then  she  sought  permission
    and was permitted to return to her own family after that first year due
    to the domestic violence she had been subjected to.  Her  husband  then
    came to visit her and they were reconciled  and  he  moved  in  to  her
    family home.

 9. The first Appellant clarified in respect of [6]  of  her  supplementary
    statement that  after  he  arrived  she  was  attending  university  in
    Liverpool, whereas her husband went to stay with a friend near  Lincoln
    in order to work and she would visit him there.  In relation to [7] and
    the fact they moved to Keighley together, the  first  Appellant  stated
    she moved there in order to work and at that time her husband had money
    and said he would come with her.  She said for two months he was  okay.
    The children then joined them from India because of the  death  of  her
    father.  In respect of [9] and the reference to threats and accusations
    from her mother-in-law, she said that these had been made on the  phone
    after the first Appellant had informed her  that  her  husband  was  in
    prison due to domestic violence.  In relation to [12] and the assertion
    that her husband is politically connected, the first Appellant confirms
    that he is connected to the Congress Party of India, that he knows  the
    MP for Kottayam, a Mr Oommen Chandy who had previously been  the  chief
    minister and her husband's family know his family.

10. The Appellant's oldest daughter M was then called as  a  witness.   She
    confirmed her statement and that she was born on 1 March  1998.   There
    were no questions for her by Mr McVeety.

11. The Appellant's daughter C was then also called to give evidence.   Her
    date of birth is 12 April 2003.  She confirmed she was 10 when she came
    to the UK.  For the purposes of clarification, the Upper Tribunal asked
    her about a claim in the statement that she was unable to  speak,  read
    or write Malayalam despite only having come to the UK at the age of 10.
     The witness said that she could speak Malayalam but having been in the
    UK for six and a half years she  is  speaking  less  and  less  of  her
    regional language.  She was  not  taught  to  read  or  write  in  that
    language before she left India.  She was educated in English at primary
    school prior to coming to the  UK  at  the  age  of  10.   The  witness
    confirmed that she can still speak some Malayalam but she tends to  use
    English when talking to her mother.   Her  younger  brother  also  uses
    English and her older sister M uses a mix  of  English  and  Malayalam.
    The witness confirmed that she had just recently finished her GCSEs and
    was now studying chemistry, biology  and  maths  for  A  level,  having
    passed the grade boundaries in order to do this.  She said that she had
    missed some school because of having to move from one area to  another.



12. I then heard submissions from Mr McVeety on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State.  He submitted that the factual nature  of  the  appeals  is  not
    controversial and elicits only sympathy and  pity  for  the  Appellants
    because of having experienced  violence  at  the  hands  of  a  violent
    individual.   Mr  McVeety  further  accepted  that  there  would  be  a
    subjective fear of return to the Appellant's home area, but Kerala is a
    reasonably small part of India.  It is a third of the size  of  the  UK
    and has a population of tens of millions, but he accepted she  may  not
    wish to go back to that area from a subjective fear point of view.

13. In relation to the  Appellant's  husband's  political  connections,  Mr
    McVeety submitted that someone who had previously been a chief minister
    and was high profile  would  not  assist  the  Appellant's  husband  in
    tracking her and the children down in order to harm them  and  that  he
    would have no motivation to do this, that India has a functioning court
    system.  Mr McVeety suggested that internal relocation would be  viable
    for the Appellants, that India was a vast country and it is  reasonably
    clear that the children are  moving  away  from  speaking  their  local
    language towards speaking English, which is the  official  language  of
    the government in India and thus this would not be a problem  in  terms
    of living elsewhere in the country.

14. Mr McVeety submitted that the  Appellant's  husband  is  from  a  small
    family which consists only of his parents and his brother and  he  does
    not appear to be serious in  tracking  them  down.   Whilst  the  first
    Appellant assumes that he is making adverse comments  on  Facebook  and
    social media using a different identity, there is no evidence of  this.
    She could of course stay away from social media or make sure  that  the
    settings only permit access by close family and friends.

15. In relation to the best interests of the  two  younger  Appellants  who
    remain minors, Mr McVeety noted the report by  the  independent  social
    worker.  He was not seeking to go behind her  findings  but  sought  to
    comment on various aspects of them, in particular, at [7.4] that whilst
    it may be desirable for children to have stability,  if  that  was  the
    primary consideration there will be  no  such  thing  as  international
    migration.  At [3.33] he submitted that the social worker  was  perhaps
    overstating the  concerns  as  to  the  Appellant's  son  returning  in
    relation to the culture permitting domestic violence and in relation to
    [3.38]

16. Mr McVeety noted that  the  scene  of  the  crime,  i.e.  the  domestic
    violence, was both India and the UK.  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the
    fact is that the family have had  to  move  to  avoid  the  Appellant's
    husband and they have managed to do so.  He submitted that none of  the
    Appellants are qualifying children.  They would be returned as a family
    unit.  Their important years in terms of their initial development took
    place in India where they  had  education  in  English  so  they  could
    continue with this on return, given  there  is  a  clearly  functioning
    education system in India.

17. Mr McVeety submitted that the first Appellant  is  the  only  surviving
    family member of a person who had  property  and  land.   Even  if  the
    Appellant did not wish to return to her home village she could  arrange
    for the house to be sold.  He submitted the children had lived in India
    for significant periods of their lives.  There  was  no  huge  extended
    family on their father's side who could track them down and they  would
    be able to access sufficiency of protection.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's husband would not be able to find out if they  returned  if
    they went, for example, to Mumbai or another big  city.   He  submitted
    clearly the Article 3 threshold had not been reached.

18. In relation to the public interest considerations set  out  at  Section
    117A to D of the NIAA 2002, Mr McVeety submitted  that  at  best  these
    were neutral factors.  There was  no  adverse  immigration  history  or
    criminality, however, the children were not  qualifying  children.   Mr
    McVeety submitted whilst it may be in their best interests to remain in
    the UK, it does not mean it is reasonable for them to do so given  that
    the family can relocate to India.

19.  In his submissions, Mr Lee  sought  to  rely  on  the  report  of  the
    independent social worker and the educational attainment,  particularly
    of the Appellant's daughter C.  Bearing in mind that the best interests
    assessment, this is a primary consideration and it must  be  considered
    first.  He submitted that C. is a paradigm example.  She is 16 and  has
    been in the UK for well over six years.  It  is  clear  that  her  best
    interests lie in her being able to continue her education  in  the  UK,
    having started her A level course.

20. Mr Lee submitted that there was an impact on the  child  Appellants  of
    having witnessed violence against their mother and trauma and that they
    needed a degree of certainty and stability which would  be  represented
    by being able to remain  in  the  UK.   He  submitted  it  would  be  a
    significant setback for C. to have to leave the UK and restart her life
    and education in India. Mr Lee  sought  to  rely  on  the  Respondent's
    policy guidance, "Every child matters"  and  the  duty  encompassed  by
    Section 55 was not  just  to  promote  and  safeguard  children's  best
    interests  but  to  prevent  their  physical,  emotional,  intellectual
    impairment. Mr Lee also sought to rely on the considerations set out in
    the House of Lords judgment in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.   In  particular
    it is necessary  to  attain  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's  particular
    circumstances to evaluate on a case by case basis and that there is  no
    substitute for a careful examination of all the relevant factors.

21. Mr Lee further sought to rely on the judgment of Lord Justice Clarke in
    EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [35](a)-(g), in  particular  age,
    length of residence, length of education, the stage education has  been
    reached, the extent the child is  distanced  from  the  country  it  is
    proposed to return them, the extent to which the child would  encounter
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties and the extent  that  removal
    would interfere with proposed family life.  Mr Lee submitted that other
    difficulties referred to therein would also  include  for  example  the
    experience of domestic violence from their father.  He  submitted  that
    the impact of domestic violence is  twofold:  firstly,  the  Appellants
    attained some stability in the UK and secondly, that the easiest  place
    logistically for the family to base themselves in India would be  where
    they lived before but clearly that would be traumatic for them in light
    of the fact that the children  as  well  as  their  mother  experienced
    violence from the first Appellant's husband there (and he may still  be
    there). This is reflected in the independent social work report.

22. Mr Lee submitted even though none of the children  are  yet  qualifying
    children, there are other factors in the case which  nevertheless  move
    it over the line in respect of a consideration  of  exceptionality  and
    Article 8 outside the Rules and proportionality.  Mr Lee accepted  that
    the Rules are the starting point but noted that there was a lacuna  for
    children who had not been in the UK for seven years because they do not
    fall within the remit of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as they are  under  18
    years of age.  He submitted it was necessary to consider the appeal  on
    the basis of the family as a whole, as well as individual members.

23. Mr Lee submitted that there was an objective  risk  to  the  Appellants
    based on the fact they come from a relatively small part of India  with
    a  particularly  distinct  linguistic  and  cultural  background.   The
    circumstances were that the first Appellant's former husband was  still
    expressing hostility, including hostile comments on social  media.   He
    submitted it was not practicable to suggest  that  three  young  people
    would or would have to stay away from social media for any great period
    of time in order to avoid their father.

24. In relation to their father's links with an MP, Mr Lee  accepted  there
    was no objective evidence of this but that it was another factor to put
    into  the  overall  cumulative  consideration  of  proportionality.  In
    relation to the sale of the first  Appellant's  father's  property  and
    land, Mr Lee submitted that this would be an identifiable factor as her
    ex-partner would be able to use this to identify and locate the family.



25. In relation to internal relocation,  Mr  Lee  submitted  that  relevant
    factors are that  the  household  is  female  headed,  that  the  first
    Appellant will be relocating with two daughters and a young  son,  that
    she would encounter linguistic difficulties relocating  away  from  her
    home area and that her younger daughter is  unlikely  to  continue  her
    education.  Mr Lee submitted that all the factors taken  together  lead
    to a finding that there are very significant obstacles and that  it  is
    unreasonable to expect the family to internally relocate.  He submitted
    that a hostile animus and social media would not negate the risk.

26. Mr Lee submitted that it is necessary to take a holistic  view  of  the
    case outside the Rules pursuant to Article 8.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants have experienced significant violence and that  this  is  an
    unusual circumstance  when  one  is  looking  in  an  Article  8  case.
    Therefore  even  if  the  Tribunal  considered  that   the   individual
    Immigration Rule was not met on  the  facts  of  that  individual,  the
    proportionality exercise means when looked at altogether in relation to
    all four Appellants that removal would be disproportionate.

27. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.



     Findings and reasons

28. This is a human rights appeal against  a  decision  by  the  Respondent
    dated 17  August  2018  where,  whilst  acknowledging  that  the  first
    Appellant had been subjected to domestic violence by her  husband,  who
    had been convicted, sentenced to 6 months imprisonment and subsequently
    removed to India, found that there were no very  significant  obstacles
    to integration in India and no exceptional circumstances  meriting  the
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules pursuant  to  Article  8  of
    ECHR.

29.   There  are  four  Appellants,  a  mother  and  three   children   born
respectively on 19 May     1979, 1 September 1998,  12  April  2003  and  25
February 2005.  The First Appellant     has been lawfully present in the  UK
since February 2011.  The Second  and  Third    Appellants  arrived  as  her
dependants on 5 June 2013 and the Fourth Appellant    arrived, also  as  her
dependant, on 16 August 2013.  Thus the first Appellant  has     resided  in
the United Kingdom for more than 8 years and her children, who have     been
treated as her dependents, for more than 6 years. The application for  leave
on   the basis of human rights was made, in time, on  29  June  2017  and  I
find that all the      Appellants have  been  lawfully  present  in  the  UK
since February 2011.

30.  I first consider the appeals with regard to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
Immigration   Rules. It was not contended by Mr Lee that  any  of  the  sub-
paragraphs other than  paragraph 276ADE(vi) are  applicable,  thus  the  two
minor Appellants are excluded   from consideration on the  basis  that  they
are under 18 years of age.

31.  Having heard evidence from three of the four Appellants, I  find  their
evidence to be    credible and I accept it. Indeed, Mr McVeety did not  seek
to cast doubt on it. That  being the case, I find  that  it  is  established
through his  conviction  and  sentence  that      the  first  Appellant  was
subjected to domestic violence by her husband and, as Mr   McVeety  accepts,
she continues to fear him and further domestic violence if she      returned
to India. I find that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  Appellants
to   return  to  Kerala,  given  their  past  experiences  of  domestic  and
familial violence, in  circumstances where I accept  the  local  authorities
failed to provide sufficient    protection. The issue I  have  to  determine
is whether there would be very significant   obstacles to  the   Appellant's
integration in another part of India.


32.  I have taken into consideration the Home Office guidance in respect of
Family and    Private Life, version 3 dated 23 September 2019 at 59-61 in
respect of "Assessing  whether there are 'very significant obstacles to
integration into' the country of return" which   provides inter alia:

     "... A 'very significant obstacle to integration' means something
which would prevent or     seriously inhibit the applicant from integrating
into the country of return. You are looking for  more than the usual
obstacles which may arise on relocation (such as the need to learn a new
language or obtain employment). They are looking to see whether there are
'very significant'     obstacles, which is a high threshold. Very
significant obstacles will exist where the applicant  demonstrates that
they would be unable to establish a private life in the country of return,
or   where establishing a private life in the country of return would
entail very serious    hardship for the applicant.

     Relevant country information should be referred to when assessing
whether there     are very      significant obstacles to integration. You
should consider the specific claim made and the  relevant national laws,
attitudes and country situation in the relevant country or regions.

     A very significant obstacle may arise where the applicant would be at
a real risk of    prosecution or significant harassment or discrimination
as a result of their sexual     or political     orientation or faith or
gender, or where their rights and freedoms would otherwise be so   severely
restricted as to affect their fundamental rights, and therefore their
ability to establish   a private life in that country.

     You should consider whether the applicant has the ability to form an
adequate private life by   the standards of the country of return - not by
UK standards. You will need to consider      whether the applicant will be
able to establish a private life in respect of all its essential
elements, even if, for example, their job, or their ability to find work,
or their network of    friends and relationships may be differently
constituted in the country of return. The fact the    applicant may find
life difficult or challenging in the country of return does not mean that
they have established that there would be very significant obstacles to
integration there. You     must consider all relevant factors in the
person's background and the conditions they are  likely to face in the
country of return in making their decision as to whether there are very
significant obstacles to integration. You will need to    consider any
specific obstacles raised by    the applicant. They will also need to set
these against other factors in order to make an  assessment in the
individual case.

     Relevant factors to consider include:

     Cultural background
     Length of time spent in the country of return
     Family, friends and social network
     Faith, political or sexual orientation or gender identity
     You must consider the relevant country information when considering
whether an    applicant would face very significant obstacles integrating
or re-integrating into the country  of return as a result of their faith,
political or sexual orientation or gender identity. You must   consider the
degree of difficulty that would be faced as a result of the applicant's
faith,   political or sexual orientation or gender identity based on the
situation in practice in the    country of return and not necessarily
solely what is provided for in law. The applicant's   previous experience
of life in    that country and any difficulties the applicant claims to
have     experienced as a result of their faith, political or sexual
orientation or gender identity must     also be considered.

33.  I have further taken into consideration the judgment in Secretary of
State for the Home     Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 where the
Court of Appeal looked at the   concept of integration to proposed country
of deportation and found:

     "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
the country to which it is      proposed that he be deported, as set out in
section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad     one. It is not
confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while living
in the   other country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory
language as subject to some gloss   and it will usually be sufficient for a
court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that    Parliament
has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative
judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough of an
insider in    terms of understanding how life in the society in that other
country is carried on and  a capacity to participate in it, so as to have a
reasonable opportunity to be accepted   there, to be able to operate on a
day-to-day basis in that society and to build up      within a reasonable
time a variety of human relationships to give substance to the
individual's private or family life." [emphasis added].

34.  The first Appellant's first language is Malayalam, a language spoken
in Kerala but     not elsewhere in India, however, she also speaks English
to a level sufficient to have   worked during her time in the UK and I find
that this would enable her to   communicate and to potentially find
employment in one of the larger cities in India. I    find that the first
Appellant would have a cultural understanding of life in India,    having
grown up there and that she would be able to re-build a private life over
time, despite the absence of family, friends or a social network outside
Kerala, other     than     her children.

35.  One matter that gives me concern, however, whilst taking account of
the fact that this     is not an asylum claim, is whether there is an
ongoing risk to the first Appellant from     her husband. The Home Office
guidance makes reference to the need to consider      inter alia gender
identity and I find that this would render the first Appellant
vulnerable, as a female head of household and if her husband were able to
locate the    family. I make no express finding as to whether or not the
first Appellant's husband  would receive assistance from Mr Oomen Chandy in
either tracing the Appellants or    receiving    protection for any further
attacks upon them, although I take judicial  notice of the fact that Mr
Chandy is the MP for the Appellants' home area and has    formerly been the
Chief Minister of Kerala and it is reasonably likely given he is from  the
same area as the Appellants that the first Appellant's husband does indeed
know     him. I find that the potential risk of further violence from her
husband is an obstacle     to the integration of the first Appellant but
that, in itself, it is not sufficient to reach   the threshold for showing
that there are very significant obstacles to integration, given    that if
the family relocate away from Kerala it would be difficult for her husband
to   find them.

36.  I also accept and find that  the  second  Appellant  was  subjected  to
domestic violence      from her father and when he left India  for  the  UK,
from her uncle in India. I accept   that since her  father  was  removed  to
India he has issued threats and abuse through    social media. I  find,  for
the same reasons as in her mother's case, that the  second       Appellant's
gender renders her vulnerable to further violence were her  father  able  to
locate  her  and  her  mother  but  that  whilst  this  is  an  obstacle  to
integration  it  does  not     reach  the  threshold  for  very  significant
obstacles to integration, given the second    Appellant's  facility  in  the
English language and the fact she has been educated  in     both  India  and
the UK and could relocate away from Kerala.

37.  However, I have also considered the appeals with regard  to  Article  8
outside the   Immigration Rules, bearing in mind that this is  a  family  in
respect of whom the first  two Appellants have been  subjected  to  domestic
violence and the  younger  two     Appellants  have  been  witness  to  that
violence, which has resulted in social services  involvement in the  UK  and
a care plan put in place on 18.12.15 as a result  of    witnessing  parental
domestic abuse. I find  that  this  constitutes  exceptional   circumstances
meriting consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

38.  Given that the third and fourth Appellant are minors aged  16  and  14,
their best    interests are a primary  consideration  and  I  have  directed
myself accordingly. I have      taken full account  of  the  report  of  the
independent social worker, Francisca Serrette    dated  9  October  2019   ,
who found at 3.29 that it would be significantly  damaging  to    the  Third
Appellant if she had to return to India,  due  to  having  been  exposed  to
chronic domestic abuse and that the level  of  psychological  trauma  is  in
direct   opposition to healthy development and goes against the  welfare  of
the child. She    further opines at 3.37 that: "removing  the  children  and
placing them in an unfamiliar   country goes directly against what  research
suggests is needed for children exposed to   domestic abuse." At  section  5
of the report, having spoken to  the  children's  schools,  Ms      Serrette
records that both  are  excellent  students  and  potential  high  achievers
despite  having moved schools from Norfolk to Liverpool and having  suffered
adversity and     expresses concern at the impact  on  their  education  and
potential of having to go to    India. She concludes at 7.8. that  it  would
be in their best interests to remain in the  UK. I have noted  Mr  McVeety's
comments on aspects of Ms Serrette's report  but  find   that  the  extracts
cited above are  reasoned  and  that  her  opinion  is  based  on  research,
which  she  cites,   as  well  as  interviews  with  the  Third  and  Fourth
Appellants and their   teachers.

39.      The third  and  fourth  Appellants  are  not  qualifying  children,
having  resided  in  the   UK  since  5  June  2013  and  16   August   2013
respectively, which is over 6 years. Their   presence in  the  UK  has  been
lawful as they are dependents of their  mother  who  has      made  in  time
applications for leave to remain. Both Appellants speak English and     they
remain financially dependent on their mother. Their leave  has  always  been
precarious. Consequently,  as  Mr  McVeety  submitted  with  regard  to  the
statutory     public interest   considerations, at best  these  are  neutral
factors. However, as was   recognised by their Lordships in Rhuppiah  [2018]
UKSC 58, section 117B cannot    put decision makers in  a  straitjacket  and
there is small degree of flexibility built in    to section 117A(2)(a)

40.  I have had regard to the judgment of Lord Justice Clarke in EV
(Phillipines) [2014]   EWCA Civ 874 in particular at [35] and [36]. I note
that both the minor Appellants  are at an important stage of their
education, the Third Appellant has commenced     her A level course and the
Fourth Appellant his GCSE course. They were  respectively aged 10 and 8 at
the time they left India and came to the UK and I find,   bearing in mind
the views of their school and the report of the independent social
worker, that removal to India would clearly be disruptive to their
education. When   considered alongside the fact that they have both been
subject to a Social Services    care plan due to emotional abuse as a
consequence of witnessing the chronic and    long term domestic abuse of
their mother and older sister and that the Third      Appellant was also on
occasion also hit or beaten by her father, I accept the opinion    of the
independent social worker that removal to India would be psychologically
damaging and would be entirely contrary to their best interests.

41.  Having weighed up all the material factors, including the strong
weight that needs to   be given to the need to maintain immigration
control, I have concluded that on   balance it would not be proportionate
for the Third and Fourth Appellants to return    to India. Given that they
are part of a family unit with their mother and older sister,  the First
and Second Appellants, it follows that it would not be proportionate for
the  family to be separated. I have, in assessing the appeals of the first
two Appellants,   also taken into consideration that there are no adverse
factors given that the first    Appellant has resided lawfully albeit
precariously in the UK since February 2011 and   that she has worked to
support herself. The second Appellant both works and  studies and has been
a dependent on her mother throughout, albeit she is now a      young adult
aged 21. I further find that it is clear from her evidence that she was
also negatively impacted by domestic violence by her father and retains a
fear of him   and his family and further violence were they to find her in
India, due to threats  received by social media, which I find are credible.

     Notice of Decision

42.  For the reasons set out above, I allow all four appeals on human
rights (Article 8)     grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 5 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 5 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman





















