
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/18345/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 September 2018                     |On 11 October 2018                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                       Between

                       MRS MONIJESU OLUWATOYIN FOLAYAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Bircumshaw, Central England Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Can the period between the grant of a leave to enter between a date  of
    which an individual is granted leave to  enter  and  that  individual's
    arrival in the United Kingdom be counted towards  continuous  residence
    for the purposes of paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules?   The
    appellant contends that it can; the respondent contends  that  that  is
    not a permissible interpretation.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Heatherington  promulgated  on  11   September   2017,
    dismissing her appeal against a decision of the respondent made  on  13
    July 2016 to refuse her  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of ten years' long residency.

 3. There is no dispute of the essential facts of this case.  The appellant
    was initially granted entry clearance on 18 August 2004, entering on 14
    September 2004 with entry clearance as a student valid until 1  October
    2006.  Leave to remain in that capacity was extended  on  a  number  of
    occasions, it being accepted that her leave did  expire  on  27  August
    2014 and an appeal against that decision was lodged out of time.

 4. At the relevant time paragraphs 276A and 276B of the Immigration  Rules
    provided as follows, so far as is relevant:

    276A.    For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE(1).

    (a)  "continuous residence" means residence in the United  Kingdom  for
    an unbroken period, and for  these  purposes  a  period  shall  not  be
    considered to have been broken where an applicant is  absent  from  the
    United Kingdom for a period of 6  months  or  less  at  any  one  time,
    provided that the applicant in question has existing limited  leave  to
    enter  or  remain  upon  their  departure  and  return,  but  shall  be
    considered to have been broken if the applicant:

         (i)  has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act, section  10
         of the 1999 Act, has been deported or has left the  United  Kingdom
         having been refused leave to enter or remain here; or

         (ii)     has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so, evidenced  a
         clear intention not to return; or

         (iii)    left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which he could
         have had no reasonable expectation at the time of leaving  that  he
         would lawfully be able to return; or

         (iv)     has been convicted of an offence and was  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment  or  was  directed  to  be  detained  in  an
         institution other  than  a  prison  (including,  in  particular,  a
         hospital or an institution for young offenders), provided that  the
         sentence in question was not a suspended sentence; or

         (v)  has spent a total of more  than  18  months  absent  from  the
         United Kingdom during the period in question.

    (b)  "lawful residence" means residence which is  continuous  residence
    pursuant to:

         (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

         (ii)     temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971 Act  (as
         previously in force), or immigration bail within section 11 of  the
         1971 Act, where leave to enter or remain is  subsequently  granted;
         or

         (iii)    an exemption from immigration control, including where  an
         exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a  grant
         of leave to enter or remain.

    (c)  'lived continuously' and 'living  continuously'  mean  'continuous
    residence', except that paragraph 276A(a)(iv) shall not apply.

    (2).     Where leave to enter is granted in accordance  with  paragraph
    276A01(1), paragraph 276BE(1) shall apply to an application  for  leave
    to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK as if for "leave  to
    remain under this sub-paragraph" there were substituted "leave to enter
    in accordance with paragraph 276A01(1)".

 5. The appellant's primary submission is that it is  not  necessary  under
    the Rules for there to be continuous physical presence, and  the  Rules
    providing that leave is not broken upon departure and return and indeed
    at the time overstaying prior to departure  did  not  break  continuous
    lawful residence.  It is further submitted that as  the  Rules  on  the
    continuous residence refer to periods of residence pursuant  to  grants
    of leave to enter, which are usually made to applicants out of country,
    there is an intent for these to be included.  And further, by virtue of
    paragraph 25A of the  Immigration  Rules  the  holder  of  valid  entry
    clearance has valid leave to enter the United Kingdom thus meeting  the
    requirements.

 6. It is submitted also that by  analogy  with  paragraph  245AA  and  the
    guidance thereon, whereby periods arising prior to the date of issue of
    entry to  the  United  Kingdom  are  considered  an  allowable  absence
    counting towards the 180 days allowable absence in the relevant twelve-
    month period. It is,  however,  accepted  that  this  is  not  directly
    relevant to paragraph 276A.

 7. In response, the respondent submits that  whilst  paragraph  276A  does
    expressly provide for periods outside the United  Kingdom  and  without
    leave not breaking continuity, the purpose of the  genuine  requirement
    that once they have been in the United Kingdom lawfully for  ten  years
    that as such either  they  should  be  entitled  to  settle  but  first
    logically, permitting summary to leave  for  a  few  weeks  should  not
    interrupt that.  It is submitted that permitting up  to  two  or  three
    months before entry makes no sense and in reality  one  could  not  say
    that one is "resident" before one has arrived in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He submitted further the guidance on points in  relation  to  paragraph
    245AA was not strictly relevant to the facts to this case.

 8. Properly analysed, "continuous residence" within paragraph 276A of  the
    Immigration Rules requires  both  residence  and,  leave  to  enter  or
    remain.  For the purposes of showing continuous residence,  "residence"
    is confined to residence pursuant to leave to enter or remain.  If  the
    appellant were right, a physical presence in the United  Kingdom  would
    not be necessary for the requirements of the rule to be  met,  and  the
    need for the exception set out in 276A (a) (v) would not arise  as  the
    individual in question still had extant leave to enter  and/or  remain.
    The need for exemptions demonstrates that were they not to exist,  then
    there would be a break in continuity not in  leave  but  in  residence.
    Further, were the appellant's submission correct, an  individual  could
    in theory obtain multiple grants of entry clearance, accruing 10  years
    of leave, and qualify yet never have entered the United Kingdom.

 9. The general position is that the Immigration Rules must be given  their
    natural meaning.  Here, I am satisfied  that  the  natural  meaning  of
    "residence" in this case requires physical presence.

10. It follows that the conclusion that leave accrued between the grant  of
    leave  and  entering  the  United  Kingdom  in  calculating  continuous
    residence was not in error and accordingly I dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold it.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                            Date     4
    October 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



