
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/18538/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 June 2019                           |On 25 June 2019                    |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                MR ALI Irbouh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fisher, counsel instructed by ABN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of  Algeria  born  on  13  July  1979.   He
    arrived in the UK on 13 September 2008 as the spouse of an EEA national
    and was subsequently provided with a residence card as evidence of  his
    right to remain in the  UK  issued  valid  until  28  April  2015.  The
    marriage permanently broke down on 1 November  2013,  his  wife  having
    moved out of the matrimonial home  in  2011.  In  September  2013,  the
    Appellant  met  L  whilst  on  holiday  in  Algeria  and  they  had   a
    relationship. Ms L subsequently travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    successfully claimed asylum.

 2. On 1 July 2015, Ms L gave birth to a son. DNA  results  have  confirmed
    the Appellant's paternity. The relationship between the  Appellant  and
    Ms L subsequently broke down but the Appellant maintains  contact  with
    his son on a very regular, almost daily basis.  The  Appellant  made  a
    further application for a  residence  card,  which  was  refused  on  2
    October 2015.  He appealed against  this  decision.   His  appeal  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal for hearing on 21 April 2017 where First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Juss allowed the appeal with regard to Article 8 on
    the basis of his relationship with his son.

 3. This appeal was subject to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that it had not been open to the judge to deal with Article 8 and in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 1 September  2017,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Jackson found that the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to
    consider the appeal on human rights grounds and allowed the  appeal  of
    the Secretary of State.

 4. On 14 September 2017 the Appellant made an in-time application  on  the
    basis of his human rights pursuant to Article 8 to  remain  in  the  UK
    with his son.  This application was refused  in  a  decision  dated  21
    August 2018, primarily on the basis that the Secretary of  State  found
    there was insufficient evidence e.g.  a  DNA  test  to  show  that  the
    Appellant was his child's father.

 5. His appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Broe  for
    hearing on 5 February 2019.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on
    11 February 2019, the judge dismissed the  appeal  finding  that  there
    were no circumstances justifying the grant of leave outside the  Rules,
    it having been accepted that the Appellant could not succeed under  the
    Rules.  Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis  that  the
    judge had materially erred in law in failing to  determine  whether  it
    would be in the Appellant's child's best interests to be separated from
    him, in effect permanently, which  would  be  the  consequence  of  the
    Respondent's decision in light of the fact that the child is a  refugee
    from Algeria who cannot be expected  to  return  to  that  country  and
    secondly in failing to address whether it was in the Appellant's  son's
    best interests for his father to be required to leave the UK  resulting
    in the cessation of their daily contact.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Symes
    in a decision dated 3 May  2019,  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeared to have afforded no distinct attention  to  the  fact
    that the son being a recognised refugee would not be able  to  see  his
    father in their country of origin (Algeria).

     Hearing

 7. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Jarvis helpfully  accepted
    that the judge had materially erred in law in that,  whilst  the  judge
    had considered the best interests of the child at [22]  the  judge  had
    not considered the impact of separation from his father on the child.

 8. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Fisher was content to accept  Mr  Jarvis'
    concession.  In relation to the secondary issue i.e. the fact that  the
    child has refugee status, she submitted that the point is that even  if
    the child were not found to have a well-founded fear of persecution, he
    would not be able to travel alone to see his father, given that  he  is
    currently 3 years of age and  that  his  mother  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to return to Algeria in order for her son to visit his father,
    thus this was a material issue affecting proportionality.

 9. I found a material error of law and indicated that I  was  prepared  to
    remake the decision.  I gave the parties time to prepare for  this  and
    for Mr Jarvis also to consider the skeleton argument prepared  for  the
    hearing by Ms Fisher.  It was agreed  that  as  there  was  no  factual
    dispute in terms of the evidence as recorded by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge that there was no need for further oral evidence.  I  sought  and
    obtained confirmation from Ms Fisher that the basis  of  the  grant  of
    refugee status to Ms L was that she had had a child out of wedlock  and
    was at risk consequently from her family as she  could  not  return  to
    Algeria as a single mother.

10. In his submissions, Mr Jarvis confirmed that the Secretary of State was
    not taking issue with the evidence that the Appellant is  engaged  with
    his son and ex-partner and the findings of fact made by the judge  were
    not contested or in dispute, thus it was expressly accepted that  there
    is family life between the Appellant and his son.  Mr Jarvis  submitted
    that the Appellant is unable to benefit under the provision of Appendix
    FM or under the private life provisions  of  the  Rules  viz  paragraph
    276ADE, however, he pointed out that GEN.3.2  permits  for  exceptional
    circumstances following recognition by the Secretary of  State  of  the
    judgments of the Supreme Court in MM  (Lebanon)  [2017]  UKSC  10.   He
    submitted that, following TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 the public
    interest and  the  policy  considerations  need  to  be  given  serious
    expression and consideration.  The Appellant had previously resided  in
    the UK pursuant to the EEA Regulations.  The test was  whether  removal
    of the Appellant would constitute unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
    him, his former partner or his child.

11. Mr Jarvis submitted that the public interest  considerations  reflected
    the fact that the Secretary of State considered it  proper  to  draw  a
    distinction between children who  on  the  one  hand  were  British  or
    settled and those who were not.   In  respect  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's son had been recognised as a refugee, Mr  Jarvis  submitted
    that this cannot properly dilute the public interest in removal of  the
    Appellant, however it might  enhance  his  positive  case.   Mr  Jarvis
    submitted in the real world the disruption and adverse  impact  on  the
    child, which would be caused by the removal of the Appellant  from  the
    UK, was balanced by the absence of any  additional  or  extra  features
    that resulted from the failure by the Appellant to be able  to  benefit
    from the Immigration Rules and the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations.  In
    relation to the statutory public interest considerations under  Section
    117B of the NIAA 2002,  it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  speaks
    English and that he was working as a bus driver until  September  2017,
    when he was no longer entitled to remain  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
    Thus he was not currently financially independent.

12. In respect of the Appellant's leave, it was  ultimately  accepted  that
    the Appellant has resided  continuously  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations since 13 September 2008 and that he  made  his  human
    rights application within  fourteen  days  of  becoming  appeal  rights
    exhausted i.e. during the time  frame  whereby  he  could  have  sought
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  Thus, it  would  seem  he
    has had continuous leave, however, this was precarious.  Mr Jarvis also
    sought to rely on OA and Others (human  rights;  'new  matter')  [2019]
    UKUT 65 (IAC).  He submitted that the right of the Appellant to stay on
    the basis of continuous lawful residence was a new matter.

13. In relation to the impact on the Appellant's son, he submitted that the
    relationship between father and child  had  already  been  impacted  by
    virtue of the breakdown in the relationship between the child's parents
    so there had already been some element of disruption  to  family  life.
    However, removal of the Appellant would be no  more  than  the  typical
    kind of impact on a child of immigration control.

14. Mr Jarvis submitted it was not disproportionate for  the  Secretary  of
    State to require a person to leave when a child  is  not  a  qualifying
    child.  He made reference to the decision in Kaur [2018] EWCA  Civ  and
    SB (Bangladesh) [2017] EWCA Civ 28 where the Court of Appeal found that
    it was not appropriate to consider the potential success  of  an  entry
    clearance application when the case  was  not  a  Chikwamba  case.   He
    submitted that the  Appellant  could  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance.

15. In her submissions, Ms Fisher stated that the Appellant has now  passed
    his life in the UK test on 25 March 2019, however, he had  been  unable
    to take the English language test as his passport had been retained  by
    the Home Office.  She accepted that the Statement of Additional Grounds
    did not raise the issue of the Appellant's ability to qualify for leave
    pursuant to 276B of the Rules due to ten years' lawful residence.   She
    sought to rely on the judgment in JO (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT 00517 IAC at
    12.  She submitted that whilst the best interests of the child were not
    a trump card the welfare of the child was clearly of great  importance,
    see Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and that the  Appellant  and  his  former
    partner were working hard to create a family unit for their child.

16. With regard to proportionality, Ms Fisher asked what is in  the  public
    interest.  She submitted that ultimately the Appellant was someone  who
    may have been in the United Kingdom precariously but  he  was  under  a
    route to settlement  under  the  EEA  Regulations  until  his  marriage
    unfortunately  broke  down  and  his  wife  returned  to  France.   She
    submitted that it was clear from the chronology that  the  entirety  of
    the Appellant's leave had been arguably lawful and could be considered,
    if not under 276B then certainly as part of the overall proportionality
    consideration.

17. Ms Fisher also sought to rely on OA [2019] UKUT 00065 IAC.  She  sought
    to go through the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  In respect of
    the factors material to the assessment of  proportionality,  Ms  Fisher
    sought to rely on the fact that the Appellant has worked  lawfully  and
    resided lawfully.  He clearly speaks English and is integrated.  Whilst
    his child is not a qualifying child, she submitted that being  a  child
    of a refugee is  different  and  in  some  ways  this  makes  him  more
    vulnerable.  His mother has been accepted as  a  refugee  and  this  is
    different from someone who has precarious leave, because it is a  route
    to  settlement  after  five  years.   She   submitted   it   would   be
    unjustifiably harsh to deny the Appellant's child his father, given the
    nature and extent of the family relationships involved.  She  submitted
    that this would clearly impact on the child if the Appellant were to be
    removed.  In relation to the public interest, Ms Fisher submitted  that
    this was multi-faceted  cf.  Hesham  Ali.   The  Appellant  is  not  an
    offender and this must reduce the public interest in  removal,  bearing
    in mind that given the daily contact between father and son,  supported
    by the letters from his son's school and nursery, that it would not  be
    in the child's best interests for the Appellant  to  be  removed,  that
    this would be a huge loss for the child and his best  interests  are  a
    primary consideration.

18. I reserve my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Findings and Reasons

19.  The material findings of fact made by the First tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    which are preserved are as follows:

19.1.    the Respondent now accepted that the  Appellant  is  his  son,  M's
father [13];

19.2.    there is no dispute that M has refugee status in the UK [13];

19.3.    he was satisfied in light of the evidence set out at [14] that  the
Appellant has regular  contact with his son as he claims [15];

19.4. the Appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules [20];

19.5.    he was satisfied that it was in M's best interests that  he  remain
in the secure     environment that his mother provides [22];

19.6.    the Appellant cannot benefit from section 117B  of  the  NIAA  2002
[27];

19.7. he was satisfied that family life exists  between  the  Appellant  and
his son [28].

20.  The judge then went on to find that: "whilst one  may  sympathise  with
his  position  I  am       not  persuaded  that  there   are   circumstances
justifying the grant of leave outside the rules." It  is apparent,  however,
as was conceded by Mr Jarvis, that  there  is  no  consideration  by     the
Judge of the impact upon the Appellant's son, M, if his  father  returns  to
Algeria,      despite his reference to Beoku Betts [2008] UKHL 39  at  [21].
This  is  clearly  a  material       consideration  in  any  assessment   of
proportionality and the failure by the Judge  so  to     do  is  a  material
error of law.

21.  In order to re-make the decision I adopt the Judge's findings  of  fact
set out at [19]   above and I have  further  taken  into  consideration  the
detailed submissions made by    both parties. The question I am required  to
decide is whether, it being accepted that    there is  family  life  between
the Appellant and his father and that removal would    inevitably  interfere
with their right to enjoy that life, whether  removal  of  the     Appellant
from the United Kingdom would be proportionate.

22.  It was accepted by Mr Jarvis that the Appellant  has  resided  lawfully
and  continuously in the United Kingdom since 13 September 2008. He has  not
to date  made any application for leave  to  remain  pursuant  to  paragraph
276B of the   Immigration Rules and I do not make any finding as to  whether
or not such an    application would be successful, given  that  he  has  not
yet taken or passed the    English language test as his  passport  has  been
retained by the Home Office. I also     accept, as submitted by  Mr  Jarvis,
that this would constitute a new matter as it  was      not  raised  in  the
grounds of appeal to the First tier Tribunal and was  not  determined     by
the First tier Tribunal. However, I find  as  a  matter  of  fact  that  the
Appellant has     always resided lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom,  having
entered with entry clearance    as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  on  13
September 2008 and that he made an  application for leave to remain  on  the
basis of  human  rights  within  14  days  of       becoming  appeal  rights
exhausted. Mr Jarvis did not seek to raise any factors which   were  adverse
in respect of the Appellant's individual circumstances.

23.  I also take account of the public interest considerations  set  out  at
section 117B of the    NIAA 2002. I find that the Appellant  speaks  English
and that, whilst he  was  residing     pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)
Regulations  he  was  working  as  a  bus  driver  and     was   financially
independent. He has not retained the right to work, however,  during     the
current proceedings pursuant to his human rights application and so  is  not
currently  financially  independent.  His  leave  has  at  all  times   been
precarious but it      has been lawful. His son,  M,  is  not  a  qualifying
child as he has   refugee status and    has not reached the age of  7  years
nor is he settled.

24.  Mr Jarvis submitted that GEN 3.2. of Appendix FM was  applicable.  This
provides:

         "GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application
for entry         clearance or leave to enter or remain made under this
Appendix, or an            application for leave to remain which has
otherwise been considered under         this Appendix, does not otherwise
meet the requirements of this Appendix or        Part 9 of the Rules, the
decision-maker must consider whether the                  circumstances in
sub-paragraph (2) apply.

         (2) Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker must
              consider, on the basis of the information provided by the
applicant, whether         there are exceptional circumstances which would
render refusal of entry         clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a
breach of Article 8 of the European          Convention on Human Rights,
because such refusal would result in             unjustifiably harsh
consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant          child or
another family member whose Article 8 rights it is evident from that
information would be affected by a decision to refuse the application."

25.  I have concluded that there are exceptional circumstances, which  would
render the    refusal of leave to remain a breach of Article  8  because  it
would result in unjustifiably   harsh consequences for the Appellant's  son.
It is apparent from the evidence that the    Appellant is actively  involved
in his son's life. This evidence comprises a supporting    letter  from  the
Appellant's former partner  and  mother  of  his  son,  a  letter  from  his
son's primary school stating that they see the Appellant  frequently  as  he
drops off     and collects him regularly throughout the week  and  a  number
of photographs    showing the Appellant with his son over a period of  time.
I find that whilst it would     be in M's best interests to remain  residing
with his mother in the United Kingdom it      would  also  be  in  M's  best
interests for him to continue to have regular contact with      his  father.
I find it is material that M's status in the United Kingdom and that of  his
     mother is that of a refugee and therefore, this is not a case where  it
can reasonably be      expected that M would be able to visit the  Appellant
if he is removed to Algeria,    given his young age and  the  fact  that  he
would have to be accompanied by his     mother.

Decision

26.  I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Broe.  I  set  that      decision  aside  and  substitute  a  decision
allowing the appeal on human rights     grounds (Article 8).

     No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 21 June 2019



