








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18293/2018;

                                                              HU/18295/2018;

                                                              hU/18299/2018;

                                                               HU/18302/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16th July 2019                      |On 15th August 2019                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                              SN, SO, MS & MBS

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Oliveira-Agnew, Counsel, instructed by Kitty
                    Falls Immigration Law

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mailer promulgated on the 29th March  2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the  appellants'  human  rights  claims  based  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction.  As  the  proceedings  concern  the  status  and  rights  of
    children, I considered it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmet on 12th June 2019. Thus the case appeared before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

Background

 4. The first appellant entered the UK in January 2010 as a Tier 4 student.
    In Nepal the appellant was married to a lady, J. By the age  of  21  he
    had 2 daughters by the lady. J and the 2 daughters are living in Nepal.
    He has never divorced the lady J.

 5. The first appellant went to university in Nepal where he  met  RS.  The
    first appellant married RS. Bigamy is a criminal offence in Nepal.

 6. When the appellant came to the United Kingdom RS was a  dependant  upon
    the appellant's application for  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student. She came with  the  first  appellant  to  the  United  Kingdom
    ostensibly as his wife.

 7. Having entered as a student there were  a  number  of  applications  to
    extend his leave, some of  which  were  refused,  some  of  which  were
    granted. The appellant  ultimately  was  given  leave  until  the  10th
    November 2015.

 8. In July 2014, whilst the appellant was in Nepal,  RS  purportedly  went
    through a marriage ceremony in a Hindu temple in Southampton,  marrying
    another man. It is suggested that she had been seeking to  divorce  the
    appellant but there is no evidence that a formal legal divorce had been
    granted or that a declaration had been obtained that the  marriage  was
    void/voidable as illegal. The first appellant informed the Home  Office
    that RS was no longer his dependant and RS's visa was revoked.

 9. On 5 August 2014 the first and 2nd appellants met for the first time at
    Heathrow. It is claimed that the first and 2nd appellant began to  live
    together in January 2015.

10. On  the  9th  or  10th  November  2015  the  first  appellant  made  an
    application for leave but that application was refused.  By this  stage
    the appellant was seeking to rely upon his relationship  with  the  2nd
    appellant. The appellant was to be removed to  Nepal,  his  country  of
    nationality and removal directions were set. The  first  appellant  was
    served with notice of the removal directions. At that stage  the  first
    appellant made a claim based upon family and private life.

11. On the 5th December 2017 his claims  were  rejected  and  certified  as
    clearly unfounded.

12. The second appellant had entered the UK as a student in  October  2012.
    There are references to the  fact  that  the  2nd  appellant  was  also
    married but that she discovered her husband was gay and she was seeking
    a divorce from him. Although it  does  not  appear  that  she  actually
    obtained a divorce. There  had  been  periods  of  time  when  she  had
    returned to Bangladesh, specifically in July 2014. She appears to  have
    had no difficulty in returning to Bangladesh by reason of the fact that
    she was separated from her husband.

13. The 2nd appellant having returned on the 5th August 2014 to the  United
    Kingdom from Bangladesh made a claim for asylum on 16 October 2014  but
    this was refused as of 20 March 2015. Her appeal  against  the  refusal
    was dismissed as of 17 February 2016 and that decision was upheld on 22
    April 2016 in the Upper Tribunal.

14. The first and 2nd appellants after  meeting  in  August  2014  began  a
    relationship. They had commenced to  live  together  in  about  January
    2015. The 3rd appellant was born on 10 November 2015.  It appears  that
    the first and 2nd appellant went  through  a  marriage  ceremony  at  a
    temple the Hindu Vedic Society in Southampton before the birth  of  the
    3rd appellant. The 2nd appellant indicates that she  did  not  want  to
    give birth to her child when she was not married to the father  of  the
    child. The parties therefore went through a  ceremony  of  marriage  as
    indicated.

15. The first appellant had completed  his  BA  degree  in  July  2015.  He
    applied for further leave to study an MA [as referred to in paragraph 6
    above] but that was refused on 22 December 2015.

16. The 2nd appellant had applied for asylum. The  2nd  appellant's  asylum
    claim was refused and her appeal dismissed on 17 February 2016. It  has
    to be noted that at that stage the 2nd appellant's case was based  upon
    the fact that she was a divorced woman with a child/children  returning
    ostensibly to Bangladesh alone. The judge in  the  present  appeal  has
    commented  on  the  fact   that   the   2nd   appellant   was   clearly
    misrepresenting the facts at the  time  of  that  appeal  in  order  to
    bolster her claim for asylum.

17. Further applications were made for leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    family and private life. There were further refusals.

18. The 4th appellant was born 12 July 2017.

19.  The first appellant was detained on 7 September 2017 but was  released
    and made application for leave to remain with the 2nd appellant and his
    children as dependants.

20. By decisions taken on 22 August 2018  the  applications  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  the
    basis of Article 8, family and private life by the appellants were  all
    refused.

21. In summary the appellants have made a large number of applications  for
    leave to remain which have variously been refused over  the  years  and
    the appellants have for periods of time had  no  leave  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom. It does not appear that the first appellant  had  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom at the latest after 22  December  2015.
    The 2nd appellant did not have leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    after 17 February 2016.

22. The second appellant has had an asylum claim dismissed.  It  is  to  be
    noted at paragraphs 190-195 of the present decision that the judge both
    in the asylum decision and in the present appeal before the  First-tier
    found that the 2nd appellant had sought to advance a  case  for  asylum
    which was wholly untrue. The judge has specifically found that the  2nd
    appellant has actively sought to deceive both the respondent, the First-
    tier Tribunal and subsequently the Upper Tribunal.

23. The first appellant is the still married to his first wife J.  The  2nd
    appellant has referred to being upset that  he  has  not  been  totally
    honest with her because she appears to have been unaware of  his  first
    wife. However the judge has pointed out in paragraph 119 the fact  that
    the 2nd appellant has not been entirely consistent in her evidence.

24. The first and 2nd appellant had  been  living  together  since  January
    2015. As a result of them living together they  have  2  children.  The
    first and 2nd appellant are however not married in law.

25. In raising issues  it  was  being  asserted  that  the  first  and  2nd
    appellant enjoyed family life together,  that  the  2nd  appellant  had
    problems coping with 2 children by reason of a mental health  condition
    and that accordingly it would be a breach of Article 8  to  expect  the
    family either to go to Nepal or to Bangladesh with the possibility that
    the family would be separated either for a limited period  of  time  or
    permanently.

    Grounds of appeal

26. The first ground of appeal  relates  to  the  evidence  of  the  second
    appellant's mental health. Whilst the judge has recorded that there  is
    no up-to-date evidence relating to the first appellant's mental health,
    it is asserted that there was evidence in the following form:-

      a) The first appellant's witness statement sets out that an  ambulance
         had to be called on the  27th  February  2019  because  the  second
         appellant was in crisis.

      b) A letter from Dr Sargen  dated  6th  March  2019  in  which  it  is
         reported that the second appellant had stated  that  she  would  be
         better off dead and her weekly prescription had been maintained due
         to a suicide risk.

      c) The Portsmouth Council Early Help  Assessment  dated  30th  January
         2019  which  records  a  recent  overdose  attempt  by  the  second
         appellant and a referral by the second appellant's GP to the Multi-
         Agency Safeguarding hub as SO wellbeing had deteriorated.

27. It is submitted that the second appellant's mental health  is  material
    to the issue of whether the second appellant could  capable  of  caring
    for the third and fourth appellants in either Nepal  or  in  Bangladesh
    without the help and assistance of the first appellant.

28. In commenting that there was no up-to-date evidence with regard to  the
    2nd appellant's mental condition  the  judge  did  note  that  the  2nd
    appellant had been placed on antidepressant  medication  and  that  the
    medication had been continued. The  judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the
    letter from the general practitioner.

29. In referring to the fact that there was no up-to-date medical evidence,
    the judge was commenting upon the ability  of  the  appellant  to  look
    after the children. The appellant was stated to be depressed  and  have
    suicidal thoughts. There was however was no up-to-date medical evidence
    to indicate that the appellant was unable to look after  the  children.
    In the past the appellant had been subject to highly erratic behaviour.
    Whilst there was  some  medical  evidence  to  indicate  that  she  was
    depressed and an indication that  she  had  claimed  to  have  suicidal
    thoughts, such had been dealt with. The evidence was  not  such  as  to
    bring into question her ability to look after the 2 children.  As  that
    was the central core of the challenge specific medical evidence to deal
    with the point was  necessary  in  the  evidence  did  not  bring  into
    question her ability to cope.

30. The judge was  merely  commenting  that  the  assertion  that  the  2nd
    appellant was not capable of coping with the  3rd  and  4th  appellants
    required detailed medical basis and that the  medical  basis  for  that
    assertion was not present.

31. The judge had carefully assessed the evidence by the 2nd appellant  and
    given valid reasons for finding that she had set  out  to  deceive  and
    been dishonest in giving her evidence on previous occasions and on this
    occasion before the First-tier Tribunal. In the light of  that  finding
    an assertion that  she  was  unable  to  cope  with  the  3rd  and  4th
    appellants medical evidence was necessary to support  that  claim.  The
    evidence that was being advance came nowhere near suggesting  that  she
    was mentally unfit to look after the children. Whilst she and the first
    appellant were making an  assertion  that  was  not  supported  by  the
    necessary evidence and the judge was entitled to comment that there was
    no up-to-date evidence on that material aspect of the appellant's case.

32. As a 2nd aspect of the medical condition of the 2nd  appellant  it  was
    being asserted that she would be unable to  work  due  to  her  medical
    condition. Again that would have required a detailed medical report  to
    support the appellant's contention. Up to date  evidence  of  such  was
    lacking and the judge was entitled to make  the  comment  that  it  was
    lacking.

33. The second point taken is that the judge has cited  that  there  is  no
    legal barrier to interreligious marriages.  It  is  asserted  that  the
    background evidence establishes that a Muslim woman cannot marry a non-
    Muslim. There is reference in paragraph 44 of the decision to the  fact
    that the appellants have lied to family members to cover the fact  that
    the 2nd appellant had married a non-Muslim.

34. From paragraph 161 onwards  the  judge  has  carefully  looked  at  the
    evidence that had been submitted as to whether  or  not  interreligious
    marriage was  possible  in  Bangladesh.  The  background  evidence  was
    somewhat inconsistent. In paragraph 163 the judge has referred  to  the
    Australia Refugee Review Tribunal Enquiry in  paragraph  162  reference
    was made to the UNHCR report and reference was also made to  the  CPIN.
    The judge has carefully looked at the evidence that was before him. The
    indications being that in Dhaka in Bangladesh interreligious  marriages
    were more common. The point made the representative for the  appellants
    was that the parties were not married.

35. As an alternative the judge has specifically  considered  the  position
    with regard to Nepal, the home country  of  the  first  appellant.  The
    judge  looked  carefully  at  the  prospects  of  the  first  appellant
    obtaining a divorce from his first wife. There appeared to be no reason
    why the first appellant could not obtain a divorce from his first  wife
    and potentially his 2nd wife RS. At  that  point  the  appellant  could
    lawfully marry the 2nd appellant.

36. In part complaint is made that the first appellant if returned to Nepal
    may suffer the consequences of having committed bigamy. With respect it
    cannot be denied that the first  appellant  has  committed  a  criminal
    offence and that the 2nd appellant was certainly aware that  the  first
    appellant was married to RS and yet she  went  through  a  ceremony  of
    marriage despite knowing that.  The  argument  seems  to  be  that  you
    cannot send us back to Nepal because facing  the  consequences  of  the
    first appellant's criminal conduct would impact upon the  children.  It
    is an unattractive argument to say you cannot return me to  my  country
    of nationality because to do so would mean I would  have  to  bear  the
    consequences of my previous criminal conduct.

37. The judge assessed whether or not the family could return to Nepal. The
    judge has identified that the first, 3rd and 4th appellants would  have
    been Nepalese citizens and as  such  entitled  to  enter  Nepal.  There
    appears to be no reason why the family could not go to  Nepal.  It  may
    not be what the first appellant  and  2nd  appellant  want  but  it  is
    certainly a matter that the judge has carefully  considered  and  given
    valid reasons for concluding that the parties could go to Nepal. Whilst
    it may require the first appellant to divorce his wife  and  marry  the
    2nd appellant, there was no reason why he should  not  do  that  if  he
    wants to maintain a genuine family relationship.

38. The judge has pointed out in paragraph 57 that the first appellant  has
    been in touch with a lawyer in Nepal and there appears to be no  reason
    why a divorce could not be expedited in Nepal. There appears to  be  no
    reason therefore why he should not divorce.

39. In a very careful, well- structured decision the judge  has  considered
    all aspects of this case. The judge has considered the  best  interests
    of the children. In paragraph 153 the judge specifically  assesses  the
    best interests of the children. The judge thereafter takes  account  of
    the conduct of the first appellant in apparently entering into bigamous
    marriages. The judge in paragraph 159 has noted  that  Portsmouth  City
    Council had in the past taken steps to make the children the subject of
    child in need planning. The judge specifically considers  the  analysis
    that has been undertaken in respect thereof.

40. Thereafter the judge has from paragraph 112  considered  the  prospects
    for the family in Nepal. The judge was satisfied that the 2nd appellant
    could enter Nepal with the first appellant and the children. The  judge
    was satisfied that the 2nd appellant would be able to  look  after  the
    children. The judge specifically considers the prospect  of  the  first
    appellant serving a custodial sentence and was satisfied that  the  2nd
    appellant would be able to look after the children in Nepal.

41. The judge has also from paragraph 220 onward considered  the  prospects
    for the family if the family were returned to Bangladesh. In accordance
    with the background reports he had noted that interreligious  marriages
    were becoming more common especially in the larger cities.

42. The judge having assessed all the evidence came to the conclusion  that
    there were no very significant obstacles  to  the  integration  of  the
    family into either Nepal or Bangladesh. The judge has properly assessed
    all the factors and was entitled to come to the conclusion that he  did
    on a very careful examination of the evidence before him.

43. In the circumstances I find that there is no material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

44. I dismiss the appeals on all grounds.






Signed



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Date: 7th August 2019

