
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18887/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 7 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MR DAVENAND JAIPUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

      Procedural Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
        For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in
       the First-tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department is technically  the  Appellant  in  this  particular
       appeal.  The Respondent appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson  promulgated  on  8  February  2017  ("the
       Decision") allowing the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's
       decision dated 26 July 2016 refusing the  Appellant's  human  rights
       claim in the context of  a  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant  to
       Guyana.

    2. As will be immediately evident from the above, the Decision was made
       some  time  ago.   It  is  necessary  to  say  something  about  the
       procedural  background.   Permission  to  appeal  the  Decision  was
       granted initially by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle on 6 June  2017
       in the following terms so far as relevant:


           "...2.      The grounds argue that the Judge  erred  in  stating
           that the Appellant's mother had leave to remain.   He  erred  in
           giving weight to an  immaterial  matter  in  paragraph  37.   He
           failed to give adequate reasons as to why  the  Appellant  could
           not reintegrate in Guyana and failed  to  resolve  the  conflict
           between the finding that the Appellant had integrated  into  the
           UK and his offending combined with his immigration history.   In
           considering the appeal outside the Rules, the  Judge  failed  to
           give due consideration to the public interest.
           3.    It is arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  equating  the
           difficulties outlined  in  paragraph  39  to  "very  significant
           obstacles" to integration in paragraph 399A of the Rules.  It is
           also arguable that he failed to give due weight  to  the  public
           interest.   Permission  is  therefore  granted.   The  remaining
           grounds may also be argued."

    3. The error of law hearing came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Allen  on
       17 July 2017. He reached the following conclusions as  to  error  of
       law:

           "[24] In my view what this passage in the judge's decision fails
           to take into account is the point made in  Bossade  of  breaking
           the continuity of the social and  cultural  integration  in  the
           United Kingdom.  Before the appellant started offending it would
           have been difficult indeed to deny  that  he  was  socially  and
           culturally  integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom.   However  I
           consider that the Judge erred in not considering  whether  there
           had been a breach in the social and cultural integration of  the
           appellant in the United  Kingdom  by  his  sustained  period  of
           offending, bearing in mind also that the  level  of  seriousness
           increased, and also bearing in mind the  other  criminality  and
           undesirable behaviour in which the appellant was involved during
           that period of time over and above the offences for which he was
           convicted.  Accordingly I find the judge erred  in  law  in  his
           assessment of social and cultural integration.

           [25]  With regard to the question of  whether  there  were  very
           significant obstacles to the integration of the  appellant  into
           Guyana, I consider that Mr Melvin is right  on  this  point  and
           that there is little to show beyond  obstacles.   The  appellant
           would be returning to a country with which he has clear cultural
           links although no family members still  present.   He  was  back
           there as recently  as  2010.   Although  he  has  no  employment
           history that is as true of the United Kingdom as Guyana, and  as
           the  judge  pointed  out  at  paragraph  34  he  is  capable  of
           undertaking employment and being self-sufficient should he  have
           the opportunity to  do  so.   The  judge  also  noted  that  the
           appellant has no accommodation in  Guyana  and  logically  would
           need some form of financial support at least in the early stages
           and his father said he could not assist him with any significant
           or material financial support and the judge also  bore  in  mind
           that the appellant has never lived independently and  has  never
           had to support himself.

           [26]  These matters to my mind cannot rationally be described as
           going beyond obstacles or at the highest significant  obstacles.
           The test of very significant obstacles is a high one indeed.  It
           is again a matter of simply  comparing  fact  situations  rather
           than a point of law, but again the  facts  in  Bossade  are  not
           without relevance here.  There the Tribunal  was  not  persuaded
           there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  integration
           into the Democratic Republic of Congo of a man who did not speak
           Lingala and had no experience of living in that  country  as  an
           adult or even as a young person.  It seems that he had no family
           there either.  It was  thought  reasonable  to  infer  that  his
           family would seek to help him financially and that he had  grown
           up in a household where French was  spoken  and  the  DRC  is  a
           Francophile country.

           [27]  It is not simply a matter of making comparisons of course.
            Judge  may  legitimately  differ  as  to  the  outcome  of  the
           determination of a point such as this  on  identical  facts  but
           this in my view goes beyond simply a matter of disagreement.   I
           do not consider it could rationally be  concluded  that  on  the
           facts as presented to the judge the appellant  would  face  very
           significant obstacles to integration into  Guyana,  if  removed.
           Accordingly I find an error of law in that regard also."

    4. As to the future disposal of the appeal, Judge Allen said this:

           "[29] In conclusion therefore the judge's decision is set  aside
           for material errors of law and there  will  have  to  be  a  re-
           hearing.  I do not know at this  stage  whether  there  are  any
           issues of further evidence which will need to be considered, but
           it seems clear to me  that  the  matter  will  have  to  be  re-
           determined in the Upper Tribunal."

    5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal from the Court  of  Appeal
       against Judge Allen's decision.  Permission was granted on 14 August
       2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:

           "...Judge Allen did not go on to rehear the appeal.  This appeal
           was launched before he had  an  opportunity  to  do  so.   As  I
           understand it, those proceedings are  currently  stayed  pending
           the outcome of this appeal.

           This is a second appeal and the second appeals criteria apply.

           The Applicant relies on three grounds.  First,  in  relation  to
           para 399A(b) of the Immigration  Rules,  it  is  submitted  that
           Judge Allen erred in the manner in which he dealt  with  "social
           and  cultural  integration",  and  in  particular  whether   the
           Applicant's offending  and/or  periods  in  custody  "broke  the
           continuity" of such integration.  Second, in  relation  to  para
           399A(c), it is submitted that Judge Allen did not  identify  any
           legal basis for  overturning  Judge  Hodgkinson's  finding  that
           there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  Applicant's
           integration into Guyana.  In fact, such a legal basis is  given:
           the judge considered that, on  the  evidence,  the  finding  was
           legally perverse in the sense that such a conclusion  could  not
           reasonably have been reached on  the  evidence  (see  para  27).
           However, there is an issue as to whether that justification  for
           interference with the finding below was good as a matter of law.

           I consider that each of those  issues  -the  second  as  I  have
           identified it - are arguable, and otherwise satisfy  the  second
           appeals criteria.  I give leave in respect of each.

           The third ground seems to me to be,  at  best,  premature.   The
           Upper Tribunal  never  considered  the  article  8  requirement,
           because Judge Allen specifically left that over."

    6. Following the grant of permission, the  parties  agreed  that  Judge
       Allen's decision should be set aside, and the appeal remitted to the
       Upper Tribunal to reconsider whether the Decision contains an  error
       of law.  Little is said in the Statement of Reasons about the  basis
       for that agreement save that "the most appropriate  way  to  resolve
       this matter is to consent to the current appeal  being  allowed  and
       then to have this matter remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  de  novo".
       It appears from what is said at [2] of the Statement of Reasons that
       at least part of the reason why it was thought appropriate to  remit
       turned on the timing of the application for  permission  to  appeal.
       By order dated 18 February 2019, the Court of  Appeal  remitted  the
       appeal to this Tribunal "for its reconsideration de novo,  in  light
       of the subsisting grant  of  permission  to  appeal  by  First  Tier
       Tribunal Judge Astle of 6 June 2017, as to (i) whether the  decision
       of First Tier Judge Hodgkinson is materially undermined by error  of
       law and (ii) in the event that the decision is so  undermined,  what
       to do in consequence."

    7. I raised with the parties at the outset how it came to be  that  the
       application to the Court of Appeal for permission  to  appeal  Judge
       Allen's decision was made when it was. It appeared to me  that  this
       was contrary to the Tribunal's decision in VOM (Error of law -  when
       appealable) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 00410 (IAC) by reference to sections
       12 and 13 Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  Mr  Fripp  who
       was also Counsel at the time of the appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal
       submitted that VOM was wrongly decided.  However,  I  cannot  accept
       that submission, particularly since when VOM was cited to the  Court
       of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
       [2017] EWCA Civ 944, it distinguished that case but did not  suggest
       that the case was wrongly decided.

    8. I did not hear submissions on the point, however, for  two  reasons.
       First, as Mr Jarvis submitted, and I accept, as there is a Court  of
       Appeal order remitting the appeal to the Tribunal, I must reconsider
       the appeal.  It is not open to me to find that  a  Court  of  Appeal
       order is a nullity.  Second, Mr Fripp informed me that the issue  of
       timing and jurisdiction had been discussed between the parties  when
       negotiating the statement of reasons.  Although I was not shown that
       correspondence, it can be inferred from what is said at [2]  of  the
       statement of reasons that the Respondent was alive to the point  and
       agreed to the remittal  as  a  matter  of  pragmatics.   Of  course,
       parties cannot confer jurisdiction on a court or tribunal if it does
       not have such jurisdiction.  However, if a point was to be taken  as
       to the Court of Appeal's jurisdiction, that should have been  raised
       with the Court of Appeal.  As I have already noted, it is  not  open
       to me to disturb the Court of Appeal's order.

    9. It is in that way that the appeal  comes  before  me  to  reconsider
       whether the  Decision  (of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson)
       allowing the Appellant's appeal contains an error of law.

    Appellant's Background

   10. The Appellant's immigration history and background is set out at [3]
       to [14] of the Decision and I do not need to repeat  what  is  there
       said.  The salient points for the purposes  of  considering  whether
       there is an error of law in the Decision are as follows.

   11. The Appellant has been in the UK since 28 March 2002 when he entered
       to join his mother who was in a relationship with an Irish  national
       and was granted a five-year EEA family permit on  that  basis.   The
       Appellant was born on 23 April 1994 and was  therefore  aged  nearly
       eight years when he came to the UK.  He was subsequently granted  an
       EEA residence document on 27 March 2003 valid to 7 September 2006.

   12. The Appellant was then refused a further residence card in 2006  and
       2007 but was granted one again  in  November  2007  valid  for  five
       years.  On 19 October 2012, an application for  permanent  residence
       was refused and on  27  June  2014,  he  was  served  papers  as  an
       overstayer.

   13. The Appellant's criminal offending began in September  2011  with  a
       conviction for theft.  He  moved  on  to  various  drugs  possession
       offences and theft.  He was then  convicted  on  30  April  2014  of
       battery and assaulting a police officer.  On 9 January 2015 came his
       first term of imprisonment of thirty-six weeks  for  affray.   On  5
       February 2015, he was  convicted  of  wounding  inflicting  grievous
       bodily harm and sentenced to nine months imprisonment.  On  17  July
       2015, he was convicted of robbery and possession of drugs (cannabis)
       and sentenced to two years and six months imprisonment.  Separately,
       the Appellant has come to the attention  of  the  police  for  other
       offences of which he has not been convicted.  I will need to  return
       to that evidence below.

   14. The Appellant's mother has since  reconciled  with  the  Appellant's
       father in the UK, her relationship with  an  Irish  national  having
       broken down.   Both  parents  continue  to  live  in  the  UK.   The
       Appellant attended school and college in the UK.  Between  2011  and
       2013, the Appellant attended Croydon  college.   He  attributes  his
       offending to the taking of drugs and gambling to support his  habit.
       He also blames alcohol as  a  contributing  factor.   He  has  never
       worked in the UK.







    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   15.  I have set out an extract from Judge Allen's decision at [3] above.
        I have not done so in order to rely upon what is there said.   That
       decision has been set aside with agreement of both  parties  by  the
       Court of Appeal.  It is however a useful summary  of  the  competing
       submissions regarding the error of law  in  the  Decision.   I  have
       regard to it only for that reason and I do  not  take  into  account
       Judge  Allen's  findings  or  conclusions  when  reaching   my   own
       conclusions below.  As will be evident from the extract  cited,  the
       Respondent relies on two aspects of the Decision  as  containing  an
       error of law;  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  social  and
       cultural integration in the UK  and  his  findings  in  relation  to
       whether there would be very significant obstacles to integration  in
       Guyana.  I take those in turn.

    Social and Cultural Integration

   16. This part of the  Respondent's  case  was  given  prominence  in  Mr
       Jarvis' oral submissions and I therefore begin with this issue.

   17. Before coming to the  Judge's  findings  about  this  issue,  it  is
       necessary to have regard to the background evidence which the  Judge
       had  before  him.   I  have  already  referred  to  the  Appellant's
       offending which is set out at more detail at [8]  of  the  Decision.
       Whilst relevant to the extent of the Appellant's social and cultural
       integration,  it  is  nonetheless  not  the  only   focus   of   the
       Respondent's case.  As I have already mentioned, there was  evidence
       from police officers concerning the Appellant's  criminal  offending
       and other offences of which he had not been convicted. A summary  of
       that evidence appears at [9] and [10] of the Decision as follows:

           "[9]   Additionally,  I  have  the  statements  of  two   police
           officers.  The first is a lengthy and detailed statement of a PC
           Bijal Raichura ("PC Raichura"),  dated  14  December  2015.   PC
           Raichura was unable to attend  the  hearing.   However,  another
           police officer, PC David Glicksman ("PC  Glicksman"),  from  the
           same department, attended in her place in  order  to  give  oral
           evidence  with  reference  to  PC  Raichura's  statement,   that
           statement having been prepared solely from police records.   The
           second statement is that of a PC Garland, who has some  personal
           knowledge  of  the  appellant  and  his  past  criminality,   PC
           Garland's statement being dated 3 December 2015.

           [10]   The  respondent's  supplementary  bundles   comprise   PC
           Raichura's said statement,  together  with  a  large  volume  of
           police  records,  as  referred  to  in  that  statement.    That
           statement, and the supporting records, inter-alia refer to other
           encounters by the police with the appellant which did not result
           in convictions.  It is the respondent's case, with reference  to
           PC Raichura's said statement, and the accompanying records, that
           there have been numerous additional criminal or antisocial  acts
           committed by  the  appellant  in  association  with  his  former
           acquaintances, in respect of which he was not  convicted.   They
           include a number of alleged  robberies,  an  attempted  robbery,
           handling stolen goods, common assault and  affray,  theft  of  a
           vehicle, disorderly/threatening behaviour, an incident outside a
           local betting shop in February 2014, shoplifting, intimidating a
           witness  or  juror  and  drunk  and  disorderly.   The   alleged
           robberies referred to appear to have involved the appellant  and
           his then  associates  allegedly  assaulting  and  stealing  from
           individuals whom they encountered on the street by chance."

   18. The Judge accepted that evidence at [46] and [47] of  the  Decision.
       That is not disputed by the Appellant.  Indeed, Mr Fripp  relied  on
       that passage as showing that the Judge was aware of the evidence  of
       anti-social behaviour when reaching his findings  about  social  and
       cultural  integration.   That  passage  of  the  Decision  reads  as
       follows:

           "[46] As I have indicated above, there are also, in addition  to
           the appellant's  convictions,  numerous  additional  accusations
           made against him, some of them serious, and encounters with  the
           police, during the period  2011,  running  up  to  his  ultimate
           incarceration in 2014, when it would appear that he was remanded
           in custody pending conviction and sentence  in  2015.   In  oral
           evidence before me, the appellant indicated that  he  could  not
           recall everything referred to, although he did not go so far  as
           to deny their occurrence, and they clearly did  occur,  as  they
           are clearly documented in the records annexed to  PC  Raichura's
           said statement.  In the presenting circumstances, I am satisfied
           that the appellant was involved in criminality  and  undesirable
           behaviour during  that  period  of  time,  over  and  above  the
           offences for which he was convicted.

           [47]  In PC Garland's evidence, he gave indication that  it  was
           his view that the appellant would continue  to  commit  offences
           and I have given due weight to that indication,  whilst  bearing
           in mind that PC Garland's evidence in  that  regard  is  clearly
           based upon his view that the  appellant  is  unlikely  to  be  a
           reformed character, and based upon his past conduct.  Of course,
           the appellant asserts that his incarceration has  taught  him  a
           very solitary [salutary?] lesson, that he did not realise, until
           threatened with deportation, that he was potentially  liable  to
           be removed.  His evidence is that he has now  formed  the  clear
           intention, first, never to abuse drugs or alcohol in the  future
           and,  second,  not  to  associate  further   with   his   former
           acquaintances."

   19. Before coming to the Judge's findings about the  evidence  regarding
       social and cultural integration, I make a few observations about the
       factual background and evidence which the Judge needed to take  into
       account.

   20. As appears from [17] of the  Decision,  the  Appellant  remained  in
       detention as at the date of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Hodgkinson
       which took place in January  2017,  therefore  only  about  eighteen
       months after the Appellant's last conviction.  I assume he  remained
       detained either in accordance with his criminal sentence or  was  in
       immigration detention.  As a result, though, although  the  evidence
       given by the police officers covered the  period  only  up  to  July
       2015,  there  could  have  been  no  further  evidence   about   the
       Appellant's behaviour in the community as the Appellant was detained
       at all times thereafter.

   21. The Judge  therefore  had  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  been
       involved in criminal offending and anti-social behaviour  from  2011
       to 2015.  He had been in the UK for about nine years when he started
       offending but nonetheless the most  recent  period  of  his  liberty
       (when aged between seventeen and twenty-one) was a four-year  period
       when the Appellant had committed a large number of offences,  mostly
       with impact on the community and had behaved in a manner  which  was
       anti-social more generally.

   22. Although the Judge summarises the police evidence in a way which  is
       broadly accurate, it is  worth  saying  a  little  more  about  that
       evidence.  First, PC Raichura is  a  Metropolitan  Police  Constable
       serving on "Operation Nexus" which, according to his statement is "a
       partnership operation with the United Kingdom Border  Agency...  and
       its aim is to tackle the most harmful individuals in society who  do
       not have British Citizenship.".   The  statement  relies  on  police
       records in relation to "[the Appellant's] known associates  and  his
       links to gang intelligence". The statement detailing the Appellant's
       activities runs to thirty-nine pages.  There is a bundle of evidence
       in support of that statement running to over a thousand pages.

   23. Although the Judge is, again, broadly accurate in his description of
       the Appellant's activities as  set  out  in  that  statement,  those
       activities  were  not  simply  attacks  on  random  members  of  the
       community (including violence and intimidation).  That in itself  is
       clearly anti-social behaviour.  However, the statement also includes
       instances of aggressive behaviour  towards  the  police  -  see  for
       example the offence of assault on a constable of which the Appellant
       was in fact convicted, swearing and spitting at police when  he  was
       arrested for other offences and  aggressive  behaviour  towards  the
       police (see also PC Garland's statement in this  regard).   Although
       the Appellant was not convicted of some of the other offences, given
       that the  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  in  the  police  officers'
       statements, it is appropriate also to note that some of the offences
       involved threats to bomb properties of witnesses and suggestions  by
       the Appellant that he would use a knife when robbing his victims  if
       they did not cooperate.

   24. I turn then to the way in which Judge  Hodgkinson  dealt  with  this
       evidence at [37] of the Decision as follows:

           "I consider the respondent's reasoning, as set out in the  above
           paragraph  of  the  RFRL,  as  adopted  by  Mr  McRae   in   his
           submissions, to be flawed.  Of course, it is  correct  that  the
           appellant  has  a  history  of  significant  criminal  offending
           between 2011 and  2014.   However,  he  arrived  in  the  United
           Kingdom when he was 7 years old, in 2002.  He  attended  primary
           and  secondary  schools  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  he  also
           commenced a college education.  He  has  various  qualifications
           from the time when he was engaged in such education and he also,
           clearly, has accomplished a number of sporting achievements,  as
           is evidenced by the documents which are before me.   Whilst  his
           behaviour in recent years  has  been  totally  unacceptable  and
           antisocial, I bear in mind that the  appellant  would  not  even
           fall for consideration under this particular Rule if he were not
           a foreign criminal liable to deportation.  I would add that  the
           appellant speaks English and his only close relatives are in the
           United Kingdom; a factor of relevance.  It is  abundantly  clear
           that he has integrated into United Kingdom society,  albeit  not
           in an appropriate manner based  upon  his  behaviour  from  2011
           onwards.  Consequently, I find that the appellant satisfies  the
           requirement at paragraph 399A(b)"

   25.  Mr Jarvis first  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  disregarded  the
       criminal behaviour on the basis that the relevant provision  of  the
       Immigration Rules ("the Rules")  would  not  apply  at  all  if  the
       Appellant were not a foreign national offender.  That was  perverse.
       If the Judge were right in that analysis,  it  would  leave  out  of
       account a  relevant  factor  when  assessing  the  strength  of  the
       Appellant's private life namely the public interest which fell to be
       assessed in that context.

   26. Mr Jarvis also relied on the Court of Appeal's  recent  judgment  in
       Binbuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ
       551 which approved the Tribunal's decision in  Bossade  [2015]  UKUT
       00415 (IAC) on which the  Respondent  relied  in  his  grounds.   Mr
       Jarvis drew my attention to what is said by the Court of  Appeal  in
       particular at [55] to [59] of the judgment as follows:
           "[55] In my judgment the UTJ was correct to conclude that the
           FTJ erred in law in regarding TB's association with pro-criminal
           peers as part of a gang as a "telling" example of his social and
           cultural integration.
           [56]  Membership of a pro-criminal gang tells against rather
           than for social integration. In this context, social integration
           refers to the extent to which a foreign criminal has become
           incorporated within the lawful social structure of the UK. This
           includes various incidents of society such as clubs, societies,
           workplaces or places of study, but not association with pro-
           criminal peers.
           [57]  Similarly, cultural integration refers to the acceptance
           and assumption by the foreign criminal of the culture of the UK,
           its core values, ideas, customs and social behaviour. This
           includes acceptance of the principle of the rule of law.
           Membership of a pro-criminal gang shows a lack of such
           acceptance. It demonstrates disdain for the rule of law and
           indeed undermines it.
           [58]  Social and cultural integration in the UK connotes
           integration as a law-abiding citizen. That is why it is
           recognised that breaking the law may involve discontinuity in
           integration. As was found in the Bossade case at [55]:
                 "...his history of offending (repeated robbery) betokens a
                 serious discontinuity in his integration in the UK
                 especially because it shows blatant disregard for fellow
                 citizens. ..... We also agree with Mr Jarvis that even when
                 not in prison the claimant's lifestyle over the period when
                 he was committing offences was manifestly anti-social.....
                 We have to decide whether he is socially and culturally
                 integrated in the UK in the present. He is now 29. Whilst
                 his recent acceptance of the reprehensible nature of his
                 criminal conduct is an important factor, we consider the
                 negative factors we have just mentioned indicate that his
                 history of criminal offending broke the continuity of his
                 social and cultural integration in the UK and he has not
                 regained it. This means that currently he has not shown he
                 is socially and culturally integrated."
                 [59]  Being part of a pro-criminal gang similarly shows
                 "blatant disregard for fellow citizens" and is "manifestly
                 anti-social"."

   27. Mr Fripp did not seek to argue that the Judge was right to disregard
       the offending and other like behaviour on the basis  that  the  rule
       would not apply unless the Appellant were a  foreign  criminal.   He
       submitted that  the  Judge  had  taken  into  account  the  criminal
       offending and what he had described as "unacceptable and anti-social
       behaviour" but  had  balanced  that  against  the  evidence  of  the
       Appellant's social and cultural integration  before  the  period  of
       offending.  He said that this followed from what is said at [46] and
       [47] of the Decision about the police  evidence.   The  Judge  there
       accepted the evidence and would therefore have had that in mind when
       considering social and cultural integration.

   28. I am quite unable to accept Mr Fripp's submission on this point.  On
       a plain reading of what the Judge says at [37], he  has  disregarded
       the criminal and anti-social behaviour on the basis  that  the  rule
       only applies because, in essence, such behaviour is to  be  expected
       from those to who the rule applies.   That  is  not  the  case.   Of
       course, most criminal offending is anti-social by  its  very  nature
       (as the Court of Appeal observed in Binbuga at [58]).   However,  as
       the Court of Appeal makes clear it is also the nature and degree  of
       the offending which has to be taken into  account  when  considering
       whether the behaviour amounts to anti-social behaviour  and  whether
       that is sufficient to counter any social  and  cultural  integration
       which has already taken place.

   29. The fallacy in the Judge's reasoning is moreover apparent  from  the
       penultimate sentence when he says that the  Appellant's  integration
       has been "not in an appropriate manner based upon his behaviour from
       2011 onwards".  There is a tension between  that  sentence  and  the
       earlier sentence which (properly) accepts that the behaviour is  far
       from being inappropriate integration  and  is  in  fact  anti-social
       behaviour which needed to be weighed in the balance when considering
       the issue of social and cultural integration.  There  is  a  further
       tension between the acceptance that the  behaviour  has  been  anti-
       social in recent years and the finding that "it is abundantly clear"
       that the Appellant has integrated into UK society.  None of that  is
       recognised by the Judge in this paragraph because he has disregarded
       the evidence of the Appellant's criminal and  anti-social  behaviour
       in his analysis.

   30. Even if Mr Fripp is right in his analysis of this paragraph, I would
       find an error of law because, if that is the  case,  the  Judge  has
       failed to provide adequate reasons to support his finding that it is
       "abundantly clear" that the  Appellant  has  integrated  and/or  has
       reached a finding which is irrational based on  his  record  of  the
       evidence and what is said in that paragraph  and  elsewhere  in  the
       Decision about that evidence.

    Very Significant Obstacles

   31.  Strictly, given my finding  that  there  is  an  error  of  law  in
       relation to the  acceptance  that  the  Appellant  is  socially  and
       culturally integrated in the UK, I do not  need  to  deal  with  the
       finding concerning very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in
       Guyana.  Mr Jarvis recognised that this was the weaker  of  his  two
       grounds and relied only on the written grounds.  Mr  Fripp  did  not
       therefore consider it necessary to make submissions  and  relied  on
       his rule 24 statement. I do so however for the sake of completeness.

   32. The Judge dealt with this issue at [38] and [39] of the Decision  as
       follows:

           "[38] With reference to paragraph 399A(c), of relevance  to  the
           appellant's ability to reintegrate in Guyana is, of course,  the
           length of time that he has  been  absent  from  his  country  of
           nationality.  I reiterate that the appellant was  7  years  old,
           going on 8, when he began living in the United Kingdom.   He  is
           now approaching 23 years of age and, consequently, has not lived
           in Guyana for 15 years.  He has undertaken much of  his  primary
           education in  the  United  Kingdom  and  all  of  his  secondary
           education.  He has no employment history, either in  the  United
           Kingdom or in Guyana.  It is  evident  that  the  appellant  has
           undertaken at least one visit back to Guyana  as,  in  his  oral
           evidence, his father indicated that the  appellant  returned  to
           Guyana for a visit, of about three weeks' duration, in 2010  but
           that this was the last time that he had returned to Guyana.

           [39]  Further, the unchallenged evidence before me is  that  the
           appellant no longer has any relatives remaining in  Ghana  [sic]
           to whom he might turn for support and, indeed, that he does  not
           know anybody in Ghana [sic].  Such unchallenged evidence is also
           to the effect that there is no individual to whom he might  turn
           for any kind of support in re-establishing himself in  his  home
           country.  I reiterate  that  the  appellant  has  no  employment
           history, although he does have certain  qualifications  obtained
           in the United Kingdom, which  may  or  may  not  assist  him  in
           Guyana.  The appellant  has  no  accommodation  in  Guyana  and,
           logically, would need some form of financial support,  at  least
           in the early stages.  His father's unchallenged evidence  before
           me was to the effect that he could  not  provide  the  appellant
           with any significant or material financial  support  in  Guyana,
           due to his own financial commitments.  I also bear in mind  that
           the appellant to date has  never  lived  independently  and  has
           never had to support himself.  In all the  circumstances,  I  am
           satisfied that the appellant has established that any attempt to
           form a private life in Guyana would entail very severe  hardship
           for him.  Consequently,  I  conclude  that  he  also  meets  the
           requirement at paragraph 399A(c) and that, as a result, he meets
           all the requirements of paragraph 399A."

   33. The Respondent's grounds rely on  the  case  of  Bossadi  (paragraph
       276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42 (IAC) and argue  that  the
       Judge has failed to take into account whether the Appellant would be
       able to re-establish ties.  It is also asserted that the  Judge  has
       failed to take into account that the  Appellant's  mother  does  not
       have leave (or did not at the date of  decision)  and  has  not  had
       leave since 2012.  It is said that she  could  therefore  return  to
       Guyana with the Appellant to assist him to reintegrate and that this
       has not been taken into consideration.  It is also pointed out  that
       English is the official language of Guyana.

   34. In response, the Appellant, in his rule 24 statement,  submits  that
       Bossadi is distinguishable  because  that  relied  on  ties  to  the
       Appellant's home country (namely the presence of his  mother)  which
       could be re-established on return.  Here,  the  Judge  has  accepted
       that the Appellant has no friends or family in Guyana.  It  is  said
       that the other points made are simply disagreement with the  Judge's
       findings.

   35. I accept that the Respondent's grounds as pleaded  are  not  strong.
       Certainly, they would be borderline if this were the only  error  of
       law raised.  However, I accept that the Judge did make errors of law
       also in  this  regard  although  not  necessarily  for  the  reasons
       pleaded.

   36. First, there is some inconsistency between the Judge's  findings  at
       [38] and [39] of the Decision when compared with at least one  other
       of his findings.  At [34]  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  says  the
       following:

           "I do not find that the appellant enjoys a family life,  in  the
           context of Article 8, with his parents, bearing in mind that the
           appellant is now 22 years old  and  is  capable  of  undertaking
           employment  and  being  self-sufficient,  should  he  have   the
           opportunity to do so.  Whilst I appreciate  that  he  wishes  to
           return to live at  his  parents'  home,  such  is  a  matter  of
           necessity and convenience and the evidence before  me,  I  find,
           does not  establish  that  the  appellant's  reliance  upon  his
           parents goes beyond the  normal  emotional  and  practical  ties
           between adult  children  and  their  parents.   Indeed,  in  his
           submissions before me, Mr Fripp did not seek to argue otherwise,
           the focus of the appeal being upon private life."

       It is difficult to see why, if the Appellant might be expected to be
       independent of his parents and self-sufficient in the UK,  he  could
       not be in Guyana.  He has never worked in Guyana but, as  the  Judge
       found, he has never worked in the UK either (and would no doubt face
       some difficulties in finding employment given his criminal history).

   37. Second, and related to  the  above,  the  test  for  what  are  very
       significant obstacles is as set out in Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 as follows:
           "[14] In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's
           "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that he
           be deported, as set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph
           399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to
           find a job or to sustain life while living in the other country.
           It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject
           to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
           tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament
           has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
           evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will
           be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in
           the society in that other country is carried on and a capacity
           to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to
           be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis
           in that society and to build up within a reasonable time a
           variety of human relationships to give substance to the
           individual's private or family life."

   38. Whilst the Judge may well have been entitled on the evidence to find
       that deportation to Guyana would be very harsh  for  the  Appellant,
       his reasoning does not incorporate the  sort  of  "broad  evaluative
       judgement" called for on this authority.  Put  another  way,  whilst
       the obstacles put forward by the Judge are no  doubt  obstacles  and
       may well be  significant  ones,  it  is  not  clear  why  the  Judge
       concludes that they are "very significant" ones,  particularly  when
       taking into account his other findings.

    Article 8 Assessment: Materiality

   39. Finally, the Appellant in his rule  24  statement  raises  an  issue
       whether the errors I have identified are material as the Judge  also
       allowed the appeal following a consideration of the case outside the
       Rules based on a wider proportionality assessment ([43] to  [54]  of
       the Decision).  It is said that the Judge was entitled to allow  the
       appeal outside the Rules even if he  was  wrong  in  his  assessment
       within them.

   40. I cannot accept this submission.  First, the  section  carrying  out
       the proportionality balance is prefaced by the  Judge's  finding  at
       [41] of the Decision that the Appellant was  not  required  to  show
       compelling circumstances because he had found that the Appellant met
       the Rules and that "I have borne in mind that an ability to  satisfy
       a relevant part of the Immigration Rules relating to deportation  is
       illuminating in  terms  of  where  the  respondent  might  generally
       consider the relevant  proportionality  balance  should  lie,  which
       factor I  have  taken  into  account  in  assessing  proportionality
       overall." [my emphasis].  The Judge has therefore clearly taken into
       account in what follows his earlier findings which I have  found  to
       be flawed.

   41. Second, that is also evident from  what  is  said  at  [51]  of  the
       Decision where the Judge, assessing the case applying Sections 117A-
       D Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  also  says  when
       assessing the Appellant's private  life  that  "[s]uch  are  clearly
       factors of relevance in terms of the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
       development of his private life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  the
       presenting circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  some  significant
       weight should be given thereto, which fact, I find, is in tune  with
       my findings in relation to paragraph 399A.

   42. For those reasons, the findings which I have found to contain errors
       clearly infect the proportionality assessment  carried  out  outside
       the Rules.  The errors which  I  have  found  to  be  made  out  are
       therefore material.

    NEXT STEPS

   43. For the above reasons, I set aside the Decision.  I  have  carefully
       considered whether to retain this appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  for
       re-making or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

   44. Central to that consideration is a further issue which arose in  the
       course of submissions concerning the applicability of paragraph 399A
       and the private life exception under Section 117C in  terms  of  the
       lawfulness of the Appellant's residence in the UK.  I have  set  out
       the immigration history of the Appellant at [11] to [14] above.   As
       is evident from what is there said, the Appellant has been here  for
       more than half of his life.  However, as Mr Jarvis submitted, and  I
       accept, the Appellant has not necessarily been in  the  UK  lawfully
       for half his life.  This is a  concession  which  was  made  in  the
       Respondent's decision under appeal and Mr Jarvis made clear that  he
       did not rely on this point when arguing that there is  an  error  of
       law in the Decision.  However, he did indicate that, if  I  were  to
       find an error of law, as I have, the Respondent would be seeking  to
       withdraw that concession.

   45. I had initially taken the view that this was a strong point  against
       the Appellant and one which could be dealt with by way of  a  simple
       mathematical calculation.  However, having heard from Mr Fripp, I am
       inclined to agree with his submission that,  because  the  Appellant
       was initially here as the family member of an EEA  national  (namely
       his mother's ex-husband), further factual investigation and evidence
       might be necessary in order to establish the position.   Of  course,
       that further factual findings are necessary is not necessarily  good
       reason to remit an appeal rather than to give directions and  retain
       the appeal in the Upper Tribunal.

   46. In this case, however, I have taken the view that  remittal  is  the
       more appropriate course for two additional reasons.   First,  if  Mr
       Jarvis is  right  about  the  lack  of  lawful  residence  and  that
       paragraph 399A could not apply, the focus of the case and the appeal
       will shift significantly.  It then becomes an appeal based  only  on
       Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules which is likely to change also  the
       nature of the evidence required.

   47. Second, the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  took  place  over
       two years ago.  Whilst I did not understand Mr Fripp to  argue  that
       much had changed in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  private  and/or
       family life, it may well be that more evidence is needed in relation
       to the development of that  private  and/or  family  life  over  the
       period which will also require fresh findings.

   48. For those reasons, I have decided that it is  appropriate  to  remit
       this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Both  parties  were  agreed
       that I should do so if I found an error of law as I have done.



    DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  I
    set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Hodgkinson
    promulgated on 8 February 2017.  I  remit  the  appeal  for  re-hearing
    before a Judge other than Judge Hodgkinson.
       Signed          [pic]            Dated: 2 May 2019
       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


