

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18217/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decisions& Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20th December 2019                    |On 10th January 2020            |
|                                         |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                             DANIEL OSEI MENSAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, counsel, direct access
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


         1. On 12th November 2019, I set aside the decision  of  First-tier
            Tribunal Judge Freer for the following reasons:


                 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  a
                    decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer following a
                    hearing on 3 July 2019.  He allowed the  appeal  of  Mr
                    Mensah for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on
                    18 July 2019.


                 2. Mr Mensah is a Ghanaian citizen born on 1 May 2000  who
                    applied on 27 April 2018, just a few days short of  his
                    18th birthday,    for    entry    clearance    under
                    paragraph 297(f) of the Immigration Rules.  He  sought
                    entry clearance as a dependant of his aunt on the basis
                    that there were serious or compelling family  or  other
                    considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the   child
                    undesirable.  Unfortunately, Judge Freer considered the
                    application and the appeal under  paragraph  297(e) of
                    the Rules which is only applicable where the sponsor is
                    a parent not, as in this case, an aunt.  Although the
                    question as to whether or  not  the  sponsor  had  sole
                    responsibility for the child as he then  was  may  well
                    impact upon the decision under 297(f) of the Rules that
                    is not the end of the  consideration  that  has  to  be
                    given.


                 3. The judge  set  out  in  his  decision the  background
                    material that was before him and found the  sponsor  to
                    be very frank and  co-operative.   She  plainly  came
                    across extremely well, but unfortunately despite the
                    fact  that  she  has  been  supporting  the   appellant
                    financially and visiting once or twice a  year  there
                    was, so far as I could  see,  no  evidence  before  the
                    First-tier Tribunal Judge that there were any serious
                    or compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which
                    made Mr Mensah's exclusion undesirable.


                 4. The judge in paragraph 27 of his  decision  found  that
                    the sponsor satisfied the requirements of the Rules  as
                    the sole parent.  She was settled in the UK and has had
                    sole responsibility now for many years.  She is not the
                    sole parent.  She may well be settled in the UK and she
                    may well have looked after him for a number  of  years,
                    but that does not result, without more information, in
                    a decision that there are serious or compelling  family
                    or other considerations.  The appellant was three  days
                    short of his 18th birthday when the application  was
                    made.  There does not appear to have been any  evidence
                    put to the First-tier Judge what the compelling  family
                    circumstances  were,  or   indeed   what   the   family
                    circumstances were other than  there  was  a  full-time
                    carer for his grandmother  with  whom  he  was  living.
                    There was nothing to show that his exclusion  would  be
                    undesirable, particularly given that he had  completed
                    education and was now attending college.  There is one
                    reference to him having to go out and look for friends,
                    but it cannot be concluded that amounts to  a  serious
                    consideration or compelling circumstance.   Presumably
                    that is what most 17 and 18 year olds do.  Furthermore,
                    the fact that there is a real connection between  the
                    sponsor and the appellant does not in itself mean  that
                    there was a relationship which could only  continue  if
                    he were resident in  the  UK  and  that  his  continued
                    residence in Ghana was in some way harmful to him.


                  Notice of Decision


                 5. I am satisfied that the judge has applied the incorrect
                    test; has  made  findings  that Mr  Mensah meets  the
                    Immigration Rules when he does not; and has  failed  to
                    provide any proper assessment of the proportionality of
                    the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8  grounds.
                    I set aside the decision as  an  error  of  law  to  be
                    remade.


                 6. I note from the file that the  sponsor  was  unable  to
                    attend the hearing on 12 November 2019 and was informed
                    that if the decision was set aside it would be relisted
                    for further hearing.  An adjournment was refused, and
                    she said she was content for the error of law  to  be
                    determined in her absence.


                  Conclusion


                      The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law and  I  set
                      aside the decision to be remade.


         2. Thus the appeal came before  me  on  20th  December  2019.  The
            appellant had filed  a  comprehensive  and  helpful  bundle  of
            documents. I heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant's  aunt,
            Josephine Clementine Ammah and her husband Anthony  Acquah  and
            submissions from  Mr  Hawkin  and  Mr  Melvin.  I  reserved  my
            decision which I now give with reasons.


         3. Judge Freer found, having heard oral evidence,  that  Ms  Ammah
            had sole responsibility for the appellant  for  several  years,
            since the death of her sister who was the  appellant's  mother.
            The judge accepted that there were good reasons for  the  delay
            in the making of the application for entry clearance.  Although
            Mr Melvin in submissions drew attention  to  the  existence  of
            other  family  members  in   Ghana,   the   finding   of   sole
            responsibility was not subject to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
            and is a finding that, as submitted by Mr Hawkin  is  retained.
            The issue before me, which was not addressed by the  First-tier
            Tribunal judge was whether there were  serious  and  compelling
            family or other circumstances such as to render exclusion  from
            the UK undesirable. The existence of other family  members  may
            impact upon the question of whether exclusion  is  undesirable,
            but their presence does not impact upon  the  finding  that  Ms
            Ammah has and had sole responsibility.

         4. Ms Ammah was frank, co-operative  and  clear  in  her  evidence
            before me, as she was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. Her
            husband had not given evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
            but his evidence before me was generally consistent  with  that
            of his wife although it lacked the detail of that of Ms  Ammah.
            He is not related to the appellant other than through  marriage
            to the appellant's aunt. I  am  satisfied  that  such  lack  of
            detail or inconsistencies in the evidence such as the detail of
            Ms Ammah's sister, where she lived,  the  collection  of  money
            which  was  sent  by  Ms  Ammah  for  the  appellant   and  the
            grandmother's state of health were of relatively  minor  import
            and stemmed from a lack of knowledge (understandable given  the
            nature of the relationship) rather than through any attempt  to
            mislead or deceive the Tribunal.

         5. Mr Melvin took issue  with  Ms  Ammah's  evidence  as  to  what
            appeared from her description, to be the  appellant's  learning
            difficulties, that  he  was  bullied,  reclusive,  had  limited
            reading and writing skills and  was  vulnerable.  He  submitted
            that none of this  evidence  had  been  before  the  First-tier
            Tribunal and he submitted that although not going so far as  to
            submit that Ms Ammah was attempting to deceive the Tribunal, it
            was 'over-egging the pudding' in an attempt to substantiate the
            claim that there were serious family or  other  considerations.
            He  drew  attention  to  the  evidence,  including  documentary
            evidence,  that  indicated  the  appellant  had  completed  his
            education, was no longer receiving any additional education and
            that he was taking an automotive course which contradicted  the
            assertion  the  appellant  could  not  read  or   write.   Such
            assistance as the appellant required could,  he  submitted,  be
            provided by the other family members  in  Ghana  from  whom  he
            noted there was no witness statement.

         6. I note there was no witness statement from Ms  Ammah's  sister.
            Ms Ammah's evidence was that her sister lived in the  outskirts
            of Accra, travelled in perhaps  once  a  month,  collected  the
            money  sent  for  the  appellant  and  delivered  it   to   the
            grandmother's home.  She did  not,  Ms  Ammah  said,  have  any
            particular contact with the appellant and provided no care  for
            or support to him. It would have been of  assistance  if  there
            had been a witness statement from the sister.  Nevertheless,  I
            accept Ms Ammah's evidence that her sister  has  little  or  no
            contact with the appellant. The existence of the  sister  would
            have been before the First-tier Tribunal judge and  would  have
            been a matter he considered in reaching his  decision  on  sole
            responsibility. I do not accept Mr Melvin's submission that the
            sister could or would or has taken any role in the care of  the
            appellant since his mother's death or that  she  would  in  the
            future.

         7. The evidence before me from Ms  Ammah  as  to  the  appellant's
            possible learning difficulties was substantiated by the  school
            report which indicated his aptitude  was  weak,  very  weak  or
            fail. At automotive school the only subjects on  which  he  was
            good were auto mechanics and technical drawing. Other  subjects
            he failed or merely passed. It is correct  that  there  was  no
            report into possible learning difficulties or  what  particular
            measures  could  or  should   be   taken   to   address   these
            difficulties. Ms Ammah said she had arranged additional tuition
            for him, but the teacher had said there  was  little  point  in
            continuing because the appellant could not read;  she  had  not
            had time in her visits  to  Ghana  to  arrange  for  particular
            assessment or testing to be undertaken. I accept this evidence.

         8. Ms Ammah was very clearly and plainly concerned and  caring  of
            the appellant. She  was  firmly  of  the  view  that  with  the
            assistance she could give if he were living with  her  and  her
            husband and with the contact he would gain from his cousins, he
            would begin to achieve  basic  English  and  maths  skills  and
            increased confidence. I accept her heartfelt evidence which was
            thoughtfully given. I do not accept Mr Melvin's submission that
            she was 'over-egging the pudding'; nor do  I  accept  that  the
            evidence of  the  appellant's  learning  difficulties  and  the
            consequences of that have been manufactured for the purposes of
            the appeal. I am satisfied, as submitted  by  Mr  Hawkin,  that
            these issues were not explored before the First-tier  Tribunal,
            the judge in that hearing concentrating on the  issue  of  sole
            responsibility and not the correct legal test. I  am  satisfied
            that on the evidence  before  me  the  appellant  has  learning
            difficulties which have had as a consequence led to  him  being
            vulnerable, isolated and bullied in addition to being unable to
            read and write as well as could otherwise be expected.

         9. The issue to be determined is whether there are serious  family
            or other considerations which are such as to  render  exclusion
            of the appellant undesirable. I take into account the fact that
            the appellant was, at the date of application,  just  short  of
            his 18th birthday. Whilst he was a minor, he was  only  just  a
            minor; his age is a relevant factor. Circumstances that may  be
            serious for a minor of 10 or 12 may  not  fall  into  the  same
            category for an older juvenile.  This  appellant  does  however
            have  learning  difficulties  the  exact  extent  of  which  is
            unknown, but they have clearly had a disadvantageous impact not
            only on his academic ability but also  his  social  and  coping
            skills. He has been physically in the care of  his  grandmother
            and I am satisfied that he needed this physical care beyond the
            age at which one would  expect  minors  to  become  more  self-
            sufficient. His grandmother's health has deteriorated  and  the
            person who used to help her is no longer available to help.  He
            has no meaningful contact with his aunt who lives just  outside
            Accra and there are no other family members, whether direct  or
            through the marriage of the sponsor,  who  can  assist  in  any
            meaningful way. Of considerable importance and  of  substantial
            weight  is  the  fact  that  his  aunt  in  the  UK  has   sole
            responsibility. Whilst I do not accept that  this  fact  is  of
            itself sufficient to enable the appellant to succeed under  the
            Rules, I do accept that it is a weighty factor. I  accept  that
            the appellant requires 'looking  after'.  This  is  not  merely
            because he has learning difficulties but because he is  plainly
            isolated and vulnerable. The  appellant  has  had  a  difficult
            youth - his mother died when he was young, his grandmother  has
            become increasingly  unable  to  provide  him  with  the  daily
            physical care that he requires, and he has learnt very recently
            that the man he thought was his father was not - even though he
            played no part in his life. The one  person  who  has  remained
            constant in his life is his aunt who  has  sole  responsibility
            for him.


        10. It is not  reasonable  for  the  sponsor  and  her  husband  to
            relocate to Ghana to look after the appellant.; they have three
            children here in the UK who, although not minors are still very
            much a part of the family. Ms Ammah's evidence, which I accept,
            was that she would provide the appellant with the loving family
            home that is needed.

        11. I am satisfied, taking all the evidence in the round, that  the
            exclusion of the appellant from the UK  is  undesirable.  I  am
            satisfied that he meets the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
            Rules. It follows that the refusal of entry  clearance  was  in
            breach of Article 8.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it.

                                    Date 6th January 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
