
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18663/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 August 2019                |On 21st August 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    Z. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Najah, Counsel instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, entered the  United  Kingdom
         legally in October 2006 with leave to  remain  as  a  student.  Her
         leave to remain was then extended on a number of occasions, and  in
         different capacities until the most recent grant that expired on 23
         September 2017.
      2. On 31 August 2017 the Appellant made, in time, an application for a
         grant of indefinite leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  her  long
         residency. This was refused on 29 August  2018  with  reference  to
         paragraphs 276A(a)(v) and 276B(i)(a) of the Immigration Rules.  The
         Respondent relied upon the fact that the Appellant had been  absent
         from the UK for a total of 761 days during the ten year period that
         she relied upon as the basis for her application. This  period  ran
         from October 2006 (the date of entry) to August 2017 (the  date  of
         application). The Respondent's calculation of the relevant  periods
         of absence identified the four longest periods of  absence  as  175
         days 9.12.14-3.6.15, 102 days 26.12.12-10.4.13, 175  days  23.1.11-
         18.7.11, and 113 days 18.6.08 - 10.10.08 [F1]. This calculation has
         never been placed in dispute, and thus it has never been in dispute
         that arithmetically the Appellant had been physically  absent  from
         the UK during this period for in excess of the period of six months
         permitted by paragraph 276A(a)(v).
      3. The Appellant's immigration history during the period from  October
         2006 to 31 October 2017 did however demonstrate a  sequence  of  in
         time applications for leave, so that the combined effect of section
         3C of the Immigration Act 1971, and the grants of leave  that  were
         specifically made to the  Appellant  was  to  provide  a  chain  of
         periods of leave in different capacities  during  the  eleven  year
         period in question.
      4. The Appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  her  deemed  human
         rights claim was heard and allowed on Article 8  grounds  by  First
         Tier Tribunal Judge Hands in a decision promulgated on  28  January
         2019.
      5. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal by decision  of  25
         June 2019 of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  on  the  basis  it  was
         arguable Judge Hands' decision was  confused,  and,  contradictory.
         Arguably the Judge had erred in making inconsistent  findings  when
         she had found that not all of the Appellant's absences from the  UK
         could  be  justified  as   due   to   compelling   or   exceptional
         circumstances, and yet, that the Appellant had met the requirements
         of paragraph 276B. Arguably the Judge was said to have used Article
         8 as a general dispensing tool and failed to give  the  appropriate
         weight to the Appellant's precarious  status  in  the  UK  and  the
         relevant   public   interest.   Arguably   the   conclusions   were
         inadequately  reasoned  and  unjustified  in  the  light   of   the
         immigration history.
      6. There is no cross-appeal brought by the Appellant.
      7. A Rule 24 Notice was lodged on 25 July  2019  in  response  to  the
         grant of permission to appeal. Neither party has  applied  pursuant
         to Rule 15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus
         the matter came before me.

    The hearing
      8. The hearing of the appeal was originally listed for 2 August  2019,
         but on that occasion the entire list had to  be  adjourned  because
         the presenting  officer  was  indisposed  on  the  morning  of  the
         hearing. Having consulted the Appellants and their  representatives
         to ascertain their availability, and  secured  a  court  room,  the
         entire list was adjourned to 7 August 2019 in an effort to minimise
         the expense and delay that the parties would otherwise face (two of
         the appeals being privately funded). Time for the  service  of  the
         Notice of Hearings was thereby abridged.
      9. On 6 August 2019 the Respondent applied by email of 1255 hours  for
         an adjournment of the entire list on the basis it  was  anticipated
         that it would not be possible to provide a presenting officer as  a
         result of seasonal staff shortages. That application was refused by
         email of 1414 hours on the basis there remained ample time for  the
         Respondent to  secure  adequate  representation,  if  necessary  by
         resort to the services of the Bar. The  application  has  not  been
         renewed. The Respondent did not attend the hearing.
     10. In the circumstances I was satisfied that the Respondent  is  aware
         of the hearing. I was not  satisfied  there  was  any  good  reason
         demonstrated as to why the appeal should be adjourned once again of
         the Tribunal's own motion. The issues were simple, and  it  was  in
         the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing without  delay
         and  with  minimal  further  expense,  and  the  appeal   therefore
         proceeded in the Respondent's absence, having considered paragraphs
         2, 36, and 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
         2008.

    The challenge raised in the grounds
     11. The grounds to the application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
         Upper Tribunal noted that the Judge had  concluded  that  this  was
         only ever a "private life" appeal [23, 33], and that there were  no
         insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's return to Pakistan [23,
         41]. Pausing there, the Appellant has raised no cross-appeal to the
         Judge's findings of fact upon her relationship with her  uncle  and
         aunt in the UK, or, upon her ability to live in Pakistan in safety.
         Whilst there would no doubt be disruption to the way  of  life  the
         Appellant had established for herself in the UK she owned  property
         in Pakistan, had family there, and had spent significant periods of
         time there in safety.
     12. The grounds raised four discrete challenges.
     13.  First  it  was  argued  that  the  decision   was   confused   and
         contradictory.  Having  concluded  the  Appellant  had  failed   to
         establish that her absence from the UK between  December  2014  and
         June 2015 in excess  of  six  months  was  due  to  exceptional  or
         compelling circumstances [30-1], it was not open to  the  Judge  to
         conclude that the Appellant  had  demonstrated  that  she  met  the
         requirements of paragraph 276B.
     14. Second it was argued that it was common ground between the  parties
         that the Appellant's total number of relevant absences from the  UK
         was 761 days [4, 16]. It was not in the circumstances open  to  the
         Judge to use instead a figure of 720  days  as  the  total  of  her
         periods of absence.
     15. Third it was argued that the Judge had resorted to using Article  8
         as a general dispensing tool having concluded  that  the  Appellant
         did not meet the Immigration Rules. The Judge had failed  to  offer
         adequate reasons for any conclusion that it was disproportionate to
         expect the Appellant to return to Pakistan. That conclusion was not
         one that was open to her in the light of her findings, the relevant
         jurisprudence, and section 117B of the 2014 Act.
     16. Fourth it was argued that the conclusion that the  refusal  of  the
         application was disproportionate was inconsistent with the  finding
         that the Appellant  had  failed  to  establish  that  she  met  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules, and thus one  that  was  not
         open to her.

    The Appellant's response
     17. Although there is no cross-appeal from the Appellant  the  Rule  24
         response argues that the Judge's approach to the  appeal  erred  in
         not following the guidance to be found in  Balajigari  [2019]  EWCA
         Civ 673; if she had then it is argued that she would  have  allowed
         the appeal, because she would have "stepped into the shoes  of  the
         decision maker" to exercise a general discretion.
     18. It is conceded that the parties were agreed before the  Judge  that
         the calculation of the Appellant's absences from the UK during  the
         relevant period amounted to a total of 761 days [#10].
     19. It is argued that it was open to the Appellant  to  establish  that
         some of her absences from the UK were for compelling  compassionate
         reasons, and thus that they should be left wholly out of account in
         the calculation of 761 days. Although the argument as framed is not
         easy to  follow,  it  is  based  upon  the  Respondent's  published
         guidance of 3 April 2017,  although  no  passage  with  the  effect
         argued for is identified within that guidance.
     20. As a subsidiary argument the Appellant points to the fact that  the
         Respondent's own  calculations  of  her  absences  show  that  none
         equalled or exceeded a period of 180 days [F1]. Thus it  is  argued
         that none equalled, or exceeded, a period of six  months  (since  a
         month is 30days in this context) with the result that there  is  no
         break in the chain of "continuous residence".
     21. At the hearing  Ms  Najah  chose  to  focus  upon  this  subsidiary
         argument. She also argued that the Appellant was entitled  to  take
         the date of hearing and then work back from it for a period of  ten
         years in order to show that the periods of absence in  this  period
         (10.1.09 - 10.1.19) were less than 540 days in total, and thus that
         the requirements of the Immigration Rules were met as at  the  date
         of the hearing.
     22. In any event, Ms Najah argued that since this was  a  human  rights
         appeal the Judge was obliged to undertake a holistic assessment  of
         the relevant facts, and the Appellant was entitled  to  bring  into
         the balance of proportionality the reasons for her absence from the
         UK. She argued that since the majority of those absences  were  for
         compelling and compassionate reasons (although the Judge's findings
         offer no support for that proposition) then  there  was  either  no
         public interest in the decision under appeal, or, it was outweighed
         by the weight that should be  given  to  the  Appellant's  "private
         life". She  argued  that  there  was  no  public  interest  in  the
         Appellant being required to make a fresh application for ILR, if as
         was argued, she now met the requirements of paragraph 276B but  had
         failed to do so either at the date of her application, or, the date
         of the decision under appeal.

    Conclusions
     23. The Appellant enjoyed no recourse to a ground of  appeal  that  the
         Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law; the  only
         applicable ground of appeal open to her was that the decision under
         appeal amounted to a disproportionate interference in her Article 8
         rights; section 84 of the 2002 Act.
     24. The Judge concluded that  the  decision  under  appeal  potentially
         engaged the Appellant's Article 8 rights [22]. Although she  failed
         to clearly specify why, or which "gateway" she was considering when
         reaching that conclusion, it is in  my  judgement  clear  once  the
         decision is read as a whole that the Judge  could  only  have  been
         considering the balance of proportionality  in  the  context  of  a
         "private life" appeal. She had noted that the Appellant was not  in
         a relationship with anyone in the UK, and had no  child  living  in
         the UK. As noted above, the Judge had considered the evidence  that
         the Appellant had lived as an adult member of the household of  her
         aunt and uncle since 2006, but she had  made  no  positive  finding
         that the nature of the Appellant's relationship with any member  of
         that household was sufficient to constitute "family life" [33]. The
         Judge had considered the health of the Appellant's uncle,  but  had
         declared herself unable to assess the true meaning of  the  medical
         report relied upon as evidence of his condition. Whilst  the  Judge
         declared that she had no reason to doubt the  Appellant's  evidence
         concerning her uncle's health or the care that was provided by  the
         Appellant to him, she found that she was not satisfied that it  was
         sufficient to show that the Appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  was
         necessary for his well being. Thus it was declared that there would
         be no interference in her "family life"  should  he  leave  the  UK
         [sic]. As noted above there is no  cross-appeal,  and  the  finding
         that the Appellant did not enjoy "family life" with any  individual
         living in the UK must therefore stand.
     25. The Judge stated that she was prepared to give "some weight" to the
         Appellant's private life. It  is  difficult  to  discern  from  the
         decision precisely what the  Judge  accepted  this  "private  life"
         consisted of, bearing  in  mind  that  no  individual  had  offered
         evidence at the hearing on her behalf. However, given the nature of
         the evidence relied upon, and the Judge's observations, it must  in
         my judgement have been accepted to consist of two  elements.  First
         the membership of the household of her uncle and aunt, and the time
         physically spent in the UK; the "conventional private life". Second
         her business interests; the "business private life".
     26. The Judge appears to have been somewhat sceptical of the  financial
         information provided in relation to the Appellant's  business,  and
         whether it was financially viable or  profitable  [38-40].  However
         the Judge made no adverse findings in  relation  to  this,  and  in
         particular there was no finding that the business was insolvent, or
         a sham dishonestly created in order to  provide  a  foundation  for
         previous applications for grants of leave to  remain.  Thus  it  is
         difficult to see precisely how the Judge treated the  business  for
         the purposes of the Article 8 claim.  Neither  of  those  appearing
         below, nor the Judge, appear to have engaged with the  guidance  to
         be found in Onwuje [2018] EWCA Civ 336 concerning the  weight  that
         could be given to business interests created whilst  an  individual
         held a lawful, albeit precarious, immigration status.
     27. My starting point must be therefore that the Judge  did  find,  and
         was entitled  to  find,  given  the  applicable  low  threshold  of
         engagement, that the decision under appeal engaged the  Appellant's
         Article 8 rights as a result of the interference it would  occasion
         to her "private life" in the UK. Notwithstanding  the  Respondent's
         general criticisms of the decision as contradictory  and  confused,
         this much is clear.
     28. A well structured decision ought to have considered  where  in  the
         "private life" continuum the facts of the Appellant's  case  placed
         her, and thus how close she  fell  to  the  concept  of  moral  and
         physical integrity and how far removed from this core she fell,  so
         as to allow  an  assessment  of  how  readily  her  interests  were
         defeasible by those of the state; Patel [2013] UKSC  72  and  Nasim
         and Others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25. On the facts as she
         had found them to be the Judge ought to  have  concluded  that  the
         "private life" the Appellant had established was removed  from  the
         core concept of moral and physical integrity.
     29. The Judge's assessment ought then to have turned to the question of
         whether the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules
         for  the  application  she  had  made,  at  either  the  date  that
         application was submitted, or, decided. If the Judge  had  followed
         that course then she would have been bound to note as her  starting
         point that the parties were  agreed  that  however  one  sought  to
         calculate a ten year period between  arrival  and  application  for
         ILR, or, between arrival and decision upon that application,  there
         were a total number of 761 days absence from the UK. It was  simply
         not open to the Judge to substitute  some  other  figure  for  that
         agreed total, and when she did so she plainly  fell  into  material
         error. Ground 2 is made out.
     30. The Judge ought then to have considered the  disputed  question  of
         whether in the circumstances the Appellant had met the requirements
         of  paragraph  276A(a)(v)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Since  the
         undisputed figure of 761 days well exceeded the figure of 540  days
         set out in the over-riding condition of paragraph  276A(a)(v),  the
         Appellant plainly did not do so, and again the Judge  plainly  fell
         into error in apparently concluding otherwise.  Ground  1  is  made
         out.
     31. The appeal appears to have been argued before the Judge (as I  fear
         is reflected in the drafting of the Rule 24 response) on the  basis
         that  the  free  standing  nature  of  the  over-riding   condition
         contained in paragraph 276A(a)(v) was  ignored.  Alternatively  the
         way in which the operative elements of paragraph  276A(a)  operated
         together with the published guidance [v15.0 of 3 April  2017],  was
         confused, so that the free  standing  nature  of  this  over-riding
         condition was not adequately recognised, or engaged with.
     32. There is in my judgement no proper basis for the argument  advanced
         on behalf of the Appellant that the same  discretionary  provisions
         brought into consideration in relation to periods when an applicant
         was within the UK, but an "overstayer", so as to excuse  them  from
         the breaks in the chain of grants of  leave  that  would  otherwise
         exist, should be transposed to excuse periods of  physical  absence
         from the UK, with the result  that  they  should  be  left  out  of
         account altogether from the calculation of total absences  for  the
         purposes of  paragraph  276A(a)(v).  Nor  is  it  possible,  simply
         because none of the individual  periods  of  absence  from  the  UK
         exceeded  180  days,  to  leave  them  out  of  account  from   the
         calculation of total absence. There is nothing in the  Respondent's
         published  guidance  of  3  April  2017,  or  the  wording  of  the
         Immigration Rules themselves which would permit such an approach.
     33. It was not suggested before the Judge that the  Appellant  met  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE for a grant of leave.
     34.  It  follows  that  the  Judge's  approach  to   the   balance   of
         proportionality was flawed because she took as her  starting  point
         her unsustainable and inconsistent finding that the  Appellant  met
         the requirements of the Immigration Rules, when she  did  not,  and
         when the Judge had elsewhere concluded that she did not.
     35. Thus it follows that I must set  aside  the  Judge's  decision  and
         remake it. The findings of primary fact  are  unchallenged  by  any
         cross-appeal. There is no  suggestion  that  I  need  to  make  any
         additional findings of primary fact in order to do so, and  neither
         party has made any application that I should hear further  evidence
         in order to do so.

    The decision remade
     36. There is,  plainly,  a  public  interest  of  significance  in  the
         maintenance of effective immigration controls; section 117B(1). The
         Appellant could not meet the requirements of either paragraph  276A
         or paragraph 276ADE when she  made  her  application,  or,  when  a
         decision was made upon it.
     37. Those provisions represent the Secretary of State's judgment of the
         balance required by  the  public  interest  in  the  generality  of
         "private life" cases based on  long  residence.  It  will  only  be
         exceptionally that there will exist compelling  reasons  sufficient
         to require a discretionary grant of leave  to  remain  outside  the
         Rules.
     38. The Tribunal is only permitted to give little weight to a  "private
         life" established whilst the Appellant has  enjoyed  a  lawful  but
         precarious immigration status; section 117B(5). This is not however
         to say that the "private life"  relied  upon  should  be  given  no
         weight.
     39. The Appellant's "private life" consists of both the  "conventional"
         resulting from  the  length  of  time  spent  in  the  UK  and  her
         longstanding membership of the household of  her  uncle  and  aunt,
         and, that resulting from her involvement in her business. I bear in
         mind the guidance of the Court of Appeal in Onwuje  to  the  proper
         approach in such circumstances;

          1. As regards  private  life,  the  position  has  arguably  been
             unnecessarily complicated by the emphasis placed by the FTT on
             the Appellant's involvement with his business. Mr Mustafa made
             it  clear  that  the  Appellant  had  always  relied  also  on
             conventional private life grounds. In his witness statement in
             the FTT he gave evidence,  albeit  in  fairly  general  terms,
             about the friendships and social life that he and his wife and
             children had developed in their local community and how  fully
             integrated they were, particularly through church and  school.
             It is fair to say  that  those  general  statements  were  not
             supported by very much in the way of independent evidence: the
             letters from the Appellant's church and his daughter's  school
             are perfunctory.  Nevertheless,  the  general  proposition  is
             entirely plausible. I would therefore be prepared to hold that
             the FTT was entitled to find that the right to respect for the
             private lives of the Appellant and his wife and  children  was
             engaged by  their  liability  to  removal,  even  without  any
             reference to his business.


          1. Having said that, I have no difficulty  with  the  proposition
             that in some circumstances an entrepreneur's ownership of, and
             involvement in, his or her business may also be regarded as an
             aspect of their private life for the purpose of article 8.  In
             a  well-known  passage  of  its   judgment   in Niemietz   v
             Germany (1993) 16 EHRR 97, the ECHR said, at para. 29:


                "The Court does not consider it  possible  or  necessary  to
                attempt an exhaustive definition of the notion  of  'private
                life'. However, it would be too  restrictive  to  limit  the
                notion to an 'inner circle' in which the individual may live
                his own personal life as he chooses and to exclude therefrom
                entirely the  outside  world  not  encompassed  within  that
                circle. Respect for private life must  also  comprise  to  a
                certain  degree  the  right   to   establish   and   develop
                relationships  with  other  human  beings.  There   appears,
                furthermore,  to  be  no  reason  of  principle   why   this
                understanding of the notion  of  'private  life'  should  be
                taken to exclude activities of a  professional  or  business
                nature since it is,  after  all,  in  the  course  of  their
                working  lives  that  the  majority   of   people   have   a
                significant, if not the greatest, opportunity of  developing
                relationships with the outside world."


             There are certainly cases where the work that  a  person  does
             can properly be described as integral to their  "physical  and
             social identity" (to use the language of the ECHR in Pretty v
             United Kingdom (2002) 35 EHRR 1, at para.  61);  and  a  case
             where an individual has established a business in which he  or
             she  remains  actively  involved  may  well  come  into   this
             category. As regards this  particular  case,  the  Appellant's
             witness statement does not explicitly rely on the business  as
             an  aspect  of  his  identity.  Rather,  it  focuses  on   its
             importance to the local economy and to its clients, neither of
             which has anything to do with article 8; and that is  likewise
             the focus of the FTT's reasoning. Since I would in  any  event
             find that article 8 was engaged on the more conventional basis
             discussed above, it  is  unnecessary  to  decide  definitively
             whether on the basis of that evidence the Judge was  entitled,
             to the extent that he did, to take the Appellant's involvement
             in   Casgo   into   account   when   addressing   the    first
             two Razgar questions; but I am inclined to think that, despite
             its deficiencies, he was.

     40. I take into  account  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
         "conventional private life"  claim  [33-4],  and  I  do  give  them
         weight. On the other hand, as noted above, they do  not  place  the
         Appellant at the core of the "conventional private life" concept of
         moral and physical integrity.
     41. Turning to the "business private life" claim, I note the absence of
         evidence from  either  employees  or  clients  of  the  Appellant's
         business, and thus the absence of evidence concerning the  personal
         relationships the Appellant had established with either  [38-9].  I
         discount the Judge's apparent scepticism over the business  itself.
         I give weight to the existence of the business,  and  to  the  fact
         that the Appellant must have committed significant  effort  to  its
         creation, and subsequently  to  its  maintenance  for  it  to  have
         survived. On the other hand, the proper  approach  to  a  "business
         private life" claim must be as indicated in Onwuje.
     42. Thus, whilst it appears to  have  been  argued  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant that her business would collapse if she were not  granted
         ILR, this is very far from being self-evident. No  such  claim  was
         made by the Appellant in her witness statement of 3  January  2019,
         or, on her behalf by her accountant. No such finding  was  made  by
         the Judge, and I am not prepared to draw  such  an  inference.  The
         business has plainly survived her lengthy absence from  the  UK  in
         the past, and she has not demonstrated why if  it  were  profitable
         (as the disclosed accounts suggest it is) she is unable  either  to
         sell it, or, to run it from abroad. Thus she  is,  and  has  always
         been, in a position to extract in monetary terms whatever value the
         marketplace considers her investment of time and money has created.


     43. Unless the Appellant is able to satisfy the criteria for a grant of
         leave as an investor or entrepreneur established from time to  time
         under the Immigration Rules as the Respondent's policy demands, and
         it is not suggested that she is, then it is difficult  to  see  why
         the mere creation or ownership of a  business  should  require  the
         discretionary grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.  For  the
         Tribunal to use Article  8  in  this  way  would  in  my  judgement
         inevitably draw it into making value judgements  on  profitability,
         economic value, and/or value to  the  community  of  a  variety  of
         businesses,  that  would  be  wholly   inappropriate,   and   would
         inevitably lead to the loss of public confidence  in  human  rights
         law that the President has warned against; Thakrar [2018] UKUT 336.
     44. Nor, in my  judgement,  is  this  a  situation  which  engages  the
         principles rehearsed in Chikwamba and subsequent jurisprudence.  No
         attempt has been made  to  demonstrate  that  the  Appellant  would
         necessarily succeed were she to make a fresh  application  (in  any
         capacity) today, whether from within the UK, or by way of leave  to
         enter from Pakistan.
     45. I turn then to the argument that less weight should be afforded  to
         the public interest in maintaining the decision to refuse to  grant
         the Appellant ILR because some of her periods of absence would  not
         have occurred were it not  for  the  compelling  and  compassionate
         circumstances she has been faced with from time to time.
     46. No such argument is raised in relation to the 2007, 2008,  or  2009
         absences of 58, 113 and 92 days, together totalling 263 days.
     47. The first period to which this argument is said to apply  was  that
         commencing in January 2011, totalling 175 days. The  Judge  treated
         this argument as also being raised in relation to the  next  period
         of absence commencing in January 2012, totalling 39 days. The third
         period to which this argument is  said  to  apply  was  that  which
         commenced in December 2012, totalling 102 days, which followed  her
         mother suffering a stroke in November 2012.
     48. No such argument is raised in relation to the absence commencing in
         December 2014 of 175 days, or, the absence in  January  2017  of  7
         days. It is the Judge's approach to this period of absence which is
         criticised by the Appellant, correctly, as having been  subject  to
         an unwarranted "rounding up" so that the absence of 175 days (which
         was indeed the Respondent's own case [F1]) was incorrectly  rounded
         up by the Judge so that it incorrectly became  an  absence  of  180
         days [30]. Whilst the Judge did so, nothing turns on  it,  since  I
         have ignored the error in my own consideration of the evidence.
     49. Thus no such argument is raised in relation to a total of 445  days
         of absence, but the Appellant seeks to  take  out  of  account  the
         whole of the three periods of absence of 175 days, 39 days and  102
         days occurring between 2011 and  2013.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Judge's approach to this argument was, at best,  confused,  and  at
         worst one that was not open to her on the evidence [29-30].
     50. There was no express finding, and indeed  no  evidence  that  would
         appear to have allowed  any  such  finding,  as  to  how  long  the
         Appellant had originally intended to stay in Pakistan for when  she
         commenced the January 2011 trip, and thus how long she  would  have
         been absent for in 2011 had her father not died shortly  after  her
         arrival. There was for example no evidence concerning the  date  of
         her original  flight  booking,  and  its  rearrangement.  Even  the
         Appellant's witness statement of 3 January 2019 accepted  that  she
         was physically absent from the UK when her father  died,  and  that
         this necessitated a longer  stay  than  originally  planned  -  but
         wholly failed to engage with what the original plans  were,  or  by
         how much the trip was extended.
     51. Nor could it be said that the lengths of either of the  periods  of
         absence of 175 days, 39 days, or 102 days between January 2011  and
         April 2013 were out of the pattern of  absences  and  their  length
         that occurred either prior to January 2011, or  after  April  2013.
         Thus I note that the Appellant was absent for a 113  day  visit  to
         Pakistan in 2008, and for a 175 day visit in 2014/5.
     52. Accordingly it was not open to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the
         Appellant would not have been absent from the UK for in  excess  of
         540 days had it not been for the  death  of  her  father,  or,  the
         stroke suffered by her mother. Indeed it is  very  far  from  clear
         that the Judge ever intended to reach such a  conclusion,  since  I
         note that she expressly rejected precisely this argument [31].
     53. It is unclear how the Judge calculated that the Appellant spent  an
         extra 90 days in Pakistan as a result of these  events,  which  she
         would not have spent in Pakistan if  they  had  not  occurred,  and
         which should be  excused  because  of  exceptional  and  compelling
         circumstances [29]. Nor is it clear which of the three  periods  of
         absence she was applying it to. Even if such a finding were open to
         her (and I am very far from  being  persuaded  that  it  was)  then
         arithmetically it would still leave the Appellant  as  absent  from
         the UK for well in excess of the 540 days permitted in the ten year
         period relied upon (761 - 90 = 671).
     54. I note the Judge's findings that the Appellant's  mother  continues
         to live in Pakistan, and, that the Appellant herself owns  property
         in Pakistan. Plainly the Appellant was well educated  in  Pakistan,
         before travelling to the UK for her tertiary education. There is no
         suggestion that the Appellant has lost her fluency in any  relevant
         language and plainly she has marketable skills  if  she  needed  to
         seek employment, or, chose to start a  business  in  Pakistan.  The
         Appellant has a home, and close family to return to,  and  arguably
         her mother would benefit from her presence and support. It is  also
         quite clear the Appellant  could  live  permanently  in  safety  in
         Pakistan if she was willing to do so. I can identify on  the  facts
         of this appeal no good reason why the Respondent should bow to  her
         wish that she be granted ILR, even though she was not  entitled  to
         it when she made her application for it, or when  that  application
         was refused.
     55. It is asserted, baldly, that the Appellant meets  the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules now but the evidence  does  not  establish
         that this is the case - if such an application were  made  now  she
         would be obliged to demonstrate  more  than  that  her  periods  of
         absence in the period 7.8.09 to 7.8.19 were below 540 days, and she
         has not done so. I can  see  no  good  reason  why  she  should  be
         relieved of the obligation  of  making  a  fresh  application,  and
         paying the appropriate fee, should she consider  that  she  is  now
         entitled to a grant of leave under any avenue open to her under the
         Immigration Rules.
     56. Looking at the evidence in the round I am therefore satisfied  that
         on the  facts  of  this  case  the  decision  under  appeal  was  a
         proportionate  interference  in  the  Article  8  rights   of   the
         Appellant. In the circumstances I dismiss the Article 8 appeal.




    DECISION
    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    28 January 2019 is affected by material errors of law in  the  decision
    to allow  the  Appellant's  human  rights  appeal  which  require  that
    decision to be set aside and remade.
    I remake the decision so as to dismiss the human rights appeal.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
         Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is
         granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
         proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
         direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
         being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 9 August 2019


