
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18117/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 July 2018                               |On 3 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                sarabjit [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Irene Sriharan of Counsel, instructed by
Sriharan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of India, has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Murray of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 12 July  2016
    to refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Like the  respondent,
    the judge did not find credible the appellant's claim that he was in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms P.

2.   The principal thrust of the grounds  as  advanced  before  me  by  Miss
    Sriharan, concerns the judge's finding at paragraph 24:

         "When cross-examined, there were  a  number  of  discrepancies  and
         inconsistencies in the evidence.  The Appellant could not  remember
         Ms P's birthday and blamed  memory  loss.   However,  there  is  no
         supporting medical evidence of this.  Their  evidence  as  to  what
         they did on her birthday and the Tuesday predating the hearing  was
         not consistent.  He said that on the Tuesday she fell sick and  she
         said that they spent a normal day together."


3.   It is  submitted  that  this  was  predicated  on  a  mistake  of  fact
    demonstrated by the GP letter dated 30 November 2017 stating  that  the
    appellant has memory problems.  Miss Sriharan also submitted  that  the
    judge's treatment of the memory loss issue was vitiated by a failure to
    have regard to the documentary evidence indicating that  the  appellant
    was a recovering heroin addict on methadone, which  was  an  identified
    cause of memory loss.

4.   I find no arguable merit in this ground.  As regards the GP letter,  it
    is a post-decision document which was not in existence at the date  the
    judge heard the appeal and it is not arguable that the judge  erred  by
    failing to anticipate it.

5.   Insofar as the grounds contend that the judge failed  to  take  account
    of other evidence before him indicating  that  the  appellant  suffered
    memory loss, I am prepared to accept that the judge did  not  refer  to
    the letter provided by his partner stating that  he  "forgets  things".
    However,  the  judge  received  detailed  submissions   regarding   the
    appellant's claimed memory  loss,  noting  at  paragraph  12  Counsel's
    submission that "there was no expert medical evidence but the Appellant
    had said it and he invited me to accept it."  The judge does not  state
    at paragraph 24 that there was "no evidence" to support the appellant's
    claim to memory loss, only that there was  "no  medical  evidence"  and
    there is no reason to conclude the judge failed to take account of what
    the appellant and his partner said about this.  The judge was  entitled
    to consider that in light of the lack of medical evidence the  evidence
    given by the appellant and his partner was  not  reliable  as  to  this
    matter.

6.   I see no merit in the contention that the judge  should  have  regarded
    memory loss as established by the medical evidence produced to show the
    appellant was  a  recovering  heroin  addict.   None  of  the  material
    relating to this indicated that the appellant's heroin addiction or the
    medication he took to obviate it caused his memory loss  (I  would  add
    that the GP's letter dated 30 November  is  not  in  any  event  cogent
    evidence since it only states provisionally that "it looks like he  has
    got some difficulties with short-term memory" and "I need  to  do  more
    investigations...").

7.   The second main argument raised  in  the  grounds  is  that  the  judge
    failed to adequately engage with the evidence  relating  to  the  "true
    nature" of the relationship between the appellant and his partner,  but
    it is manifest that the judge did engage with that  evidence  and  gave
    sound reasons for the evaluation  he  made,  namely  that  it  did  not
    establish that they had a genuine and subsisting relationship.

8.   The written grounds also submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  attach
    weight when assessing the appellant's private life that he had accepted
    that the appellant "provides support for Ms P" and "that  this  assists
    her given she is on higher rate DLA".  That argument  founders  on  the
    clear terms  of  paragraph  32  which  made  clear  that  (even  though
    rejecting that the couple enjoyed family  life)  the  judge  took  into
    account in the Article 8 proportionality assessment that the  appellant
    "provides support to Ms P" but that this factor was "outweighed by  the
    public interest in removal".   Paragraph 32 also reflects  the  judge's
    acceptance at paragraph 25 that the couple have known  each  other  for
    some time but that "it has been as friends  and  he  has  provided  her
    support".  Given that the relationship was clearly not established as a
    genuine and subsisting one between partners and was  only  accepted  as
    being a friendship it was open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  its
    quality and nature were not such as to render the respondent's  refusal
    of leave to remain disproportionate.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and his decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:                                 Date:27 September 2018
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

