
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/18887/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2017                          |On 04  August 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              DAVENAND JAIPAUL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp instructed by Fadiga & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.   The appellant, to whom I shall refer hereafter  as  the  respondent  as
    she was before the First-tier judge, appeals against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier judge allowing the appeal of the respondent (to  whom  I
    shall refer hereafter as the appellant) against a decision of  26  July
    2016  refusing  his  human  rights  claim  and  refusing  to  revoke  a
    deportation order.

2.   The judge noted the appellant's unchallenged immigration history  which
    is that he came to the United  Kingdom  aged  around  7  years  and  10
    months, in 2002.  His  mother  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    obtained a five year EEA family permit.  Subsequent to his  arrival  he
    sought an EEA residence document which he was  granted  and  which  was
    valid to 7 September 2006.  A number of  subsequent  applications  were
    made and either rejected or refused but later the appellant was awarded
    a residence card valid until 19 November 2012.  He made an  application
    on 19 October 2012 for an EEA permanent residence  card  and  that  was
    refused.  A subsequent application made in July 2014 was also  refused.



3.   A deportation order was signed  against  him  on  28  July  2016.   His
    criminal record was set out by the judge.  I do not propose  to  repeat
    the list in full.  It begins on 7 September 2011 and  concludes  on  17
    July 2015.  There are eleven  convictions  including  most  recently  a
    conviction on 30 April 2014 of battery and assaulting a police  officer
    for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  a  community  order  and  a  curfew
    requirement, a conviction for affray on 9 January 2015 for which he was
    sentenced to 36 weeks' imprisonment, a conviction on 5 February 2015 of
    wounding and inflicting grievous bodily harm and  a  conviction  on  17
    July 2015 of robbery and possession of drugs.  He was sentenced to nine
    months for the grievous bodily harm conviction and two  years  and  six
    months for the robbery and possession of drugs conviction.  It was that
    last offence and conviction which triggered  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against him.

4.   In addition, at paragraph 46 of his  decision,  the  judge  noted  that
    there were numerous additional accusations made against the  appellant,
    some of them serious, and encounters with the police, between 2011  and
    2014.  The appellant did not deny their occurrence before the judge and
    they clearly occurred as they were documented in records attached to  a
    police constable's statement.   In  the  circumstances  the  judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant  had  been  involved  in  criminality  and
    undesirable behaviour during that period of time  over  and  above  the
    offences for which he was convicted.

5.   The judge noted that the appellant took  full  responsibility  for  the
    crimes he had committed.  He had attended Croydon College between  2011
    and 2013.  He had first got into trouble in August  2011  when  he  was
    aged 17 after he began to take drugs.  Alcohol or drugs had always been
    a contributing factor to his offending.  If permitted to remain in  the
    United Kingdom he wished to resume his  studies  in  order  to  acquire
    skills to work.  He had studied general construction  and  IT  when  at
    college.  He would keep away from his old acquaintances and would  live
    at his parents' home.  He had kept in touch  with  school  friends  who
    would be a sobering influence on him.   He  wished  to  return  to  the
    mosque regularly and intended to adhere to the terms  of  his  licence.
    He did not know what he would do if returned to Guyana.

6.   The judge noted the relevant legal principles, and also  relevant  case
    law authorities, in particular NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  662  and
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

7.   The judge considered in particular the application  of  paragraph  399A
    of HC 395.  This  paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
    applies if:

         "(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life;

         (b)  he is socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United
             Kingdom; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

8.   In effect, if those three criteria are made out, a person  may  succeed
    in showing that  his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

9.   It was common ground that the appellant satisfied  the  requirement  of
    paragraph 399A(a), in that he had been lawfully resident in the  United
    Kingdom for most of his life.  The other two subparagraphs were however
    at issue.

10.  With regard to (b),  the  judge  noted  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    concluding that the criteria were not met.  He noted  that  it  was  of
    course correct that the appellant had a history of significant criminal
    offending between 2011 and 2014.  He noted however that he had  arrived
    in the United Kingdom when he was aged 7 in 2002, attended primary  and
    secondary schools in the United  Kingdom  and  also  commenced  college
    education.  He had various qualifications from the  time  when  he  was
    engaged  in  education  and  had  accomplished  a  number  of  sporting
    achievements in addition.  The judge noted that whilst the  appellant's
    behaviour in recent years had been totally unacceptable and  antisocial
    he  bore  in  mind  that  the  appellant  would  not  even   fall   for
    consideration under this particular Rule  if  he  were  not  a  foreign
    criminal liable to deportation.  He  added  that  the  appellant  spoke
    English and his only close relatives were in the  United  Kingdom.   He
    considered that it was abundantly clear that  he  had  integrated  into
    United Kingdom society, albeit not in an appropriate manner based  upon
    his behaviour from  2011  onwards.   Consequently  he  found  that  the
    requirements of subparagraph (b) were met.

11.  With regard to subparagraph (c),  the  judge  bore  in  mind  that  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom since he was  7  and  was  now
    nearly 23.  He had undertaken much of  his  primary  education  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  all  of  his  secondary  education.   He  had  no
    employment history either in the United Kingdom or in Guyana.   It  was
    evident that he had undertaken at least one visit  back  to  Guyana,  a
    visit of three weeks in 2010 but that was the last time he had returned
    there.

12.  The judge also bore in mind that the  unchallenged  evidence  that  the
    appellant no longer had any relatives remaining in  Ghana  to  whom  he
    might turn for support and indeed that  he  did  not  know  anybody  in
    Ghana.  The unchallenged evidence was also to the effect that there was
    no individual to whom he might turn for any  kind  of  support  in  re-
    establishing himself in his home country.  He bore  in  mind  the  fact
    that the appellant had no  employment  history  although  he  did  have
    qualifications which might or might not assist him in Guyana.   He  had
    no accommodation there and logically would need some form of  financial
    support at least in the early  stages  but  his  father's  unchallenged
    evidence was to the effect that he could not provide the appellant with
    any significant or material financial support in Guyana due to his  own
    financial commitments.  The judge also bore in mind that the  appellant
    to date had never lived independently and  had  never  had  to  support
    himself.  In the circumstances he concluded that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399A(c) were met.

13.  The judge went on to note the guidance of the Supreme Court  in  Hesham
    Ali and the fact that a mere ability to satisfy the requirements  of  a
    relevant deportation order would not necessarily  of  itself  establish
    that  deportation  was  disproportionate  although  such  ability   was
    illuminating of the respondent's position  generally  in  that  regard.
    The Rules were not necessarily decisive to the exclusion of further  or
    wider considerations.  The judge noted the circumstances of  the  index
    offence and the rest of the appellant's history.   He  also  noted  the
    evidence of a Police Constable Garland who had some personal  knowledge
    of the appellant and his past criminality and who was of the view  that
    the appellant would continue to commit offences.  The  judge  gave  due
    weight  to  that  consideration.   He  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    undertaken studies during the period  of  his  incarceration  and  also
    courses relevant to drug and alcohol abuse.  He  also  noted  a  letter
    from a probation officer who was satisfied that  his  parents'  address
    was a suitable address to which he might return and indicated that  his
    parents were supportive and concerned about him.  She made  no  comment
    as to the likelihood or otherwise of him re-offending and there was  no
    evidence from the probation service concerning that.   The  judge  felt
    unable to make a finding as to whether it was more likely than not that
    the appellant would re-offend.

14.  He bore in mind the guidance in Maslov v Austria [2008]  ECHR  546  and
    attached weight to the fact that the appellant had spent the major part
    of his childhood and youth in the United Kingdom.  He bore in mind  the
    provisions of Section 117A to D of the 2002 Act, bearing in  mind  that
    the appellant's status  in  the  United  Kingdom  had  throughout  been
    precarious but it had been lawful for much of  the  time  that  he  had
    resided in the United Kingdom.  He bore in  mind  the  revulsion  which
    society was entitled to feel in relation to his offending  history  and
    conduct, which was a highly relevant and weighty  factor  in  terms  of
    assessing proportionality.  He concluded that he was satisfied that the
    respondent's decision was disproportionate and not in  accordance  with
    the law and allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

15.  The Secretary of State sought and was granted  permission  against  the
    decision.  The judge who granted permission attached particular  weight
    to what she described as the judge erring and equating the difficulties
    outlined  at  paragraph  39  of  his  decision  to  "very   significant
    obstacles" to integration at paragraph 399A of the Rules.  It was  also
    considered to be arguable that he had failed to give appropriate weight
    to the public interest.  All grounds were said to be arguable.  In  the
    grounds themselves weight was attached to the judge's failure to follow
    the guidance in Bossade [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC) with regard to the  issue
    of integration, and also the decision  was  said  to  be  flawed  by  a
    failure to give adequate reasons as to  why  the  appellant  could  not
    reintegrate in Ghana given that English was an  official  language,  he
    had qualifications, he had visited the country in 2010 and  his  family
    originated from there.

16.  In his submissions Mr Melvin emphasised the challenge to  the  findings
    on integration.  He argued that the matters identified by the judge  as
    being positive in this regard were insufficient.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant attended school in the United Kingdom, spoke English and  his
    relatives were in the United Kingdom was not  enough,  it  was  argued,
    when weighed against the numerous convictions and antisocial  behaviour
    that the judge had noted.  The decision in this regard was  irrational.



17.  He also argued that the  findings  on  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration in Guyana were flawed.  The matters identified by the judge
    were no more than obstacles and were not significant, still  less  very
    significant.  The appellant was a national of Guyana  and  his  parents
    were from there and he would be culturally aware  of  the  customs  and
    would be entitled to a grant  of  up  to  �1,500  to  assist  with  his
    integration.  He had been educated and trained in the  United  Kingdom.
    The judge had noted that he was capable of undertaking  employment  and
    being self-sufficient: if he could do that in the United  Kingdom  then
    he could in Guyana also.  Even if he had not lived  independently  from
    his parents he had spent many months away from them  while  in  custody
    and that was of relevance.

18.  With regard to the  decision  concerning  matters  outside  the  Rules,
    numerous authorities before the judge indicated the great weight to  be
    given to the public interest when considering  proportionality  and  it
    was unclear how the judge had reconciled the appellant's  private  life
    in the United Kingdom with that.

19.  In his submissions Mr Fripp relied on and developed points made in  his
    Rule 24 response.  He argued that the decision was in many ways a model
    one and followed the guidance set out in Hesham  Ali.   The  judge  was
    clearly aware of the relevant facts and had  considered  those  in  the
    context of the appropriate legal tests.  He argued that it had not been
    shown that the judge's decision was perverse either  on  the  issue  of
    integration or very significant obstacles.  The consideration of  these
    matters was rational.  Strictly speaking, having concluded as  he  did,
    the judge was not required to look at the broader factors  as  once  he
    had found paragraph 399A was satisfied  the  further  step  was  formal
    rather than substantive.  He argued  that  the  passage  cited  in  the
    grounds from Bossade was not part of the primary decision but  part  of
    its application to the facts of the particular case.  The challenge  in
    that regard was a matter of disagreement only.  The appellant had spent
    a good deal more of his life in the United Kingdom than in Guyana.  The
    findings on integration were fully open to  the  judge.   Likewise  the
    conclusions with regard to very significant  obstacles  to  integration
    into Guyana were sound.  It was artificial to say  that  his  offending
    history amounted to non-integration.  He had come as a young  child  to
    the United Kingdom and the offending took place from a period of  about
    nine years after his arrival.  The judge had come to  clear  and  sound
    conclusions on the point.  In Bossade there had been a relative in  the
    country of origin and it was relevant that the relative was  there  and
    the relationship could be revived but this was not a dormant ties case.
     The guidance in Hesham  Ali  at  paragraph  38  clearly  included  the
    factors indentified in  Maslov  relating  to  the  age  of  the  person
    concerned at a time of their life when they  committed  those  offences
    and such matters as the solidity of the  social,  cultural  and  family
    ties with the host country and the difference it made as to whether the
    person came to this country during their childhood or youth or  whether
    they only came as an adult.

20.  By way of reply Mr Melvin argued the notion of integration  was  to  do
    with working and making a contribution  and  being  a  full  member  of
    society.  As regards the Maslov point, most of the appellant's offences
    had been committed when he was an  adult.   It  was  clear  from  cases
    subsequent to Hesham Ali that the legislation  underpinning  the  Rules
    was to be taken into account when considering proportionality and  that
    had not been done in this case.

21.  I reserved my determination.

22.  In my view the essential issues for  consideration  in  this  case  are
    those relating to the judge's findings in respect of paragraph  399A(b)
    and (c).  If his decision is unlawful in respect of either or  both  of
    those points then it would not only mean that  the  decision  contained
    material errors of law with regard to my findings under the  Rules  but
    that would also feed into the evaluation of proportionality outside the
    Rules.

23.  It is relevant to note as referred to in the grounds what was  said  by
    the Upper Tribunal in Bossade.  Mr Fripp is right to point out that the
    passage quoted in the Secretary of State's grounds is not part  of  the
    head note.  A factual comparison can be  of  assistance,  however.   In
    paragraph 54 the Tribunal noted that in the case of the claimant he had
    been in the United Kingdom since the age of  4  and  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully for most of his life.  His history of offending
    was said to betoken a serious discontinuity in his integration  in  the
    United Kingdom especially  because  it  showed  blatant  disregard  for
    fellow citizens.  The significant period of time he had spent in prison
    as a consequence of his offending had excluded him from outside society
    for that period.  It was also considered that even when not  in  prison
    his lifestyle over the period  when  he  was  committing  offences  was
    manifestly antisocial.  His lifestyle and  his  period  in  prison  had
    contributed  to  him  not  being  able  to  show  he  was   financially
    independent.  His recent acceptance of the reprehensible nature of  his
    criminal conduct was an important factor, but the  Tribunal  considered
    the negative factors it had just mentioned indicated that  his  history
    of criminal offending broke the continuity of his social  and  cultural
    integration in the United Kingdom and he had  not  regained  it.   That
    meant that he had currently not shown he was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated.

24.  That set of factors is not at all dissimilar from the situation in  the
    instant case.  The appellant has  a  history  of  significant  criminal
    offending between 2011 and 2014.  The judge noted his earlier education
    and training in the United Kingdom  prior  to  that  and  his  sporting
    achievements.  He bore in mind also the fact that the appellant  speaks
    English and his only close relatives are  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
    considered it to be abundantly clear that the appellant had  integrated
    into United Kingdom society albeit not in an appropriate  manner  based
    upon his behaviour from 2011 onwards.

25.  In my view what this passage in the  judge's  decision  fails  to  take
    into account is the point made in Bossade of breaking the continuity of
    the social and cultural integration in the United Kingdom.  Before  the
    appellant started offending it would have been difficult indeed to deny
    that he was socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.
     However I consider that the judge erred  in  not  considering  whether
    there had been a breach in the social and cultural integration  of  the
    appellant into the United Kingdom by his sustained period of offending,
    bearing in mind also that the level of seriousness increased, and  also
    bearing in mind the other  criminality  and  undesirable  behaviour  in
    which the appellant was involved during that period of  time  over  and
    above the offences for which he was convicted.  Accordingly I find  the
    judge  erred  in  law  in  his  assessment  of  social   and   cultural
    integration.

26.  With regard to the question of  whether  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to the integration of the appellant into Guyana,  I  consider
    that in essence Mr Melvin is right on this  point  and  that  there  is
    little to show anything  beyond  obstacles.   The  appellant  would  be
    returning to a country with which he has clear cultural links  although
    no family members still present.  He was  back  there  as  recently  as
    2010.  Although he has no employment history that is  as  true  of  the
    United Kingdom as Guyana, and as the judge pointed out at paragraph  34
    he is capable  of  undertaking  employment  and  being  self-sufficient
    should he have the opportunity to do so.  The judge also noted that the
    appellant has no accommodation in Guyana and logically would need  some
    form of financial support at least in the early stages and  his  father
    said he could not assist him with any significant or material financial
    support and the judge also bore in mind that the  appellant  has  never
    lived independently and has never had to support himself.

27.  These mattes to my mind cannot rationally be described as going  beyond
    obstacles or at the highest significant obstacles.  The  test  of  very
    significant obstacles is a high one indeed.  It is again  a  matter  of
    simply comparing fact situations rather than a point of law, but  again
    the facts in  Bossade  are  not  without  relevance  here.   There  the
    Tribunal was not persuaded there would be very significant obstacles to
    the integration into the Democratic Republic of Congo of a man who  did
    not speak Lingala and had no experience of living in that country as an
    adult or even as a young person.  It seems that he had no family  there
    either.  It was thought to be reasonable to infer that his family would
    seek to help him financially and that he had grown up  in  a  household
    where French was spoken and the DRC is a Francophile country.

28.  It is not simply a matter of making comparisons of course.  Judges  may
    legitimately differ as to the outcome of the determination of  a  point
    such as this on identical facts but this in my view goes beyond  simply
    a matter of disagreement.  I do not consider  it  could  rationally  be
    concluded that on the facts as presented to  the  judge  the  appellant
    would face very significant obstacles to integration  into  Guyana,  if
    removed.  Accordingly I find an error of law in that regard also.

29.  As I submitted earlier, this clearly has relevance for the findings  on
    proportionality outside the Rules.  The judge came to  his  conclusions
    in that regard on the basis that the paragraph 399A criteria  had  been
    met, as a consequence I find that he erred in law in that regard also.

30.  In conclusion therefore the judge's decision is set aside for  material
    errors of law and there will have to be a re-hearing.  I do not know at
    this stage whether there are any issues of further evidence which  will
    need to be considered, but it seems clear to me that  the  matter  will
    have to be re-determined in the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date  04/08/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



