
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18227/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 March 2021                     |On 29 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD ILYAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 7 June 1968.  By
    a decision dated 26 October 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain on human rights grounds (10
    years' long residence/Private life).  The  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lloyd-Smith)   which,   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 10 February 2020, dismissed his  appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first issue with which the judge was  required  to  deal  concerned
    refusal of the  application  under  paragraph  322(2)  of  HC  395  (as
    amended). The judge found that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to
    prove  that  the  appellant  the  appellant  should  be  refused  under
    paragraph 322(2) for using a proxy in an English  language  test  [29].
    That part of the  decision  has  not  been  challenged  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal shall not revisit it.

 3. As regards his claim for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  10  years'
    continuous  lawful  residence,  the  background  is  as  follows.   The
    appellant lawfully entered the United Kingdom on 14 June 2009. He  made
    a series of applications to maintain his lawful  residence,  including,
    on 23 May 2015, an application for leave to  remain  on  family/private
    life grounds. The respondent refused the application on 4 November 2015
    with an out of country right of appeal. The notice of decision was sent
    by recorded  delivery  (it  was  not  returned  unsigned  for)  to  the
    appellant's solicitors. However, the solicitors had ceased  trading  on
    31 October 2015, a fact  of  which  the  respondent  was  unaware.  The
    appellant contends that he was not served with the notice  of  decision
    in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  (Notices)   Regulations   2003,
    paragraph [4] of which provides:

         4.-(1) Subject to regulation 6, the decision-maker must give
         written notice to a person of any immigration decision or EEA
         decision taken in respect of him which is appealable.

         (2) ...

         (3) If the notice is given to the representative of the person,  it
         is to be taken to have been given to the person.

    Section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides:

         The power under this act to give  or  refuse  leave  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration officers, and  the
         power to give leave to remain in the United Kingdom, or to vary any
         leave  under  section  3(3)(a)  (whether  as  regards  duration  or
         conditions), shall be exercised by the  Secretary  of  State;  and,
         unless otherwise allowed by or under this act, those  powers  shall
         be exercised by notice in writing given to  the  persons  affected,
         except that the powers  under  section  3(3)(a)  may  be  exercised
         generally in respect of any class  of  persons  by  order  made  by
         statutory instrument [my emphasis]

    The appellant argues that, because the decision of 4 November 2015  has
    never been served on him in accordance with the rules, he has continued
    to enjoy lawful leave  to  remain  and,  as  from  June  2019,  he  had
    accumulated 10 years' lawful residence.  In  consequence,  he  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B of HC 395 (as amended).

 4. The litigation chronology after October 2015 is also relevant. About  a
    month after the decision under challenge had been made,  the  appellant
    received at his home address a letter  from  the  respondent  dated  10
    December 2015 enclosing a Form IS96 (Notification to a  person  who  is
    liable to be detained) instructing him to attend  Becket  House  Report
    Centre in London. The appellant then applied for  permission  to  bring
    proceedings for judicial review. He asserted in that  application  that
    he had not been properly served with the decision refusing him leave to
    remain.  On 29 February 2016, permission was refused by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker. The judge found that the appellant,  via  his  solicitors,
    had been validly served with the notice of decision. Judge Coker  seems
    to have been unaware that the solicitors had ceased trading in  October
    2015. Thereafter, the appellant applied on 22 January 2016 and again in
    January  2019  for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2016. Those applications and the  subsequent  appeals  were
    unsuccessful.

 5. In his decision, Judge Lloyd-Smith refers to two authorities: R (on the
    application  of)  Rahman  [2019]  EWHC  2952  (Admin)  and  R  (on  the
    application of Mahmood) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    (effective service - 2000 Order) IJR [2016] UKUT 57 (IAC).

 6. The facts and issues in both Rahman and Mahmood differ  from  those  in
    the instant appeal. In Mahmood, the Tribunal held that,  'there  is  no
    requirement that the individual has actual knowledge of the  notice  or
    [the] contents' of a decision to curtail or  refuse  leave  to  remain.
    There is a rebuttable presumption that a notice of  decision  delivered
    by post or email to an individual's (or their representative's) address
    will have been  'given'  for  the  purposes  of  section  4(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971'. The court in Rahman  went  further,  holding  at
    [20]:

         In ordinary course, the Secretary of State is, therefore,  entitled
         to presume that, provided the notice is given  in  accordance  with
         article 8ZA, the notice has been given to the person  affected  and
         it can be presumed that the recipient thereby becomes aware of  the
         contents. That is the case for good policy  reasons.  However,  the
         presumption that it was "given" can be rebutted if the contrary  is
         proved. In my view proving the contrary is not limited  to  proving
         that  the  notice  was  not  sent  to  the  address  provided   for
         correspondence. In my view "proving to the  contrary"  means  that,
         where the person has not acted in bad faith (that is for example by
         moving address to avert detection and  deliberately  not  informing
         the Home Office), demonstrating that he was not given, in the sense
         of being made aware of the notice, would be sufficient to prove the
         contrary. As the whole purpose of section 4 of the Immigration  Act
         1971 is to ensure that a person affected must be told the  decision
         so that he or she may be  able  to  act  upon  it,  such  a  narrow
         interpretation would frustrate that purpose. In  that  respect  the
         interpretation of 'given' in Mahmood is too narrow. [my emphasis]

    The highlighted passage above identifies  the  fundamental  purpose  of
    making an individual aware of a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State:
    he/she must be 'given' a decision 'so that he or she may be able to act
    upon it'. In Rahman, the appellant's 'acting' upon the decision was  to
    apply for a new educational sponsor within 60 days of  cancellation  of
    his leave. In Mahmood, the  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    appellant could not succeed in an application under Appendix FM because
    he had overstayed for more that 28  days  (E-LTRP.2.2);  the  appellant
    argued that he was unaware of a decision curtailing his leave to remain
    which had resulted in the overstaying; by the time he found  out  about
    the decision, it was too late.

 7. In the instant appeal, leaving aside the question as to whether service
    by recorded delivery (in the sense of the letter  having  been  'signed
    for') amounts to valid service (like Judge Coker, I  consider  that  it
    does - see  below)  several  questions  arise:  In  what  way  has  the
    appellant been prevented  from  acting  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of November 2015? Was it too late for the appellant to act  by
    the time he became aware of the decision?

 8. First, the only remedy available to the appellant  in  respect  of  the
    decision was for him to appeal against it out of country. However,  the
    appellant has not left the United Kingdom and so has never pursued that
    remedy. Secondly, time did not, as it had for the appellants in Mahmood
    and Rahman, run out for the appellant so as to prevent him from  taking
    steps to regularise his immigration status before he  became  aware  of
    the decision; any problem with service has not led to  the  irrevocable
    expiry of a deadline which the  Secretary  of  State  has  subsequently
    refused to extend. The appellant became aware of  the  outcome  of  his
    application and changed immigration status when he was served with  the
    Form IS96. By the time he made his application for judicial review  and
    lodged his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, he  must  have  seen  the
    notice of decision (notwithstanding what he says at [4] of his  witness
    statement) as he responded in detail to  the  refusal  under  paragraph
    322(2).  During November/early December 2015, there was no action which
    the appellant could have initiated other than appealing out of country.
    It is clear that, by the time he  made  his  application  for  judicial
    review, the appellant was fully aware of the  decision  to  refuse  him
    further leave to remain; his judicial review application is  predicated
    on that refusal. To summarise, I find that the appellant (i) was  given
    written notice of the decision sufficient to satisfy  section  4(1)  of
    the 1971 Act and; (ii) received the decision in a manner and at a  time
    which did not prevent him from acting upon it; (iii) had been  notified
    in writing of the decision before he had completed 10 years' continuous
    lawful residence.

 9. Whilst I acknowledge that the appellant's solicitors had ceased trading
    in October 2015,  I  consider  that  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    continue to regard those solicitors as the appellant's  representatives
    until  expressly  notified  otherwise  by  the  representative  or  the
    appellant, and that the successful service by post (in the  sense  that
    the notice of decision was not returned to the  sender)  was  effective
    service.

10. It follows from what say that I wholly agree with Judge Lloyd-Smith  at
    [31]; in short, the Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003  are  not
    intended to exclude the validity of a decision which is 'given'  to  an
    intended recipient in a manner which satisfies the  provisions  of  the
    1971 Act; what matters is actual knowledge  and  that  matters  because
    'giving' notice of a decision is necessary to enable the  recipient  to
    act on it.  In this instance, the appellant had notice of the  decision
    and was able to act on it. Accordingly, I find that the judge was right
    to find that the appellant  had  not  completed  10  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

11. In the light of what I say above, I do  not  propose  to  consider  the
    remainder of the grounds of appeal in detail. Given the facts and  what
    I have said above, the judge did not materially err in law by referring
    incorrectly to the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain)  Order  2000
    at [30].




    Notice of Decision

         This appeal is dismissed.


         Signed                              Dated: 17 March 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane































































