
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18726/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|by Skype for Business                |On 04 March 2021                     |
|On 24 February 2021                  |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                          lamar aamir rameez currie
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Representation:
For the appellant:     Jonathan Holt, Counsel instructed by TMC Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 18 October 2019 to refuse him leave to remain on private and  family
    life grounds.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.

Background

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 27 July 2002, when he was 9
    years old.  His father and uncle arranged  the  journey:  once  in  the
    United Kingdom, the appellant and  his  father  stayed  with  Marcelene
    Samuels, who told the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  she  had  known  the
    appellant for 18 years (in context, since he was  8  years  old),  even
    before he came to the United Kingdom.    The  relationship  between  Ms
    Samuels and the appellant's father  broke  down  and  he  left  without
    making any arrangement for the appellant.   A  family  arrangement  was
    made for the appellant to live with another family member,  Ms  Corrine
    Coote, who raised him as though he were her own child.   The  appellant
    has never been in trouble in the United  Kingdom  and  has  educational
    achievements which are to his credit and that of his foster family.

 3. The appellant is now an adult and lives independently.  He reached  the
    age of majority on 17 July 2011.  He no  longer  lives  in  his  foster
    family's home but remains close  to  her  and  her  children,  whom  he
    considers as siblings, as they do him.  For  most  of  the  time  since
    leaving school, the appellant has not worked and has been supported  by
    family and friends.  He worked for a time at Marks and Spencer and also
    at Sainsburys.  He has a personal bank account and a Marks and  Spencer
    pension plan.  Because of his status, has not been able to work as a PE
    Instructor, having obtained a Level 2 BTec Diploma in Sport.

 4. The appellant has made a great  many  applications  to  regularise  his
    status.  In fact, it seems that Ms Coote made them and paid  for  them:
    in evidence to the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant did not  seem  to
    have much knowledge of the detail of these applications,  although  all
    of them were made when he was an adult and all when he  had  no  extant
    leave:

      a) In 2012, 2 applications were made on human rights grounds  in  July
         and August, both of which were refused;

      b) In 2013, there were 7 separate applications: in  January, a visitor
         application; in February and March, two long residence applications
         in August, a private and family life application;  in  August,  two
         applications for compassionate leave outside the Rules  (the  first
         invalid, as no fee accompanied  it,  the  second  refused)  and  in
         November 2013, an application on private and family  life  grounds.
         All the 2013 applications were refused;

      c)  In  2014,  there  were  three  applications  in  May,  August  and
         September, all for compassionate leave to remain outside the Rules.
          All were refused;

      d) On 10 February 2015, the appellant made an application for  private
         and family life leave which was granted under paragraph  276ADE(v).
         He was given 30 months' leave to remain until 2 October 2017,  when
         he would be 24 years old;

      e) On 23 October 2017, after the expiry of his leave  under  paragraph
         276ADE(v), the applicant applied  for  a  new  Biometric  Residence
         Permit card.  The respondent refused.  He made an  application  for
         leave to remain on 16 December 2017, which was also refused;

      f) On 18 April 2019, the applicant made an application  for  leave  to
         remain on private and family life grounds. Paragraph 276ADE(v)  had
         ceased to apply to him and he was unable to  bring  himself  within
         paragraph 276ADE(vi).  That application was refused on  18  October
         2019 and is the decision under challenge.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Judge noted that the appellant had now reached  the  age
    of 26.  She accepted that he was 'fully integrated into the culture and
    way of life of the United Kingdom'  and  she  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant had strong bonds to  his  foster  family,  though  below  the
    Kugathas dependency level.  She found that he was 'very  much  part  of
    the family of those who have supported him since he was a child.

 6. The judge upheld the respondent's finding that paragraph 276ADE(vi) was
    inapplicable: the appellant was now over 25 years  old  and  could  not
    show that there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
    in Jamaica if returned there.  He lived there until he was 9 years  old
    and still had some extended family members there.  He had been able  to
    undertake retail employment in the United Kingdom and in Jamaica, where
    he would not have the difficulty of having no  status,  the  First-tier
    Judge found that he would be able to find work.

 7. At [20], the judge found that there was not  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his foster family, although there was private  life.   At
    [21], she noted that the relationship with his  United  Kingdom  family
    was an element of the appellant's 'clearly established private life' in
    the United Kingdom.  Article 8 was engaged.

 8. At [23]-[25] the judge performed the analysis which section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as  amended)  requires,
    concluding at [25] that 'I am obliged to  give  little  weight  to  his
    private life'.

 9. The First-tier Judge's decision concluded at [26]:

         "26. I have considered above in detail aspects of  the  appellant's
         private life when  considering  whether  he  satisfies  the  Rules.
         Those factors are relevant for the consideration of proportionality
         also and I take account of them.  I also take account of  the  ties
         that the appellant has with those who have become  his  family  and
         the close bond they have with him.  However, it is not unusual  for
         adult members of a family to relocate  abroad  and  maintain  their
         bond via contact and visits.   Some  members  of  the  family  have
         visited Jamaica before, and there was nothing to suggest they would
         not be able to do so again.   Having  considered  all  the  factors
         above, individual to the appellant, and weighed the public interest
         factors, I am unable to find that the appellant has shown that  the
         decision  constitutes  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
         rights under Article 8 [ECHR]."

10. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

11. First-tier Judge Keane granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that
    the First-tier Judge had accepted that there was family life  with  his
    United Kingdom foster family and that he had 'but the slightest of ties
    with Jamaica'.  The grant continues:

         "...It  was  incumbent  upon   the   judge   when   assessing   the
         proportionality of  the  decision  under  appeal  to  carry  out  a
         balancing exercise taking  into  account  relevant  considerations.
         The judge arguably did not accord any or adequate  weight  to  such
         considerations when assessing the proportionality of  the  decision
         under appeal but merely relied upon statutory considerations  which
         redounded in favour of the respondent.  The judge  arguably  failed
         to take into account relevant considerations and had the judge done
         so he might arguably have arrived at a different finding in respect
         of proportionality. The application  for  permission  is  granted."
         [Emphasis added]

Rule 24 Reply

12. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the respondent.

Triage submissions

13. On 26 August 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt gave triage directions, in
    the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.

14. Triage submissions were received from TMC Solicitors, who represent the
    appellant. They do not engage expressly with the Part  5A  presumptions
    in the 2002 Act, which are crucial to the understanding of  the  First-
    tier Judge's decision.  The appellant disputes the weight given to  his
    private life, arguing that the proportionality  decision  was  perverse
    and that he has fluent English (the language of Jamaica, as well as the
    United Kingdom), is financially independent, and that it  would  be  in
    the public interest to retain him in the United Kingdom.  The appellant
    contends that the First-tier Judge failed to  'exercise  discretion  in
    the appellant's case by considering the case  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules'.

15. For the respondent, Mr Alain  Tan  from  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team
    settled a detailed response to the grounds of appeal.  The grounds  may
    be summarised by saying that it is the Secretary of State's  case  that
    the First-tier  Judge  made  a  careful,  intelligible  and  adequately
    reasoned decision, with which the Upper Tribunal should not interfere.

16. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Submissions today

17. Mr Holt for the appellant noted that from the age of 9 until he reached
    his majority in 2011, the appellant would have had family life with his
    foster family.  The judge had not given that  former  family  life  any
    weight and if, as Mr Holt argued was the case her, the appellant had no
    independent existence in his adult life, that  family  life  should  be
    taken to continue.  Mr Holt was unable to  produce  any  authority  for
    this novel assertion.

18. As regards private life, Mr Holt accepted that there would be  no  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration in Jamaica,  but
    argued that the judge had  failed  to  take  into  account,  and/or  to
    resolve conflicts in the evidence, around the appellant's  strength  of
    integration and ties in the United Kingdom, and had done so at a  level
    which led her to make  a  wrong  decision  on  the  proportionality  of
    removal.

19. Mr Holt asked me to set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for remaking afresh,
    with the findings at [12] on the appellant's ties to his foster  family
    in the United Kingdom preserved.

20. For the respondent, Mr Melvin argued that there was no  material  error
    of law in the decision.  All relevant matters had been  considered  and
    the appellant's private life had been properly assessed at the date  of
    hearing.  Mr Melvin relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in AA
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ  1296  which  emphasised
    the narrow circumstances in which an appellate Tribunal  may  interfere
    with a finding of fact made by a judge who has heard oral evidence  and
    argument at first instance.   He asked me to uphold the decision of the
    First-tier Judge.

Analysis

21. I have some difficulty with the terms of the  grant  of  permission  in
    this appeal.  The provisions of part 5A of the 2002 Act are  mandatory:
    the judge was bound by them and it is certainly not an error of law  to
    'rely upon  statutory  considerations'  in  Article  8  proportionality
    assessment.

22. I  have  considered  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision.   It  is  very
    carefully reasoned, taking each issue sequentially  and  always  giving
    weight to the strength of the appellant's links with the United Kingdom
    and his foster family here, who brought him up.  Contrary  to  what  is
    stated in the grounds, the judge did make a finding on family  life  at
    [20]: he found that the Kugathas dependency required  for  family  life
    between an adult and his parents and siblings was not reached.

23. However, the legal position is very clear.  This appellant came to  the
    United Kingdom age 9  (presumably  as  a  visitor)  and  remained  here
    without leave thereafter.  That was not his fault: he was a child.   It
    cannot be held to his detriment and the judge did not do so.

24. From 2011, however, the appellant  was  an  adult.   He  remained  here
    without leave for a further four years, before being granted 30 months'
    leave to remain as a person under 25 who had spent more than  half  his
    life in the United Kingdom.   When  that  leave  expired  in  2017,  he
    remained here again, making applications for leave to remain.

25. Since the appellant reached majority, he has had leave  to  remain  for
    only 30 months out of that 9-year period.  He  has  worked,  sometimes,
    presumably during the 30 months when he had leave.  He  has  been  here
    either precariously (see section 117B(5)) or  unlawfully  (see  section
    117B(4)) and little weight can be given to  any  private  life  he  has
    accrued in either capacity period.    The  judge  did  not  err  in  so
    finding.

26. The judge made a perfectly proper assessment at [26] of  whether  there
    were any exceptional or compassionate circumstances for which leave  to
    remain should be given outside the Rules.  Again, the strength  of  his
    connections was taken into account.

27. There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Judge's  decision
    and I uphold the decision made.  This appeal is dismissed.


DECISION

28. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     24 February
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



