
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18775/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th July 2018                             |On 2nd August 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Kashif Khurshid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel; instructed by iConsult
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal but I will refer to the parties
    by their original status before the First-tier  Tribunal  for  ease  of
    comprehension.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against  the  decision  of  Judge  Sweet
    promulgated on 4th January 2018 allowing the Appellant's appeal on  the
    basis of his Article 8 family life.  The Secretary  of  State  appealed
    against that decision and was granted permission  to  appeal  by  Judge
    Lambert in the following terms:

         "The grounds contend inadequate reasoning  supporting  the  judge's
         conclusions  that  the  Appellant  satisfied   the   insurmountable
         obstacles test in paragraph EX.1 and that it  was  disproportionate
         to  require  him  to  make  an  entry  clearance  application  from
         Pakistan.  They are rendered arguable by the very brief content  of
         paragraph 29 of the decision.  The judge refers to 'the  fact  that
         it would not be reasonable to expect family  life  to  continue  in
         Pakistan',  and  goes  on  to  state   that   'there   are   indeed
         insurmountable obstacles to family life ... continuing outside  the
         UK' without any indication of the evidence or  reasoning  on  which
         those conclusions are based.  Nor is there any reference to Section
         117B considerations.  There is therefore an arguable error  of  law
         disclosed by the application."

 3. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response by  the  Appellant  but  was
    given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

    Error of Law

 4. Heaving heard submissions from both representatives,  I  do  find  that
    there is a material error of law in the decision such that it should be
    set aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 5. In respect of the Grounds of Appeal as drafted, Ms Everett  embellished
    upon them to a degree,  which  was  sensible  given  that  the  grounds
    appeared to me  to  constitute  on  widespread  disagreement  with  the
    decision of Judge Sweet.

 6. Ms Everett directed her submissions towards the judge's construction of
    the decision in that there was an inadequacy of reasons,  most  clearly
    displayed by the findings at paragraphs 28 and 29  and  exemplified  by
    the fact that the judge stated that it  would  be  "very  difficult  to
    continue to support the Appellant if he returned to Pakistan  in  order
    to make an application from that country" in  terms  of  the  Sponsor's
    financial situation and her schedule of outgoings as seen.

 7. In addition, the judge also stated succinctly that  there  are  "indeed
    insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  his  spouse  continuing
    outside the UK", however, without any reasons supporting that.

 8. In my view, these submissions and the errors outlined above are  indeed
    correct.  The decision does display an inadequacy  of  reasoning  which
    makes it difficult to know why the Appellant won his appeal and why the
    Respondent lost.

 9. In light of the decision of the Supreme Court in R, (on the application
    of Agyarko & Ikuga) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    UKSC 11, albeit that the judge can and should take  into  consideration
    whether an application can be made from abroad and the likelihood of it
    being successful (see Chikwamba), it would still be  necessary  for  an
    Appellant to show that they were otherwise certain to be granted  leave
    to enter if an application were made from outside the UK as that  would
    result in there being "no public interest"  in  the  person's  removal.
    However, I cannot see any analysis by the First-tier Judge  of  whether
    the specified evidence or other requirements of Appendix  FM  governing
    entry clearance applications would be met  by  the  Appellant  were  he
    applying from abroad and consequently, it has not been shown  that  the
    entry clearance application would be satisfied in theory.

10. Similarly, the judge has  not  take  into  account  the  stated  public
    interest  in  its  statutory  form  under  Section   117B(1)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in reaching  his  decision
    under Article 8 ECHR outside the rules.

11. For these reasons, in my  view,  the  judge's  decision  does  show  an
    inadequacy of reasoning and does not  assist  an  objective  reader  in
    understanding why the appeal  was  successful  against  the  facts  and
    evidence in play.

12. In light of the above findings I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in its entirety.

    Notice of Decision

13. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed.   The  appeal  is  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.

    Directions

14. I make the following Directions for the further administration of  this
    appeal upon remittal.

      1) The appeal is to be remitted  to  Hatton  Cross  for  its  remitted
         hearing.

      2) A Mirpuri interpreter is required.

      3) There are said to be three witnesses but  of  course  that  may  be
         subject to change.

      4) The time estimate given is two hours.

      5)  No  special  directions  have  been  requested  by  either  party.
         However, I have given an indication to the  parties  that  attempts
         should be made for the Appellant's passport to be returned  to  him
         so that he may attempt to take his English language test  prior  to
         the remitted hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

      6) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

