
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18613/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2018                |On 25 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                              MRS. SARVENAZ [N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECERTARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr.  [RJ] and Mrs. [AA]
For the Respondent:    Mr. Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge McClure promulgated on 21st May 2018.  The FtT Judge dismissed
      the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 15th June
      2016, refusing her application for leave to enter the UK in order to
      join a parent who currently has refugee status.


   2. The background to the application made by the appellant and the
      matters relied upon by the appellant are set out at paragraphs [17] to
      [40] of the decision of the FtT Judge. The appellant was born on 2nd
      July 1998, and is the daughter of Mrs. [AA] ("the appellant's
      mother").  The appellant's mother claimed that her relationship with
      the appellant's father, was beset with violence, and she separated
      from the appellant's father in 2001. The appellant's mother claimed
      that following that separation, she and the appellant went to live
      with her mother. That is, the appellant's maternal grandmother.


   3. The evidence before the FtT Judge was that in or about January 2007,
      the appellant's mother married Mr [RJ] ("the appellant's step-
      father").  The appellant, her mother, her stepfather and her maternal
      grandmother, had been living together as a family unit in Iran for a
      period of about two years before that marriage.  Because of events
      that occurred in March 2010, Mr [RJ] left Iran and travelled to the
      United Kingdom, where he has been recognised as a refugee. The
      appellant's mother left Iran in or about 2011 to join her husband,
      leaving the appellant in Iran in the care of her maternal grandmother.
       Neither the appellant's stepfather nor the appellant's mother, made
      any reference to the appellant in the applications that they had made
      to the respondent.


   4. Having heard evidence from the appellant's mother and stepfather, the
      FtT Judge sets out his conclusions at paragraphs [41] to [60] of his
      decision.  Having noted the evidence that the appellant had been
      living at her maternal grandmother's home from about 2001 onwards, the
      Judge found, at paragraph [46] of his decision, that the appellant was
      living with her mother, her grandmother, and her stepfather during the
      period 2007 to 2010. The Judge also found that the appellant was
      living with her mother until her mother made an application to join
      the appellant's stepfather in the United Kingdom. At paragraph [47] of
      his decision the Judge stated:


         "I am not however satisfied that the mother has been responsible
         since that date in taking all the major decisions in the child's
         life. There is no evidence of contact with any schools. There is no
         evidence of regular and significant money transfers. I am not
         satisfied that the appellant's father has had no involvement in the
         appellant's life including providing no financial support to the
         appellant."


   5. At paragraphs [56] to [60] of his decision, the FtT judge concluded as
      follows


         "56. Much of what has happened in the intervening period of time
         has been as a result of choices that the mother and stepfather have
         taken. For the reasons set out I do not find that it has been
         proved that the father of the appellant [has] had no involvement in
         the appellant's life. I take account of the fact that the appellant
         would be living in the same environment as she has always lived in.
         I take account of the fact that the appellant at the time of
         application was a minor but since that time has become an adult.


         57.  Taking all those factors into account clearly the mother of
         the appellant is in the United Kingdom and there is to that extent,
         family life between the appellant and her mother. The quality of
         their family life has been determined by the decisions made by the
         appellant's mother and her stepfather. The decision to refuse entry
         clearance will clearly interfere with their family life that it is
         merely preventing a close family unit being established. It does
         not interfere with the form and quality of family life that has
         been chosen by the appellant's mother and stepfather over the last
         few years. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that it is the
         decision of the respondent that interferes with family life rather
         it was the choices made by the mother and stepfather in the past.


         59.  If I am wrong in that regard, I am satisfied that the decision
         is in accordance with the law and it is for the purposes of
         maintaining immigration control.


         60.  Finally having taken all the factors set out above into
         account I find that the decision taken is proportionately
         justified. The appellant cannot meet the requirements of
         immigration rules with regard to family reunion and cannot
         otherwise meet the requirements of the rules under Appendix FM.
         There is nothing exceptional on the facts as presented. There is
         nothing that warrants consideration of Article 8 outside the
         rules."


   6. The Judge concluded that the decision to refuse entry clearance does
      not breach Article 8 and dismissed the appeal.  In the grounds of
      appeal, the appellant claims that in reaching his decision, the FtT
      Judge, repeatedly refers to the delay until the appellant was almost
      18 years old before making an application, as weighing against the
      appellant.  The appellant claims the Judge failed to consider the
      explanation provided in the witness statement's that were before the
      Tribunal, for that delay. An earlier application could not be made on
      behalf of the appellant because an application was not possible until
      the appellant's father provided his consent to the appellant having a
      passport, so that she can travel out of Iran.  The passport was not
      issued to the appellant until September 2014. The appellant's
      stepfather confirmed in his witness statement that the appellant's
      father would not sign the necessary forms in order to obtain a
      passport.  It was not until 2014 that the appellant's mother had been
      able to persuade the appellant's father to allow the appellant to get
      a passport, after she offered to give him money in exchange for his
      signature on the passport forms.  Furthermore, an application for
      entry clearance had been made previously, but refused.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on
      18th September 2018. The matter comes before me to consider whether or
      not the decision of FtT Judge McClure involved the making of a
      material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make
      the decision.


   8. The Tribunal had received a letter from Miica Service dated 9th
      November 2018 stating that they no longer represent the appellant.  At
      the hearing that before me, the appellant was represented by Mr.  [RJ]
      and Mrs. [AA].  That is, the appellant's mother and stepfather. I
      explained to Mr [RJ] and Mrs [AA] that the appellant has been granted
      permission to appeal the decision of the FtT Judge because it is
      arguable that the Judge had failed to take into account the evidence
      explaining the delay in making an application for family reunion, when
      reaching his decision. I explained that that is not to say that there
      is an error of law in the decision of the FtT Judge, and that I would
      reach my decision after hearing from them on behalf of the appellant,
      and from Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent.


   9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr [RJ] submitted that he has a good
      emotional relationship with the appellant, but the appellant would
      have needed her father's permission to leave Iran. When the
      appellant's mother had come to the United Kingdom in 2011 they had
      asked for permission from the appellant's father, but at that stage,
      he would not agree to the appellant coming to the United Kingdom. He
      was prepared to accept that there was no evidence of any steps taken
      in 2011 to secure the permission of the appellant's father, at the
      hearing of the appeal before the FtT. He submits that although the FtT
      Judge states, at paragraph [47] of the decision, that there is no
      evidence of regular and significant money transfers, there was in the
      appellant's bundle before the FtT, evidence of money being sent to the
      appellant from the UK.


Discussion


  10. It is uncontroversial that the appellant  was  left  living  with  her
      maternal grandmother when the appellant's mother came  to  the  United
      Kingdom in 2011. At paragraphs [26] to [27] of his decision,  the  FtT
      Judge refers to the evidence of the appellant's mother.  The  evidence
      was that she had been told by friends that there would be no point  in
      applying for the appellant come with her to the UK  in  2011,  because
      her husband was not the appellant's natural father.  The Judge  noted,
      at [27], that the appellant's mother "... has also mentioned  that  in
      order to take her daughter out of the country she  would  have  needed
      the permission of the biological father. She claims  that  would  have
      been impossible at the time. However she has given no indication  that
      she sought to obtain that permission either at the time that  she  was
      applying to come here, or since.".


  11. In his witness statement, Mr [RJ] also confirms,  at  paragraph  [10],
      that the appellant was not included  in  his  wife's  application  for
      family reunion previously because "... At that time we  were  told  by
      Iranian friends in the UK that  because  [the  appellant]  is  not  my
      biological daughter there was no point in  applying  for  her  as  she
      would be refused.".  At paragraph [11], he claims that there was  also
      a problem in that the appellant's father would not sign the  forms  so
      that the appellant could get a passport and that  made  it  impossible
      for them to bring her to the UK.


  12. I reject the claim that the FtT Judge failed to take into account  the
      evidence explaining why the  application  for  a  family  reunion  was
      delayed.  The  Judge  refers  to  the  explanation  provided  by   the
      appellant's mother in his decision.  It  was  open  to  the  Judge  to
      conclude on the evidence, as he did at paragraph [50] of the decision,
      that a conscious decision was taken not to apply for the appellant  to
      come to the UK with her mother in  2011.   As  I  have  set  out,  the
      evidence of the appellant's mother before the FtT Judge was  that  the
      appellant would have needed the permission of  her  biological  father
      but there was nothing to  suggest  that  she  sought  to  obtain  that
      permission at the time that she was applying to  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom or since.  It was evidence that the Judge  was  clearly  aware
      of.


  13. In any event, the delay in making the application was but  one  factor
      that the Judge refers to in his decision,  and  in  my  judgement  any
      failure to refer expressly to the  explanation  in  his  findings  and
      conclusions, is immaterial.  On any view, the appellant was  an  adult
      by the time of the hearing before the FtT and the Judge was  bound  to
      consider the Article 8 claim, on the facts as they were at the time of
      his decision.


  14. I also reject the criticism made in the submissions  before  me,  that
      the Judge erred at paragraph [47] of  the  decision,  by  saying  that
      there is no evidence of regular and significant money transfers to the
      appellant.  Paragraph [47] of the decision,  must  be  read  alongside
      paragraph [44] of the decision.  At  paragraph  [44],  the  FtT  Judge
      noted that  "There  is  very  little  evidence  of  financial  support
      provided even taking account of pages 16  to  20  of  the  appellant's
      bundle.". The Judge plainly had regard to the evidence relied upon  of
      financial support, in reaching his decision.  The Judge  rejected  the
      claim  that  the  appellant's  father  had  no  involvement   in   the
      appellant's life, and took into account the fact  that  the  appellant
      would be living in the same environment as she has  always  lived  in,
      noting too, that at the time of her application, the appellant  was  a
      minor but she has since become an adult.


  15. The only ground of appeal available to  the  appellant  was  that  the
      respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
      1998.  As to the Article 8 claim, the burden of  proof  was  upon  the
      appellant to show, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  she  has
      established a family life with her mother and stepfather, and that her
      exclusion from the UK as a result of the respondent's decision,  would
      interfere with that right. It was then for the respondent  to  justify
      any interference caused. The Judge  concluded  that  the  interference
      with family life had arisen by the choices  made  by  the  appellant's
      mother and stepfather in the past.


  16. The appellant's ability to satisfy the immigration rules  is  not  the
      question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of  being  a
      weighty, though not determinative factor, when deciding  whether  such
      refusal  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim   of   enforcing
      immigration control.  Here, the Judge found that the  interference  is
      proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


  17. Having carefully considered the decision  of  the  Ft  Judge  and  the
      submissions made before me by the appellant's stepfather  and  mother,
      in my judgment the findings made by the FtT judge are  not  irrational
      or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or findings that  are  wholly
      unsupported by the evidence.  The Judge did  not  consider  irrelevant
      factors, and the weight  that  he  attached  to  the  evidence  either
      individually or cumulatively, was a matter for him.


  18. It follows that in my judgment, the  decision  of  the  FtT  does  not
      contain a material error of law, and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


  19. The decision of the FtT Judge did not involve the making of an error
      of law and the appeal is dismissed.

  20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          13th January 2019


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date          13th January 2019


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




