
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18719/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 5 February 2021               |On 2 March 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                    Y K
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L. Butler, instructed on behalf of the appellant.

For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Curtis
         and Judge Birrell) (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "panel")  who
         dismissed his human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on  the
         26 February 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules  2008.  Unless  and
         until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the  appellant  is
         granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
         or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies  both  to  the
         appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 5 February 2021, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The  advocates  attended  remotely.
         There were no issues regarding sound,  and  no  technical  problems
         were encountered  during  the  hearing  and  I  am  satisfied  both
         advocates were able to make their respective cases  by  the  chosen
         means.

Background:


      4. The history of the appellant is set out in the decision of the FtTJ
         panel, the decision  letter  and  the  evidence  contained  in  the
         bundle.

      5. On 30 April 2011,  the  appellant  was  married  to  G,  a  British
         citizen, in Pakistan. This was an arranged marriage.

      6. On 2 August 2012, the appellant applied for entry  clearance  as  a
         spouse  under  the  rules.  The  application  was  refused  by  the
         respondent on 31 October 2012 on the basis that the sponsor, G, had
         not provided the specified documents  in  relation  to  her  income
         under Appendix FM -SE.

      7. The appellant appealed against this decision and  his  appeal  came
         before FtTJ Herwald on 26 June 2013. The judge found as a fact that
         the appellant and his spouse had not met since May 2011  (the  date
         being shortly after their marriage) and that they had only kept  in
         touch by telephone on a sporadic basis, once or twice a week.

      8. The judge further found that his spouse had misled the court in her
         original statement suggesting she was self-employed  and  that  she
         was a sole Pakistani national. In the evidence  before  the  judge,
         his spouse confirmed that she held dual nationality. When  applying
         the considerations under Article 8, the  judge  was  not  persuaded
         that the appellant and G were in a subsisting marriage. The  appeal
         was therefore dismissed.

      9. On 22 August 2013, the appellant  made  a  second  application  for
         entry clearance as a spouse of a British citizen, G. This again was
         refused by the respondent because, as before, the sponsor  had  not
         provided  the  prescribed  documents  to  establish  her  financial
         circumstances.

     10. The appellant appealed against that decision on 9  September  2014.
         The appeal was heard  on  4  March  2015  during  the  hearing  the
         appellant withdrew the appeal. There is no reason  given  for  that
         withdrawal in the papers.

     11. The appellant entered the UK on 13 October 2016 after being granted
         entry clearance as a spouse. The entry visa was valid until 10 July
         2019.

     12. On 26 September 2017, a child of the marriage, A, was born.

     13.  On 14 November 2018, the appellant's leave to remain was curtailed
         to expire on 11 February 2019.

     14. On 2 May 2019, the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  outside
         the  rules  under  the  destitution  domestic  violence  concession
         ("DDVC") and was granted from 9 May 2019 to 8 August 2019.

     15. On 17 July 2019, the appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain as a victim of domestic violence.

The decision of the 5 November 2019:

     16. The  application  was  refused  on  5  November  2019  because  the
         appellant did not meet the requirements of Paragraph E-DVILR 1.3 of
         Appendix FM, under which  the  appellant  is  required  to  provide
         evidence that demonstrated during the last period of limited  leave
         as a partner the relationship broke down permanently as a result of
         domestic violence.

     17. The following was set out in the decision letter:

             . Under Paragraph E-DVILR of Appendix FM,  the  appellant  must
               provide evidence to demonstrate that during his  last  period
               of limited leave as a partner, his  relationship  broke  down
               permanently  as  a  result  of  domestic  violence.   It   is
               acknowledged that he had leave  as  a  spouse  of  a  settled
               person valid  until  10  July  2019  which  was  subsequently
               curtailed to expire on 11 February 2019.

             .  In  the  form  completed,  the  appellant  stated  that  the
               relationship broke down  on  15  November  2018,  within  the
               probationary period.

             .  Consideration  was  given  to  whether  the  appellant   had
               demonstrated that his relationship broke down due to domestic
               violence.

             . The decision  letter  set  out  the  definition  of  domestic
               violence.

             . The respondent set out that all aspects of the claim to  have
               suffered domestic abuse, including his  claim  to  have  been
               subjected to controlling and controlling behaviour  had  been
               assessed in line  with  the  definition  and  the  modernised
               guidance.

             . In the application form the appellant stated  that  no  legal
               action been taken against the person who  had  committed  the
               abuse of which he claimed to have been a victim.

             . The documents provided as supporting evidence  of  his  claim
               consisted of a personal statement dated 3/7/2019, police logs
               and letter from the police dated 6/6/2009, email from  modern
               slavery helpline dated 3/7/2019 and bank statements and  wage
               slips.

     18. Consideration was given to the matters set out in  his  application
         form and personal statement dated 3/7/2019.

     19. He stated that after he arrived in the UK on 13 October 2016  after
         his marriage in Pakistan on 30/4/2011, as soon as he  got  off  the
         plane, his spouse's family took  his  passport,  ID  documents  and
         personal documents. The appellant stated that he quarrelled  often,
         and his spouse told him that her father had forced her to marry him
         against her wishes. The appellant stated that she  put  cameras  in
         the bedroom to record him "failing" having sex and that  she  would
         show the tapes to the family if he did not do what  she  said.  The
         appellant stated that she never took him to visit her  parents  and
         told him to stay away from them. However sometimes his  brother-in-
         law would take him to visit them and his father-in-law  would  give
         him food and arrange for a job for him working  in  a  factory.  He
         said he had his own bank account but that his spouse took the debit
         card so he could not access the money and she controlled all of it.
         He would be given �50 cash every week to spend on himself.

     20. In addition he stated that he did not have a key to the  house,  he
         was often locked out from morning till night. He  stated  that  for
         the first three months he was allowed to stay in his wife's bedroom
         but then she moved to a small room of her own. He  stated  that  he
         was only allowed in this room in the toilet. He was not allowed  to
         go to the kitchen and get himself  something  to  eat  and  if  you
         wanted to shower the hot water is turned off.

     21. The appellant stated that his wife found out that he  was  spending
         time with her father after work and began  threatening  him  saying
         that she would show the video recordings to everyone and she  would
         call the police and say that he was abusing her. He stated that  in
         November 2016 that his wife stopped giving him food.

     22. In January 2017, his  wife  told  the  doctors  that  she  was  not
         pregnant because there was something wrong with  him.  He  gave  of
         specimen and she used it to  get  pregnant.  Things  at  home  were
         volatile with his wife smashing two mobile phones and throwing  one
         at him.

     23. In  May  2017,  the  appellant  claimed  that  his  wife's  brother
         assaulted him at the home, slapped him and afterwards his wife  hit
         him with a broom handle to the side of the jaw. The  next  day  his
         colleague took him to the hospital. The appellant  stated  that  he
         was not allowed in the family home for iftar and when his wife  had
         their child in September 2017 he was  not  allowed  to  go  to  the
         hospital and only got a hold her two or three times although he did
         see her when his wife returned from hospital.

     24. In October 2018, his wife went to Pakistan for a family wedding and
         left strict instructions at what time he was allowed in  the  house
         and where the house he was allowed to go with cameras keeping track
         of his movements. He could not endure the situation, so he left the
         marital home in November 2018.

     25. The respondent set out that  it  was  accepted  that  the  personal
         statement was his account of events but that  on  its  own  it  was
         insufficient to establish  that  the  relationship  was  caused  to
         permanently breakdown as a result of domestic  violence.  Reference
         was made the  guidance  and  that  the  appellant  must  provide  a
         sufficient degree of information  from  independent  and  objective
         sources which supported his claim to have been a victim of domestic
         violence.

     26. Reference in the decision letter was made to the police logs  dated
         6/6/2019. The respondent noted that the appellant submitted records
         which confirmed that on 6/6/ 2019 he reported historical  abuse  to
         the police as outlined in the witness statement. The  police  notes
         consist of an incident report where he reported being the victim of
         controlling  behaviour  between  October  2016  -   November   2018
         including allegations of his spouse taking his bank cards and other
         documents as well as physical abuse of his wife  and  brother.  The
         notes state that he was advised by the immigration solicitor to  go
         to the station to report the historical abuse.  No  further  action
         was taken, and all the reports were closed.

     27. The respondent noted that the information contained in  the  police
         information is a record of the appellant's own testimony  and  that
         the report of the abuse in June 2019 was  seven  months  after  the
         breakdown of the relationship. No further action was taken  by  the
         police in relation to the allegations which  were  unproven.  As  a
         result  the  police  logs  submitted  were  not  considered  to  be
         sufficient to establish that he was a victim of  domestic  violence
         or that the marriage broke down as a result of domestic violence.

     28. Consideration was given to the email from modern  slavery  helpline
         dated 3/7/2019. The appellant submitted an email from the  helpline
         to his immigration solicitor which confirmed that he called them on
         3/7/2019 and reported his account  of  domestic  abuse.  The  email
         stated that the helpline advisers took the call did say that  there
         were indicators of modern slavery  in  the  situation  however  the
         email clarified that such indicators do not "conclusively  tell  us
         that the situation is one of modern slavery. We would need to speak
         your client more detail using one  of  our  interpreters,  to  more
         fully assess the situation." The email also confirmed that  he  did
         not wish to pursue the National Referral Mechanism ("NRM") but that
         he wanted help with  the  recovery  of  owed  wages  which  is  not
         something they would assist with.

     29. The respondent noted that the email confirmed that he made a report
         of the alleged situation to the helpline which they logged. However
         the report was taken  entirely  from  his  own  testimony  and  the
         helpline confirmed that the appellant had told them that he did not
         wish to pursue the NRM and therefore they were unable  to  identify
         whether his case fitted the criteria of modern  slavery.  Thus  the
         information was not sufficient to demonstrate that he  had  been  a
         victim of domestic violence or that the relationship broke down  as
         a result.

     30. The respondent stated that whilst it was accepted that there  could
         be conflict between the relevant parties in the  aftermath  of  the
         marriage breakup, it was  concluded  that  without  any  acceptable
         evidence and support for the various claims, there was  nothing  of
         sufficient substance to distinguish the breakdown of  the  marriage
         from any other unhappy marriage that ends in acrimony.

     31. Consideration was also given to the bank statements and wage  slips
         with regard to the claim that his wife abused him  financially.  It
         was noted  that  the  bank  statements  and  wage  slips  permitted
         provided no evidence which indicated or demonstrated  that  he  was
         subjected to financial abuse or coercion is claimed. As  such  they
         were not accepted to establish that he was  a  victim  of  domestic
         violence or that the marriage broke down as a  result  of  domestic
         violence.

     32. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on 7 November 2018 in  which
         it was said that the refusal to grant the appellant leave to remain
         breached his and  A's  rights  under  Article  8.  It  was  further
         submitted that the respondent had failed to adequately consider the
         independent evidence relating to the appellant's claim that he  was
         a victim of domestic violence such that the refusal to grant  leave
         to remain was not sustainable.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel:

     33. The appeal came before the FtT panel on 18 February 2020. The panel
         set out the evidence that was before them including the chronology,
         skeleton argument and further statement from the appellant dated 14
         January 2020 and documents in support of the appeal.

     34. It is also recorded that whilst a letter had previously  been  sent
         dated 10th February 2020 indicating  that  the  protocol  with  the
         family Court should  be  initiated,  at  the  hearing  itself,  the
         appellant's advocate confirmed that there  was  no  application  to
         adjourn to invoke the family court protocol (see  paragraph  [22  -
         23]).

     35. At paragraph [24] the panel asked the presenting officer to clarify
         the position in relation to the previous  grant  of  leave  (for  a
         period of three months under  the  DDVC  concession).  As  set  out
         there, the grant of limited leave of three months was to allow  the
         appellant to access  public  funds  and  to  allow  him  to  access
         accommodation whilst he completed and submitted an application  for
         indefinite leave to remain as a victim of  domestic  violence  thus
         there is no concession that the appellant had in fact been a victim
         of domestic violence by that grant of leave.

     36. The panel heard evidence from the appellant and set out his case at
         paragraphs [25] - [32] and also heard submissions from each of  the
         advocates which were also summarised in the decision.

     37. The findings of the panel are set out at  [40]-[56].  They  can  be
         summarised as follows:

         1) the domestic abuse summary, the incident  report  on  the  crime
            report contained within the  bundle  carried  little  evidential
            weight as the appellant had not contemporaneously  reported  any
            offending/violence to the police.

         2) The report to the modern slavery helpline was similarly a report
            made which was not contemporaneous.

         3) The panel found that the sole purpose of disclosing the  alleged
            historic abuse carried out by the appellant's wife  and  brother
            were to generate the independent paperwork  required  under  the
            guidance of assessing applications for  leave  to  remain  as  a
            victim of domestic violence (at [40]).

         4)  The panel found that there  were  inconsistencies  between  the
            appellant's evidence and the content of the paperwork.

               . The domestic  abuse  summary  (page  16)  noted  that  the
                 appellant was assaulted  numerous  times  during  2017  in
                 2018, he was abused a couple of times  per  week,  he  was
                 assaulted by pushing, shoving, punching and sometimes  his
                 spouse used to hit shoes  on  his  knees  and  arms  which
                 caused bruising. However in the appellant's statement,  he
                 describes only two incidents of assault occasioned by  his
                 wife - once throwing a mobile phone at him (paragraph  21)
                 and once where she hitting with a broom handle on the left
                 side of the jaw (paragraph 23). He did not mention in  his
                 witness statement the account given to the police that  he
                 was pushed, shoved punch, or hit with his shoes (at [41]).

               . In the domestic abuse summary the appellant disclosed that
                 the reason why his wife put cameras in the bedroom was  to
                 record  him  changing  his  clothes.  However   this   was
                 inconsistent with his witness statement  when  he  gave  a
                 different reason that his wife had installed  the  cameras
                 in the bedroom to recording "failing at  having  sex"  (at
                 [42]).

               . At paragraph 14 of the witness  statement,  the  appellant
                 said that he and his wife did not have sexual  intercourse
                 after she disclosed having erected cameras in the bedroom.
                 This was inconsistent  with  the  domestic  abuse  summary
                 which the appellant stated that the only time  they  slept
                 together was on one occasion in 2016 when she visited  him
                 in Pakistan. According to the domestic abuse summary, they
                 had not had sexual intercourse in the UK.

         5) Thus the panel found that  the  discrepancies  in  the  evidence
            which affected the overall credibility of the  account  provided
            by the appellant.

         6) The panel recorded the appellant's evidence where the  appellant
            said that having reported the historic allegations  against  his
            wife he did not want to proceed any further with  them  in  case
            his wife would be arrested  and  sent  to  prison,  and  he  was
            worried about whether his wife would  be  taken  away  from  his
            daughter. The  panel  considered  that  this  evidence  did  not
            adequately explain why he did not wish  to  pursue  a  complaint
            against his wife's brother who he had said had used violence and
            had slapped him in the face. The panel found  that  neither  his
            wife nor her brother had ever been arrested in relation  to  the
            allegations and  the  only  evidence  in  support  of  that  was
            contained in non-contemporaneous reports made by  the  appellant
            (at [45]).

         7) With respect to  the  attendance  at  the  hospital,  the  panel
            recorded that the document demonstrated  that  he  attended  the
            hospital at 1604 on 14 May 2017 and was discharged at  1914  the
            same day. It recorded that the appellant presented with  a  face
            injury and was diagnosed with a laceration to the left-hand side
            of his face. The  only  treatment  that  is  noted  is  that  of
            observation. The panel accepted that on that day  the  appellant
            had an injury to his face. They also observed that they had been
            told that his colleague took him to hospital.  The  panel  found
            that it was "perfectly possible that  the  injury  was  actually
            sustained as a result of an accident  in  the  workplace.  Given
            that the appellant still works at the factory it  is  reasonable
            to have expected him to adduce evidence of his colleagues as  to
            what he  had  disclosed  to  them  as  the  explanation  of  his
            injuries. That he has not done so affects the credibility of his
            account" (at [46]).

         8) As regards the bank statements, the panel found that during  the
            period in which the appellant was residing  in  the  matrimonial
            home a standing order of �150 per week was set up to an  account
            in what appears to be in his wife's name and  the  remainder  of
            the weekly wage was withdrawn as cash. The panel concluded  that
            "given  that  the  bank  account  statements  do  not  show  any
            expenditure that might be  related  to  normal  family  expenses
            (such as utility  bills,  Council  tax  et  cetera)  it  is  not
            unreasonable to conclude that the standing order was to  a  bank
            account from which regular bills of the household would be paid.
            We do not  accept  the  bank  statements  demonstrate  that  the
            appellant's wife had inappropriate control over the  appellant's
            money. Further support for this conclusion can be drawn from  an
            analysis of the bank statements  during  the  period  which  the
            appellant was living with his friend in  Rochdale,  since  those
            bank statements do not show the standing  order  to  his  wife's
            account. The fact that the standing order appears to  have  been
            deleted (since the appellant is not living  in  the  matrimonial
            home) suggest that the  appellant  had  control  over  his  bank
            account" (at [47]).

         9) In conclusion, the panel after assessing  the  evidence  in  the
            round, did not find that the relationship had broken down  as  a
            result of domestic violence  (as  defined  in  the  Home  Office
            guidance) perpetrated by the appellant's wife. The panel went on
            to state "it seems to us that the relationship  has  never  been
            harmonious and was one in which the  appellant's  wife  did  not
            wish  to  be  part  of.  We  draw  the  conclusion  because  the
            appellant's wife was unable on two prior  occasions  to  satisfy
            the respondent that she met the financial  requirements  of  the
            sponsor of an application for leave to enter as a  spouse,  that
            she only visited the appellant once in  Pakistan  between  their
            marriage in April 2011 on his arrival in the UK in October  2016
            and that they appear not to have had sexual relations in the UK"
            (at [48]).

        10) The panel  took  into  account  the  decision  in  Ishtiaq  (and
            paragraph 38 relied upon by the appellant) which confirmed  that
            a decision maker has a discretion to  decide  what  evidence  to
            require the applicant to produce in individual cases. The  panel
            concluded that the decision "does not change the fact  that  the
            documents that were produced, in our view, carry  little  weight
            in  supporting  his  claim.  We  have  already  noted  the   non
            contemporaneous nature of the crime report  and  domestic  abuse
            summary that were provided. We also  noted  the  A&E  attendance
            document but that provides no details as  to  what  account,  if
            any, the appellant gave to the medical professionals as  to  how
            the injury had been sustained. No documents listed in  the  Home
            Office guidance document that might carry conclusive, strong  or
            moderate  weight  were  provided  and  the  decision-maker   was
            entitled to reach the decision they did" (at [50]).

     38. The panel therefore did not accept that the appellant had  met  the
         rules when he applied for indefinite leave to remain as a victim of
         domestic violence.

     39. Turning to  Article  8,  the  panel  took  into  account  that  the
         appellant's evidence was that he had no contact with  his  wife  or
         child since November 2018 and the application for contact  made  to
         the Family Court was only lodged after the respondent  refused  his
         application for indefinite leave to remain. The  panel  noted  that
         the appellant's advocate did not seek an adjournment to  await  the
         outcome of the application for contact with the  child.  The  panel
         considered that it  was  relevant  that  the  application  for  the
         contact order was only made after the  respondent  had  refused  to
         grant leave  and  was  made  in  the  context  of  there  being  no
         subsisting relationship with a at the time (applying RS(immigration
         family Court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00219  and  R  (on  the
         application of Singh) v SSHD [2014] EFHC  461  (admin).  The  panel
         considered that as the appellant was  capable  of  obtaining  legal
         advice in relation to his immigration  status,  had  there  been  a
         genuine desire for him to have contact with his child it would have
         been expected that  the  appellant  would  have  taken  affirmative
         action in relation to formalising contact much sooner than he did.

     40. On the evidence, the panel found that the appellant did not have  a
         genuine  subsisting  relationship  with  A  and  therefore  section
         117B(6) did not apply. The panel also observed  at  [52]  that  the
         evidence appeared to demonstrate that the appellant  had  had  very
         little contact with A since her birth and having regard to A's best
         interests in accordance with section 55 of the  2009  Act,  in  the
         light of the evidence that the appellant has  not  hitherto  formed
         relationship with A and that A lived permanently with her mother in
         the UK, her best interests were for the status quo to be maintained
         and for A to continue to reside with her mother.

     41. The panel found that it is had not been suggested that any  of  the
         appellant's family were in the UK and as he did not have a  genuine
         subsisting relationship with A or G (his former spouse)  there  was
         no family life in the UK which might  engage  Article  8  therefore
         refusal to grant leave to remain did not interfere with any  family
         life in the UK.

     42. As to his private life, the panel accepted that he  was  likely  to
         have a private life during his residence of three  years  and  four
         months in the United Kingdom. He worked full-time and lived with  a
         friend. The panel observed that there was little  evidence  of  the
         nature of that private life and there  was  no  attendance  by  any
         friends or supporters or any letters of  support  in  the  bundles.
         Thus they did not find that they could place weight on his  private
         life and as such the consequences of the interference were  not  of
         such gravity to engage Article 8. However, in the alternative,  the
         panel considered the issue of proportionality  in  accordance  with
         the public interest considerations set out under S117B of the  2002
         Act  and  that  section  117B(1)  applied   confirming   that   the
         maintenance of effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
         interest; the appellant could not speak English,  and  this  was  a
         factor that weighed against  him  in  the  balance  sheet  exercise
         (S117B(2) ). The panel took into account in favour of the appellant
         that he had worked when living in the UK and was  therefore  likely
         to remain financially independent (s117B(3)).  The  weight  of  any
         private life formed while  the  appellant's  status  as  precarious
         would be limited in accordance with Section 117B(5). In  conclusion
         the panel considered that the decision made to refuse leave  was  a
         proportionate interference with the appellant's Article  8  rights.
         They therefore dismissed his appeal.

     43. Permission  to  appeal  was  sought  relying  on  two  grounds  and
         permission was granted  by  FtTJ Neville  on 28 April 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     44. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 17 July 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and that this could  take
         place via Skype. Both parties have indicated that they were content
         for the hearing to proceed by this method. Therefore, the  Tribunal
         listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given  by  each
         of the parties. I am grateful for their assistance and their  clear
         oral submissions.

     45. Ms Butler, who had appeared before the First-tier Tribunal appeared
         on behalf of the appellant and relied upon the written  grounds  of
         appeal. There was also a skeleton argument in the same terms  which
         she had provided to the Tribunal.

     46. Mr Kotas, senior presenting  officer  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent. He relied upon the written submissions which were  sent
         on  the  28  July  2020  by  his  colleague  Mr  Tan.  The  written
         submissions set out that  having  considered  the  grounds  lodged,
         there was no material error of law in the decision of the panel and
         that the panel directed themselves appropriately.

     47.  I also heard the oral submissions of the parties and I am grateful
         for the clear and helpful submissions  made  by  the  advocates.  I
         intend to consider  those  submissions  by  reference  to  the  two
         grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.

The submissions:

Ground 1:

     48. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted that the judge did not  give
         proper weight to the evidence of domestic violence on behalf of the
         appellant.

     49. The written grounds cite paragraph [40] where the panel stated that
         the domestic abuse summary, and the incident  reporting  the  crime
         report  carried  little   evidential   weight   and   submit   that
         notwithstanding that finding, the panel considered that evidence in
         three paragraphs. Ms Butler submitted that the  panel  relied  upon
         inconsistencies for an adverse credibility finding but that none of
         these inconsistencies were put to the appellant in court.

     50. In her oral submissions,  Ms  Butler  submitted   that  the  police
         report would have more detail of the crimes  committed  whilst  the
         witness statement for court addressed the elements  of  his  appeal
         namely, that he met the requirements of the  immigration  rules  by
         virtue of being in the UK with a grant of leave as a  partner,  and
         subsequently having the  relationship  breakdown  due  to  domestic
         violence.

     51. Ms Butler, in her oral  submissions  relied  upon  the  grounds  at
         paragraph 7.  She referred the Tribunal to the decision of  Ishtiaq
         v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 386 and submitted that  the  panel  did  not
         fully engage with the findings in that case that relate to the wide
         discretion available and also that  the  appellant's  cultural  and
         personal background  and  his  vulnerability  were  all  reasonable
         explanations for his late reporting of the abuse. This had not been
         addressed in the determination. Ms Butler initially confirmed  that
         the details of the  reasonable  explanation  was  provided  in  the
         covering letter sent with the application on 17 July but on further
         consideration stated that  it  was  not  set  out  in  any  written
         evidence  (  appellant's  witness  statements)  but  that  it   was
         primarily addressed in the oral submissions.

     52.  Mr  Kotas,  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  submitted  that  when
         considering the evidence relied upon by the  appellant,  the  panel
         were entitled to place less weight on the  evidence.   Firstly,  by
         the nature of the reports they were summary of  accounts  given  to
         the police by the appellant himself. Further they were reports made
         at least seven months after the claimed incidents took  place.  The
         grounds  did  not  argue  with  the  fact  that  there  are   clear
         discrepancies  within  what  is  in  effect  the  accounts  of  the
         appellant.  It  was  submitted  that  it  was  incumbent  upon  the
         appellant to provide a credible  and  consistent  account  of  that
         alleged abuse across the evidence relied upon.

     53. It is further submitted that at paragraphs [45] -  [47]  the  panel
         found issues with other areas of the evidence that did not  support
         the account of the appellant. At [45] the panel noted that even  if
         the appellant did not wish to pursue charges against his  wife,  he
         did not explain why he did not seek to do so  against  her  brother
         whom he claimed assaulted him. At [46] the panel noted  an  absence
         of corroborative evidence from work colleagues, who  the  appellant
         claimed to have taken him into hospital after he was assaulted.  At
         [47] the panel  found  the  banking  evidence  suggested  that  the
         appellant had control over his own finances rather than them  being
         controlled by his wife. The grounds did not challenge any of  these
         findings which were clearly material matters.

     54. As to the grounds where it is asserted that the panel erred in  law
         in not considering other explanations for the absence of  evidence,
         the respondent in the  refusal  decision  highlighted  the  delayed
         nature of the evidence. It was for the appellant to provide a  full
         explanation as to why he did not report abuse at an earlier  stage.
         At [49] and in other areas of the decision the judge identified  an
         absence of detailed evidence when  the  appellant  was  treated  at
         hospital,  an  absence  of   corroborative   evidence   from   work
         colleagues, and clear discrepancies in his  own  account  and  that
         given to the police. Furthermore it was noted that in  the  witness
         statement of the appellant he did  not  put  forward  any  detailed
         explanation as to why he did not report any  abuse  at  an  earlier
         stage. While the grounds argue that the cultural background of  the
         appellant and his vulnerabilities explained the  delay,  they  were
         not particularised in his evidence. Mr Kotas additionally submitted
         that there was no objective evidence put  before  the  Tribunal  to
         support the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  reticent  to  report
         domestic violence and that in  any  event  the  appellant  was  not
         someone who had just entered the United Kingdom but had  been  here
         for a number of years.

Ground 2:

     55. As to the second ground advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant,  Ms
         Butler submits that section E-DVILR.1.3 was not properly applied by
         the panel.

     56. Ms Butler submits that the respondent and the court  accepted  that
         the appellant had leave to remain in the UK as a partner  when  his
         relationship broke down however, at paragraph [48] the panel  found
         that the relationship did not break down due to domestic  violence.
         In support of the finding, the panel referred to his wife's earlier
         failed attempts to sponsor the appellant in the UK and  from  there
         concluded that the relationship "has never been harmonious and  was
         one in which the appellant's wife did not wish to be a part of."

     57. Ms Butler submitted that the respondent had  earlier  accepted  the
         relationship was genuine and subsisting and accordingly granted the
         appellant leave to enter a spouse. This was not in dispute. Had  it
         been so, the repeated attempts to sponsor the  appellant  could  be
         relied upon as evidence of the  genuineness  of  the  relationship.
         Thus she submitted that there is no requirement in E-DVILR 1.3 that
         a relationship  be  "harmonious"  before  it  breaks  down  due  to
         domestic  violence.  Relationship  may  be  both  inharmonious  and
         genuine.

     58. Therefore it is submitted that the panel  erred  in  law  in  their
         application of the relevant law and should  be  set  aside  in  its
         entirety and remitted to the FtT for a rehearing.

     59. Mr Kotas submits that the finding at [48] that the relationship had
         not broken down due to domestic violence was a finding open to  the
         panel to make on the evidence. He submitted that the  panel set out
         a number of reasons to support the conclusion that the relationship
         was never harmonious which included limited visits made/contact and
         previous  failing  to  provide  adequate   evidence   in   previous
         applications but that the panel did not require a  relationship  to
         be harmonious before any claim to domestic violence could be  made.
         The reference to that was merely a reflection of the evidence  that
         the relationship was not harmonious prior to any breakup  but  that
         the parties' separation was not due to domestic violence.

Decision on error of law:

     60. I have carefully considered the grounds advanced on behalf  of  the
         appellant and in the context of the submissions made by the parties
         and the evidence that was before the panel and their decision. I am
         grateful to both advocates for their submissions.

     61. Having done so, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of  law
         in the decision of the panel.  I  shall  set  out  my  reasons  for
         reaching that conclusion.

     62. The grounds challenge the  assessment  of  the  issue  of  domestic
         violence and do not seek to challenge  the  overall  assessment  of
         Article 8 made by the panel.

     63. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
         that the panel failed to give proper  weight  to  the  evidence  of
         domestic violence adduced by him.

     64. The evidence that the appellant relied  upon  is  set  out  in  the
         decision of the panel and consisted of  a  domestic  abuse  summary
         produced to the police,  the  incident  report,  the  accident  and
         emergency attendance document, witness statement and an email  sent
         to the modern slavery unit. Alongside that evidence  the  appellant
         had submitted his own two witness statements.

     65. It is plain in my view that when reaching their decision the  panel
         properly engaged with that evidence and neither the grounds nor the
         oral submissions identify any other evidence that was not  properly
         considered by the panel.

     66. In their consideration of the factual elements of the  appeal,  the
         panel set out their analysis expressly by reference to the  content
         of those documents. I see  no  error  in  their  analysis  of  that
         evidence where they reached the conclusion that the  appellant  did
         not contemporaneously report any  of  the  domestic  abuse  to  the
         police at the time of the incidents or any other agency. Indeed, Ms
         Butler in her  oral  submissions  acknowledged  that  there  was  a
         paucity of external evidence.

     67. When looking at the contents of that  evidence,  for  example,  the
         email to the modern slavery unit, it has not been demonstrated that
         the panel were in error in placing little  or  no  weight  on  that
         document  given  its  contents  (atp41AB).  The  report  was   made
         significantly after the separation of the parties in November  2018
         but in any event the email made it plain that the author could  not
         form any view as to the veracity or otherwise of the claim  because
         they would need to talk to  the  appellant  and  fully  assess  his
         situation.

     68. The point relied upon by Ms Butler is at the  panel  erred  in  its
         conclusion that no weight should be given to the  evidence  on  the
         basis of  it not being contemporaneous and that the panel failed to
         apply the decision of Ishtiaq and in  particular  paragraph  38  of
         that decision.

     69. I have considered the decision in Ishtiaq. Having  done  so  it  is
         clear that the tribunal  is  not  confined  in  an  appeal  to  the
         evidence "required" by the Secretary of State,  nor  is  an  appeal
         bound to fail if the "required" evidence has not been produced. The
         question of  whether  domestic  violence  has  occurred  is  to  be
         determined on the basis of all the evidence before the tribunal. As
         stated in the decision of Ishtiaq( as cited), the Court  of  Appeal
         confirmed that an applicant should be expected to produce  evidence
         of the kind provided for in the IDI guidance but  if  the  relevant
         person cannot do so any cogent relevant evidence can be taken  into
         account ( at paragraph [31]).

     70. Ms Butler submits that the panel did not engage with  paragraph  38
         where it is stated:

         "For the reasons that I have given, I  would  hold  that  paragraph
         289A (iv) gives the caseworker a discretion to decide what evidence
         to require the applicant to produce and  the  individual  case.  In
         exercising that discretion, I would expect the  caseworker  usually
         to start by applying the guidance given in section 4 of  chapter  8
         of the IDI's. But if the applicant is unable to produce evidence in
         accordance with that  guidance,  it  would  seem  to  me  that  the
         caseworker should seek an explanation of his or her inability to do
         so. If the  applicant  provides  a  reasonable  estimation  of  her
         inability to produce such evidence, that the caseworker should give
         the applicant  the  opportunity  to  produce  that  other  relevant
         evidence as she wishes to produce."

     71. Ms Butler  submits  that  the  applicant's  cultural  and  personal
         background and his vulnerability were all  reasonable  explanations
         for his inability to provide evidence.

     72. Looking at the material that was before the  decision-maker,  there
         is no reference to any explanation, reasonable  or  otherwise,  for
         his inability to  produce  evidence.  Whilst  Ms  Butler  initially
         indicated that reference was made to such  an  explanation  in  the
         covering letter to the application, upon further consideration  she
         accepted it was not in that covering letter  for  the  application.
         Nor was any explanation provided at any other time to the decision-
         maker nor was there any factual basis setting out  details  of  any
         explanation based on cultural grounds in either in the two  witness
         statements, the one prepared for the application and the other  one
         prepared shortly for the purposes of the hearing. I have  not  been
         taken to any evidence by Ms Butler  that  provides  any  evidential
         foundation for the submission.  No  record  of  evidence  has  been
         produced on behalf of the appellant. That said, I accept  the  oral
         submission made by Ms Butler that the issue was raised in her  oral
         submissions. This is reflected in the decision at  [37]  where  the
         panel recorded the submission as follows "Ms Butler says  that  the
         appellant  had  no  cultural  reference  about  reporting  domestic
         violence and it was only after taking advice that  he  realised  he
         could."

     73. However that submission was directed to the issue of delay and  the
         point raised  by  the  Tribunal  that  none  of  the  evidence  was
         contemporaneous thus it did not deal with  the  issue  set  out  at
         paragraph [38] of Ishtiaq that referred to the circumstances  where
         an appellant can provide a reasonable explanation for  his  failure
         to produce evidence. The appellant in fact did produce evidence for
         this application which the panel properly considered when  reaching
         a conclusion on the issue of whether the marriage broke down due to
         domestic violence.

     74. Even if the panel referred to the  appellant's  failure  to  obtain
         evidence, as Mr Kotas submits, the panel set out their  conclusions
         on the evidence that was provided by the  appellant  at  paragraphs
         [40 - 49]. Whilst they reached the conclusion  that  none  of  that
         evidence was contemporaneous, that is, no reports were made  either
         at the time of the incidents or at the time of  the  separation  in
         November 2018, they did not go on to reject the evidence solely  on
         that basis. I am not satisfied that it has been shown by Ms  Butler
         that there was any evidential foundation for the submission made at
         [37]. However, even if there had been a reasonable explanation  for
         the delay as reflected in the submission  set out at [37],  or even
         on the basis of a  failure to provide further evidence,  the  panel
         properly went on to consider the evidence that had been put  before
         the tribunal.

     75. In my judgement, the question  of  whether  domestic  violence  has
         occurred is to be determined on  the  basis  of  all  the  evidence
         before the tribunal. The weight to be  attached  that  evidence  is
         entirely a matter for the judge or judges concerned.

     76. In my view it was reasonably open to  the  panel  to  consider  the
         evidence and set  out  the  inconsistencies  in  that  evidence  in
         reaching  their  conclusions.  The  panel   identified   that   the
         appellant's evidence was discrepant concerning  different  accounts
         of the frequency of abuse, the manner in which he claimed  to  have
         been abused (at (41]), and the account of the appellant differed as
         to why cameras have been placed in the bedroom  (at[42]).  At  [43]
         the panel noted the appellant's inconsistent account as to  whether
         the there had been sexual intercourse  in  the  UK.  Other  factual
         findings were made at [47] in relation to  the  financial  evidence
         provided which went to the claim made that there was  coercive  and
         controlling behaviour on the part of his wife. The panel,  for  the
         reasons set out [47]  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  evidence
         relied upon did not demonstrate that the appellant's wife did  have
         inappropriate control over the  appellant's  money  and  contrasted
         that  evidence  with  the  more  recent  evidence   following   his
         separation from his wife.

     77. I do not accept the submission  made  by  Ms  Butler  both  in  her
         grounds and in her oral submissions that the  police  report  would
         have been by its nature likely contain more detail.  Ms  Butler  in
         her reply  sought  to  submit  that  the  inconsistencies  may  not
         necessarily be characterised as  inconsistencies,  but  as  varying
         degrees of abuse expressed in the documents.  However  no  specific
         particularisation has been provided concerning the  inconsistencies
         either in the written grounds or in the oral argument.

     78. The issue before the Tribunal was  to  determine  on  the  evidence
         whether the appellant had given a credible or consistent account of
         being a victim of domestic violence in the  way  claimed  and  that
         this was the cause of the breakdown of the marriage. Therefore  the
         credibility and consistency of the appellant's account was entirely
         relevant to their assessment.

     79. I also reject the submission made that the panel erred  in  law  by
         failing to put those inconsistencies to the appellant.  There is no
         general obligation upon the Tribunal to give notice to the  parties
         during the hearing of all matters on which it may rely in  reaching
         its decision. The Tribunal is not bound, as  a  matter  of  natural
         justice, to point out all the inconsistencies  since  an  applicant
         can be generally expected to be aware that the Tribunal  will  have
         to assess his credibility and the consistency of the account  given
         in evidence with any previous account contained  in  any  documents
         which will plainly be relevant to the assessment.

     80. I also observe, as did the respondent in the  written  submissions,
         that the grounds do not argue with the fact that  there  are  clear
         discrepancies in the appellant's account.

     81. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that ground 1 is made out.

     82. Dealing with ground 2, by reason of my assessment of ground  1  and
         that the key findings  and  analysis  made  by  the  Tribunal  were
         rationally open to them on the evidence, ground 2 has to be seen in
         that context.

     83. Ms Butler submits that the panel did not properly apply E-DVILR 1.3
         and challenges their findings set out at [48] that the relationship
         did not break down due to domestic violence.

     84. I am satisfied that there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  panel's
         assessment in  the  way  that  the  grounds  assert.  The  evidence
         referred  to  at  [48]  properly   reflected   the   two   previous
         applications for entry  clearance  which  had  failed  because  the
         appellant's sponsor and  spouse  had  not  provided  the  necessary
         evidence. Furthermore a previous judge had not  been  satisfied  at
         the hearing before him that the relationship was in fact subsisting
         (see  immigration  history  at  paragraph  7).  However  the  panel
         proceeded on the  basis  that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
         subsisting at the time he entered the UK for entry clearance to  be
         granted for the probationary period. In my judgement paragraph [48]
         should  be  read  alongside  paragraph  [49]  and   the   preceding
         paragraphs in which it is plain that the panel did not accept  that
         the  appellant  had  demonstrated  that  there  had  been  domestic
         violence and that the relationship had  broken  down  due  to  such
         domestic violence.

     85. Contrary to the submission made, the panel did not  misconstrue  or
         misapply paragraph E-DVILR 1.3 nor did they incorporate any further
         element requiring the relationship to be  "harmonious"  before  any
         claim of domestic violence could be  made.  In  my  judgement,  the
         reference  to  the  general  nature  of  the  relationship  was  an
         observation made from the past evidence that their relationship was
         not "harmonious" prior to breakdown but the panel after considering
         the evidence in the round reached  the  conclusion  that  that  the
         marriage did not break down due to domestic violence.

     86. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law  and  that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed.  The
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel stands.



Notice of Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT  stands.   The
appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   11 February 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


    1. A person seeking permission to appeal  against  this  decision  must
    make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application
    must be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period
    after this decision was sent to the person making the application.  The
    appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location of the
    individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


    2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  in  the
    United Kingdom at the time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the
    appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of
    decision is sent electronically).


    3. Where the person making the application is in  detention  under  the
    Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days  (5  working
    days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


    4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside
    the United Kingdom at the time that the application for  permission  to
    appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if
    the notice of decision is sent electronically).


    5. A "working day" means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
    Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


    6. The date when the decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
    covering letter or covering email.

