
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18159/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 September 2021                 |On 09 September 2021                |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                KRISHNA SARU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A Rana, Solicitor, N.C. Brothers & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Shepherd sent to the parties on 2  March  2021  by  which  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to
    grant him entry clearance was dismissed.

 2. The appellant appeals  with  permission  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Keane by a decision dated 12 May 2021.

Anonymity

 3. No anonymity direction was issued by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
    application for such direction was made before me.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal and presently aged 31.

 5. The appellant's father served in the Brigade of  Gurkhas  for  over  15
    years before his discharge in 1994.  His  father  was  one  of  several
    former  members  of  the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas  who  were  denied   the
    opportunity to settle in this country until a change of policy in 2009.
    By this time, the appellant was aged over 18.

 6. On 9 July 2019 the appellant applied for entry clearance  as  an  adult
    dependant of a former Gurkha soldier. The application was refused by  a
    decision dated 26 September 2019 which detailed, inter alia:

         'The discretionary arrangements in place for adult  children  of  a
         Gurkha discharged prior to 1 July 1997 do not apply to the children
         of widows. Children or other dependant relatives of former  Gurkhas
         are required to  meet  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  or  other
         appropriate discretionary criteria.


         ...


         You have submitted limited documentation and have not  demonstrated
         that you are financially and emotionally dependent upon your mother
         beyond that normally expected between a parent and adult child.'

 7. A  little  over  a  week  later  the  appellant's  mother  was  granted
    settlement on 3 October 2019 as the  widow  of  former  Gurkha  soldier
    under a discretionary policy then contained in Annex K of Chapter 15 of
    the Immigration Directorate Instructions. She entered this  country  on
    20 October 2019. Prior to her arrival in this country, she resided with
    the appellant in Nepal.

 8. The appeal came before the Judge sitting in Birmingham on  17  February
    2021 and was dismissed.

Grounds of Appeal

 9. By means of his notice  of  appeal,  the  appellant  relies  upon  five
    grounds of challenge, authored by  Ms.  Laura  Shepherd,  Counsel,  who
    appeared before the Judge:

         i) The First-tier Tribunal made contradictory findings  in  respect
            of article 8.


        ii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in finding that family life  would
            not be interfered with.


       iii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to undertake the correct  factual
            analysis of whether the appellant's father would have settled in
            the United Kingdom with his family upon discharge.


        iv) The First-tier Tribunal failed to apply  sufficient  weight,  if
            any, to the case of Jitendra Rai v. Entry Clearance Officer, New
            Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.


         v) In reaching the conclusion that article 8 was  not  engaged  the
            First-tier Tribunal misapplied the guidance provided in Kugathas
            v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31
            and Ghisling & Others  (Ghurkas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:  weight)
            [2013] UKUT 567.


10. In granting permission to appeal on all grounds, Judge Keane  reasoned,
    inter alia:

         '... In particular, it being incumbent upon the judge to arrive  at
         unequivocal findings of fact she arguably arrived at  contradictory
         findings in respect  of  an  issue  as  important  as  whether  the
         appellant and his United Kingdom based sponsor enjoyed family  life
         under article 8 with each other. At paragraph 55  of  her  decision
         the judge stated:


             'As the appellant and sponsor lived together in Nepal up until
             she came to the UK in October 2019,  I  find  that  there  was
             family life up to this point. I find that article 8 is engaged
             on this  basis  and  because  there  is  nothing  to  indicate
             anything about their relationship has changed other  than  the
             distance between them.'


         However, at paragraph  20  of  her  decision  and  after  prolonged
         analysis the judge found, 'I  therefore  find  that  there  is  not
         sufficient family life for the purposes of article 8.''


11. The respondent filed a rule 24 response dated 18 June 2021, authored by
    Ms. Willocks-Briscoe. The response details, inter alia:

         '2.  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
            permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to  determine  the
            appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing.'


Decision on error of law

12. Upon reading the papers in this matter,  the  concession  made  by  the
    respondent is appropriate. In the circumstances, I find that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law and its decision of 2 March  2021
    is properly to be set aside.

Remaking the decision

13. This matter was listed for an error of law hearing at Field House on 13
    September 2021. In light of the respondent's position identified by her
    rule 24 response a Tribunal Lawyer, Mr. A Hussain, wrote to the parties
    on 6 September 2021 and conveyed my provisional view that  rather  than
    incur unwarranted expense to the parties, it would  be  appropriate  to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal consequent to a paper
    consideration and remit the  matter  back  to  the  hearing  centre  in
    Birmingham. The parties were requested to express  their  view  on  the
    proposed step by 4pm on 9 September 2021.

14. The respondent agreed to the proposed course of action by an email sent
    by Ms. Willocks-Briscoe to the Tribunal at 10.22 on 7  September  2021.
    Mr. Rana confirmed the appellant's agreement by an email  sent  to  the
    Tribunal at 12.55 on 8 September 2021.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated 2 March  2021,  involved
    the making of a material error on a point of law and is set aside.

16. No findings of fact are preserved.

17.  The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Birmingham, to be listed before any judge other than Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Shepherd.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 8 September 2021


