
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18553/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 2 August 2019                     |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     YC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 12 November 1978 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    China. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision by the
    Secretary of State to refuse his human rights claim having  decided  to
    deport him as a foreign criminal on  28  August  2018.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 16  April  2019,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal are relatively narrow. In essence, the  appellant
    argues that the judge has given an unclear  reasons  for  his  decision
    which are, in part, apparently contradictory. At [54], the judge  noted
    that Exceptions 1 and 2 of section 117C of  the  2002  Act  'seemed  to
    exclude  further  consideration  of  the  public  interest.'  At  [60],
    however, the judge wrote that, 'first, I attach significant  weight  to
    the public interest in deportation.' Again, at [63],  the  judge  wrote
    that, 'what amounts to 'unduly harsh' upon a qualifying individual must
    be  weighed  against  the  public  interest  taking  into  account  the
    circumstances of the offence, aggravating factors etc in deporting  the
    individual.' The appellant argues that  the  approach  adopted  by  the
    judge was incorrect particular in the light of KO (Nigeria)  2018  UKSC
    53, which the judge discusses at [64-66]. It  was  important  that  the
    losing party, the appellant, should properly understand the reasons why
    he lost and he complains that he cannot do so on  any  reading  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. There is some merit in the appellant's submissions. I find the  judge's
    reasoning confused in places. However, it is important,  when  deciding
    whether there exists any error so serious as to justify  setting  aside
    the decision, to read the decision as a whole having particular  regard
    to the factual matrix as found by the judge.

 4. The judge plainly understood the ratio of  KO  (Nigeria);  he  reminded
    himself that he must 'assess the best interests of the children without
    taking account of the appellant's criminal activity or indeed any  past
    adverse immigration history of their parents.'  The  judge  found  [51]
    that it would be unduly harsh to expect five British  children  of  the
    appellant to leave the United  Kingdom  to  live  in  China.  The  only
    remaining question was  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to remain in the  United  Kingdom  whilst  the  appellant  was
    deported to China. The judge looked in some detail at the  relationship
    of the appellant to the  children.  He  was  satisfied  that  a  strong
    relationship existed between the children and the appellant noting that
    the appellant takes the children to school and looks after them  whilst
    his partner works in order to support  the  family  [56].  Having  said
    that, there is very little other evidence before the judge which  could
    conceivably take this case into the realms of  'undue  harshness.'   Mr
    McVeety, who appeared for the  Secretary  of  State  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, relied on the recent decision in PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ
    1213. At [38-39] the Court of Appeal stated:

         "38. The decision in KO (Nigeria) requires this court to  adopt  an
         approach which differs from that taken by Judge Griffith and  Judge
         Finch. In the circumstances of this  appeal,  I  do  not  think  it
         necessary to refer to decisions predating KO (Nigeria), because  it
         is no longer appropriate, when considering section 117C(5)  of  the
         2002 Act, to balance the severity of the consequences for  SAT  and
         the children of PG's deportation against  the  seriousness  of  his
         offending. The issue is whether there was evidence on which it  was
         properly open to Judge Griffith to  find  that  deportation  of  PG
         would result for SAT and/or the children in a degree  of  harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any partner  or
         child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.

         39.  Formulating the issue in that way, there is in  my  view  only
         one answer to  the  question.  I  recognise  of  course  the  human
         realities of the situation, and I do not doubt  that  SAT  and  the
         three children will suffer great distress if PG is deported. Nor do
         I doubt that their lives will in a number  of  ways  be  made  more
         difficult than they are at  present.  But  those,  sadly,  are  the
         likely consequences of the deportation of any foreign criminal  who
         has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  partner  and/or
         children in this country. I accept Mr Lewis's submission that if PG
         is deported, the effect on SAT and/or their three children will not
         go beyond the degree of harshness which is necessarily involved for
         the partner or child of a foreign criminal who is deported. That is
         so, notwithstanding that  the  passage  of  time  has  provided  an
         opportunity for the family ties between PG,  SAT  and  their  three
         children to become stronger than they were  at  an  earlier  stage.
         Although no detail was provided to this court of the  circumstances
         of what I have referred to as the knife incident,  there  seems  no
         reason to doubt that it was both a comfort and an advantage for SAT
         and the children,  in  particular  R,  that  PG  was  available  to
         intervene when his son was a victim of  crime.  I  agree,  however,
         with Mr Lewis's submission that the knife incident, serious  though
         it may have been, cannot of itself  elevate  this  case  above  the
         norm.  Many  parents  of  teenage  children  are  confronted   with
         difficulties and upsetting events of one sort or another, and  have
         to face one or more of their children going  through  "a  difficult
         period" for one reason or another, and the fact that a  parent  who
         is a foreign criminal will no longer be in a position to assist  in
         such circumstances cannot of itself mean that the  effects  of  his
         deportation are unduly harsh for his partner and/or  children.  Nor
         can the difficulties which SAT will inevitably face,  increased  as
         they are by her laudable ongoing efforts to further  her  education
         and so to improve her earning capacity, elevate the case above  the
         commonplace so far as the effects of PG's deportation  on  her  are
         concerned. In this  regard,  I  think  it  significant  that  Judge
         Griffith at paragraph 67 of her judgment referred to the "emotional
         and behavioural fallout" with which  SAT  would  have  to  deal:  a
         phrase which, to my mind, accurately summarises the effect  on  SAT
         of PG's deportation, but at the same time reflects its  commonplace
         nature."

 5. There is simply insufficient evidence in the present appeal capable  of
    showing  that  the  effect  upon  the  children  of   the   appellant's
    deportation, although very  likely  to  cause  them  most  considerable
    distress, would be unduly harsh. Such distress as they  are  likely  to
    suffer is the inevitable consequence of criminal offending  leading  to
    deportation. I find that, even if the judge's  reasoning  is  sometimes
    unclear, the outcome of this appeal, on the particular facts,  was  not
    in doubt. The grounds of appeal conclude by asserting that  the  appeal
    should be reheard so that 'the assessment should be made  correctly  in
    law'  [13].  The  problem  for  the  appellant  is  that,  however  the
    assessment is made, the outcome will  be  the  same.  I  do  not  find,
    therefore,  that  I  should  interfere  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    conclusion.

Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 AUGUST 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








































