
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: HU/18404/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 December 2020               |              On 16 December 2020|
|                                 |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                    M a m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Spurling, instructed by City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, a Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national who  was  born  on  10  January
    1987.  He appeals, with permission granted by Judge Pooler,  against  a
    decision which was  issued  by  Judge  O'Keeffe  on  5  February  2020,
    dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  refusal  of  his  human
    rights claim.

Background

 2. The appellant entered the UK in 2009.  He held  entry  clearance  as  a
    student, which was  valid  until  2011.   He  subsequently  secured  an
    extension of his leave to enter until May 2014.  He applied for further
    leave in that capacity but his application was refused in June 2015 and
    the resulting appeal was dismissed  in  January  2016.   The  appellant
    exhausted his appeal rights in August 2016.  He subsequently made three
    applications for residence cards under the EEA Regulations 2016.   Each
    of those three applications were refused, with the final refusal  being
    in the summer of 2017.


 3. Later that year, in December 2017, the appellant met a British  citizen
    named [PB] at a party.   They  had  been  acquainted  before  then  but
    matters moved towards a relationship from  this  point.  Ms  [B]  ("the
    sponsor") was separated from her husband at this stage.   She  and  her
    husband had three children together  but  they  had  separated  in  the
    summer of 2017.  There were  allegations  of  domestic  violence.   The
    appellant and the sponsor's relationship developed.  She  divorced  her
    husband on 17 July 2019 and, on the same day,  she  and  the  appellant
    undertook an Islamic form of marriage.  A civil marriage ceremony  took
    place on 11 November 2019.  In the  meantime,  on  30  July  2019,  the
    appellant had applied for leave to remain as  Ms  [B]'s  partner.   The
    application was refused on 29 October 2019.

 4. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was  the  sponsor's
    partner, as that term is defined at Gen  1.2  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  They were not married according to law and they had
    not cohabited for two years.  The appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
    Immigration Status Requirement for the Five Year Route because  he  was
    an overstayer.  He was not able to rely on paragraph EX1 because he was
    not the sponsor's partner.  He did not  meet  the  requirements  for  a
    grant of leave to remain  on  Private  Life  grounds  and  it  was  not
    accepted by the respondent that there were 'exceptional  circumstances'
    such that it was appropriate to  grant  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. At the hearing before the FtT, the focus was narrowed by  Mr  Spurling,
    who represented the appellant then as he does now.  The  primary  issue
    which the judge was invited  to  consider  was  whether  the  appellant
    enjoyed  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the
    sponsor's  children  so  as  to  satisfy  the  condition  precedent  in
    s117B(6).  It was  submitted  that  the  appellant  did  enjoy  such  a
    relationship with the two children and that it would be unreasonable to
    expect them to leave the United Kingdom.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    satisfaction of  s117B(6)  was  determinative  of  the  proportionality
    assessment the judge was required to undertake and that the appeal fell
    to be allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds accordingly.

 6. The judge concluded that the  appellant  did  not  enjoy  a  qualifying
    relationship with these children.  She went on, in  comparatively  (but
    justifiably) short form to find that the appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and that his expulsion  from  the
    United Kingdom would not be in breach of Article 8 ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. There are three grounds of appeal, each  of  which  takes  the  judge's
    assessment of the first question posed by s117B(6) as its  target.   It
    is submitted that the judge misdirected herself on  the  facts  in  two
    respects and that she also misdirected herself in law.

 8. In his grounds of appeal and  concise  oral  submissions,  Mr  Spurling
    submitted as follows.  His first complaint is that the judge  erred  at
    [21]  when  she  considered  that  the  appellant  had   only   had   a
    'comparatively short period of time in which to establish a genuine and
    subsisting parental  relationship'.   The  judge  had  noted  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had been in a  relationship  since  2017  but
    that they only got married (under Islamic law) in July 2019, from which
    point they started to cohabit.  The judge had based her conclusion that
    there had only been a comparatively short period on the  latter  period
    but she had erred, Mr  Spurling  submitted,  in  excluding  the  former
    period  from  her  consideration.   The  appellant  had   developed   a
    relationship with the children even whilst he and the sponsor were  not
    cohabiting, and the judge had erred in leaving  that  out  of  account.
    The judge had stated that the appellant  had  'helped  with  day-to-day
    chores' before they started to cohabit but this was  unduly  vague  and
    the reality was that they had been in a relationship which was known to
    the children.  Considering the ages of  the  children,  the  period  of
    around eighteen months could not properly be described as comparatively
    short.


 9. The second ground took something said by  the  judge  at  [29]  of  her
    decision as its focus.  She  had  noted  in  that  paragraph  that  the
    children called the appellant 'Dad' in Bengali  and  that  they  called
    their biological father 'Dad' in English.  In fact,  the  evidence  was
    that both of the  children  now  call  the  appellant  Abba  ("Dad"  in
    Bengali).  The older of the two children  calls  her  father  'Dad'  in
    English, whereas the younger child calls him 'Cousin Dad'.  Mr Spurling
    also criticised the judge's observation that she was not persuaded that
    this added much to her analysis, submitting that  this  was  wrong  and
    that the name by which the appellant was  known  to  the  children  was
    obviously probative of the relationship.  A discrete point was that the
    judge had failed to make a finding on the evidence that  the  appellant
    had attended parents' meetings and hospital visits.

10. The third ground is that the judge had confused the  test  she  was  to
    apply.  Whilst she had cited s117B(6) and had, on occasion, referred to
    whether there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    between the appellant and the children, other tests had  also  appeared
    in her analysis.  She had referred, on four occasions,  to  considering
    whether there was a 'genuine and subsisting relationship'  between  the
    appellant and the children and she  had  also  considered  whether  the
    appellant had parental responsibility for the children.  These were not
    the tests.

11. Mr Spurling referred to R (RK) v SSHD [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC); [2016]  Imm
    AR 527, in which UTJ Grubb had given guidance on the test in  s117B(6).
    He noted that there were obiter observations in that decision regarding
    the position of step-parents such as the appellant.  There was  nothing
    to prevent three  people  having  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a child and the  judge  had  erred  in  treating  the
    ongoing  involvement  of  the  children's  father  as  precluding   any
    possibility of the appellant meeting s117B(6).

12. Mr Spurling was not aware of the decision of the Court of Appeal in  AB
    (Jamaica) & AO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 661; [2019] 1 WLR 4541.
     I gave him an opportunity to consider that decision.  Having done  so,
    he submitted  that  it  emphasised  the  highly  fact-specific  enquiry
    required in circumstances such as the present and that it said  nothing
    which  suggested  that  UTJ  Grubb  had  been  wrong  in   his   obiter
    observations at [45] of RK.  The test was not, he submitted a  term  of
    art.  It had been irrational for the judge to treat the relationship in
    this case as anything other than a parental one.

13. Mr Whitwell acknowledged that the judge had used loose language on more
    than one occasion, omitting as she had the  word  'parental'  from  the
    test she applied.  Like Mr Spurling, however, he  emphasised  that  the
    test was not a term of art and he submitted that  it  was  quite  clear
    from the remainder of the decision that the judge had  had  the  proper
    test firmly in mind.  RK had been cited to her and  was  considered  in
    her decision, as was the respondent's guidance.  Mr Spurling  had  been
    wrong to cite the judge's reference to  'parental  responsibility',  at
    [30], in support of his argument; it was quite clear that  the  judge's
    assessment in that part of her decision  was  focused  on  a  different
    question.  The reality was  that  the  judge  had  taken  all  relevant
    matters into account and had come to a conclusion which was open to her
    and with which the Upper Tribunal was not entitled to interfere.

14. In response,  Mr  Spurling  submitted  that  the  judge  had  evidently
    confused two separate tests in her decision.  The repeated reference to
    whether there was a 'genuine and subsisting relationship'  showed  that
    the judge had not applied the test in s117B(6), which was intentionally
    framed differently.  Even if the judge's decision was read as a  whole,
    as it should be, the judge was clearly  applying  a  test  of  parental
    responsibility rather than a test of parental relationship.

15. At the conclusion of  the  submissions,  I  reserved  my  decision.   I
    indicated, however, that I agreed with the advocates in relation to the
    relief which should follow if I concluded that the decision of the  FtT
    should be set aside; remittal de novo would be  the  proper  course  in
    those circumstances.

Analysis

16. Although it is the third and final of  Mr  Spurling's  grounds,  it  is
    appropriate to consider at the outset  whether  the  judge  misdirected
    herself in law in failing to apply a test of whether the appellant  has
    a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the  sponsor's
    children IH (10 at the date of the judge's decision) and IQ (3  at  the
    date of the judge's decision).  The submission is made in  reliance  on
    five parts of the judge's decision.  At [21], [29], [32] and [36],  the
    judge made findings  on  whether  the  appellant  had  a  'genuine  and
    subsisting relationship' with the children.  And, at [30],  she  stated
    that  the  children's  father  'continues  to  exercise  his   parental
    responsibility' for the  children.   Mr  Spurling  submits  that  these
    references show that the judge  was  not  focused  upon  the  statutory
    language in s117B(6) and that she applied the wrong test.


17. I consider it quite clear,  with  respect  to  Mr  Spurling,  that  the
    omission of the word 'parental' in [21], [29], [32]  and  [36]  of  the
    judge's decision was merely infelicitous and is not an indication  that
    she applied the wrong test.  So much is clear from the remainder of the
    judge's decision.  At [14], she noted that she had a skeleton  argument
    from Mr Spurling.   That  skeleton  argument  made  reference  s117B(6)
    itself; to UTJ Grubb's decision in RK; and to the  respondent's  policy
    guidance entitled Family Policy: Family life (as a partner  or  parent)
    private life and exceptional circumstances, Version 5.   The  focus  in
    the skeleton argument and the oral submissions  is  replicated  in  the
    judge's decision.  At [18], she set out s117B as a whole.  At [20], she
    focused on the statutory question of whether there was 'a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the children of his partner' and she  drew
    on the relevant section of the respondent's guidance.  Having  referred
    to the facts, and to certain difficulties with the evidence, the  judge
    turned to RK and noted that 'it was not contentious that  more  than  2
    persons may be in a parental relationship with a child.  At  [32],  she
    concluded that s117B(6) did not apply.


18. I  note  that  there  are  references  to  a  'genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship' at various stages of the decision but  the  question,  it
    seems to me, is whether this was merely 'loose language', as  submitted
    by the respondent before me, or whether it is a  real  indication  that
    the judge was not aware of the  test  she  was  to  apply.   Given  the
    repeated references to  the  statute  and  to  relevant  authority  and
    policy, I am wholly unable to accept Mr Spurling's submission that  the
    judge misdirected herself in law.  It is regrettable that  she  omitted
    the word  'parental'  but  she  was  clearly  focused,  throughout  the
    decision, on the correct test.

19. As for Mr Spurling's point that the judge erred in referring, at  [30],
    to  'parental  responsibility',  it  is  important   to   assess   that
    observation in its proper context:


         [30] Drawing those various strands  together,  the  appellant  does
         live with the children and obviously sees  them  regularly.   I  am
         satisfied that he is willing and able to look after  the  children.
         Whilst I am sure that he is helpful to Ms [B] and  shared  some  of
         the burden of day-to-day childcare, there  is  simply  no  evidence
         that he is involved in any of the decisions  that  directly  affect
         these children.  I was not  provided  with  evidence  of  a  single
         decision that he has made for the children.  On the evidence before
         me I find that it is more likely than not that the  children's  own
         father continues to exercise his parental responsibility  for  them
         and continues to maintain an active genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship  with  them.   I  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
         demonstrated that he is either the primary or secondary  carer  for
         these children. [emphasis added]

20. I accept Ms  Whitwell's  submission  that  there  is  nothing  in  this
    paragraph which suggests that the judge took her eye off the  test  she
    should have been applying.  It was relevant  to  the  overall  analysis
    conducted by her that the children's father continues to have  parental
    responsibility for them and that he continues to have an active role in
    their lives.  Reading  this  paragraph  on  its  own  and  reading  the
    decision as a whole, there is no reason to think that the judge applied
    a test of whether the appellant has  parental  responsibility  for  the
    children, or that she thought that  the  ongoing  role  of  the  father
    precluded the appellant from satisfying s117B(6).  Indeed, her citation
    of UTJ Grubb's decision in  RK,  in  [31]  referred  expressly  to  the
    acceptance in that case that more than two people may be in a  parental
    relationship with a child.


21. I do not accept, in the circumstances, that the third  ground  is  made
    out.

22. Nor do I accept Mr  Spurling's  submission  that  the  judge  erred  as
    contended in the first ground of appeal.  The specific target  of  this
    ground is an observation made by the judge in [21] of her decision:

         The appellant and his wife began their relationship in 2017.   They
         married in July 2019 and began living together from that  date.   I
         was told that before that  date,  he  had  helped  caring  for  the
         children.  I have no doubt that he  has  helped  with  day  to  day
         chores and I was provided with a number of photographs  which  show
         him with the children.  I do take into account  however,  that  the
         appellant has only been living with Ms Begam and her  children  for
         just over 6 months.  That is a comparatively short period  of  time
         to establish a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  these
         children.

23. Nothing in that paragraph is said by Mr Spurling to be factually wrong,
    as such, but he does submit that the judge overlooked  aspects  of  the
    case advanced and that her reasoning process was legally  flawed  as  a
    result.  He submits that the finding that the appellant had helped with
    'day to day chores' is rather vague, and overlooks what was said to  be
    the appellant's gradual inclusion as part of the family unit before the
    date on which they began to cohabit.  To advance that complaint  is  to
    ignore the dearth of evidence in support of it, however.   The  judge's
    finding about the appellant's role in the household  before  July  2019
    was vague because the evidence about the appellant's  role  was  vague.
    There is very little, if anything, focused on that particular period in
    the statements made by the appellant and the sponsor  before  the  FtT.
    Nor is there anything of note in the statement made  by  the  sponsor's
    sister.  Those statements are focused on the position at  the  date  of
    the hearing before  the  FtT  and  provide  no  real  support  for  the
    contention that the relationship with the children had developed in any
    meaningful way before the Islamic marriage and cohabitation commencing,
    six months before the hearing in the FtT.


24. Nor is it established that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  take  any
    account of the ages of the children in this  part  of  her  assessment.
    She was plainly cognisant of the ages of the children, and she was  not
    required expressly to  state  in  her  reasoning  that  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship may be formed very quickly  where  the
    children are young.

25. I do not consider the judge to have fallen into error as  contended  in
    ground one.

26. Mr Spurling then contends that the judge erred in her consideration  of
    the evidence about the names  used  by  IH  and  IQ  to  refer  to  the
    appellant and their biological father.  There are said to be two errors
    of law.  The first is said to be an error on the part of the  judge  in
    observing that the names used did not 'add much to  a  decision  as  to
    whether or not he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with them',
    at [29].  Mr Spurling submits that this was irrational,  and  that  the
    names used by the children for the  appellant  and  their  father  were
    necessarily probative of the nature of the relationship.  I  am  unable
    to accept that submission.  The judge's observation was,  to  my  mind,
    necessarily correct.   Children  generally  -  and  young  children  in
    particular - will call adults by the names they are given.   There  was
    no evidence before the judge, as I understand  it,  that  one  or  both
    children had taken it upon themselves to  refer  to  the  appellant  as
    'Abba', which means 'Dad' in Bengali.  The natural basis upon which  to
    proceed was that the children called the appellant what they  had  been
    told to call him, and that was evidently the logic behind  the  judge's
    observation that the names used were not particularly probative of  the
    substance of the relationship.


27. Mr Spurling also submits that the evidence was more  nuanced  than  the
    judge appreciated in her summary.  At [6] of the grounds of appeal,  he
    submits that:


         the appellant said that the older of the two children who live with
         him used to call him Mama ("Uncle") and now calls him Abba ("Dad"),
         while the youngest has always called him Abba.  The older one calls
         her father "Dad" (in English) while  the  youngest  one  calls  him
         "Cousin-Dad".

28. Even if the evidence was rather more nuanced than the  judge  recorded,
    however,  the  fact  remains  that  the  judge  was  entitled,  in  her
    consideration of the evidence as a whole, to conclude  that  the  names
    used  where  not  particularly  probative  of   the   nature   of   the
    relationship.  There is no legal error disclosed by these points;  this
    is merely a disagreement with the judge's evaluation of the facts.


29. The final, discrete point, disclosed by ground two is that the judge is
    said to have failed to make  any  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    attendance at school parents' events  and  hospital  visits.   But  the
    judge recorded that evidence at [11] of her decision and  there  is  no
    reason to think that she  left  it  out  of  account  in  her  holistic
    evaluation of the relationship.

30. Although it is unfortunate that the judge omitted the  word  'parental'
    at various parts of her analysis,  it  is  quite  clear  that  she  was
    cognisant of the statutory language and of the interpretation  of  that
    language in relevant authority and Home Office policy.  The  assessment
    she undertook followed the structure she was invited  to  adopt  in  Mr
    Spurling's skeleton argument.  She considered the statutory language at
    [18].  She summarised the undisputed aspects  of  the  relationship  at
    [19].  She recounted the factors which were said  by  the  respondent's
    policy to be relevant to the assessment of whether there was a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship between the appellant and his step-
    children at [20].  She then considered those factors and made  findings
    of fact about the relationship in the ensuing twelve  paragraphs.   The
    matters which she weighed for  and  against  the  satisfaction  of  the
    statutory test featured properly in that analysis  and  the  conclusion
    she reached on the evidence as a whole was open to her as a  matter  of
    law.  The challenges advanced by Mr Spurling amount, with  respect,  to
    nothing more than an invitation to disagree with findings of fact which
    were properly open to the judge.   She was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the appellant's comparatively short involvement in the lives  of  these
    children had not reached the  point  at  which  it  could  properly  be
    described as a parental relationship.


Postcript


31. It is necessary to make one final observation.   As  recounted  at  the
    start of this decision, the respondent held that the appellant was  not
    the sponsor's partner (as defined) and that he could not avail  himself
    of paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM as  a  result.   By  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the FtT, however, the appellant  and  the  sponsor  were
    married according to UK law and she  was  undeniably  his  partner,  as
    defined in Gen 1.2.  Subject to the considerations in  s85(5),  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the appellant would  have
    been entitled to argue that he met the requirements  of  the  Ten  Year
    Route in Appendix FM.  The argument, put simply, could have  been  that
    he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to  her  relocating  to  Bangladesh
    because her children continued to have  a  relationship  with  her  and
    their father.  That argument would not have depended upon the appellant
    having a parental (or any) relationship with  his  step-children.   The
    point was not pursued before the FtT, however, and could not have  been
    taken before me as a result.  The appellant might nevertheless wish  to
    seek legal advice on the pursuit of such a claim under paragraph 353 of
    the Immigration Rules,  particularly  in  circumstances  in  which  the
    essential facts upon which that argument depends do not appear to be in
    dispute.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of an error of  law.  The
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is accordingly dismissed and  the  decision  of
Judge O'Keefe shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order  which  encompassed  the
appellant and his whole family.  Having regard  to  the  principle  of  open
justice, I respectfully consider that order to have been  too  wide.   There
is no reason why the appellant and his partner  should  not  be  identified.
Insofar as the FtT was concerned to protect the identity of the  appellant's
partner's children, however, I continue that order in the  following  terms.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
appellant's partner's children other  than  by  the  initials  used  in  the
judgment.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             12 January 2021

