
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18848/2018
     HU/18850/2018
     HU/18852/2018
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2019                            |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

                                    'ASA'
                                    'OEA'
                                    'AIA'

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

By virtue of the third appellant being a child, unless and until a  Tribunal
or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Jafferji Counsel, instructed by Oasis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
were given orally at the end of the hearing on 6 November 2019.

This is the remaking of the decision in the appellants' appeals against the
respondent's refusal of their human rights claims.

The appellants, citizens of Nigeria, sought leave to remain in the United
Kingdom (the 'UK') on the basis of their human rights, specifically their
right to a private and family life. The respondent refused their claims in
a decision dated 24 August 2018 (the 'Refusal Letter').

On 29 May 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge P-J S White (the 'FtT') dismissed
the appellants' appeals against the refusal of the appellant's human rights
claims. The central issue was whether it would be reasonable to expect the
third appellant, as a 'qualifying child' within the meaning of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2012, to leave the UK.  While the
FtT concluded that it would be in the best interests of the third appellant
to remain in the UK with his parents, that was not an end of the matter.
The FtT concluded that it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant
to return with his parents, rather than to separate him from them.   The
appellants appealed and asserted that by reference to MA (Pakistan) &
others v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and MT and ET (child's best interests; ex
tempore pilot) [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC), powerful reasons were needed to
justify removal of a 'qualifying' child and in particular, family and
private was likely to deepen when the period of time spent by the child in
the UK was at a later age, as in the third appellant's case; and that any
analysis should not blame the third appellant for his parents' adverse
immigration history.

This Tribunal, then comprising Upper Tribunal Judges Hanson and Keith, set
aside the FtT's decision, allowing the appeal, as set out in the error of
law decision dated 2 October 2019 in the Annex to these reasons.  We
preserved the FtT's conclusions that it would be in the best interests of
the third appellant that he remains with his parents in the UK. The
remaking hearing would therefore focus on the extent to which it would not
be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK. Given the
narrowness of the factual issues and the legal questions to be answered, we
regarded it as appropriate that the Upper Tribunal should remake the FtT's
decision, based on the present conclusions, which we do so now.

The issue in this appeal

The sole issue in remaking the FtT's decision is whether it would not be
reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK, for the purposes
of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  It is accepted that the first and
second appellants have genuine and subsisting parental relationships with
the third appellant and that he is a 'qualifying child' for the purposes of
the 2002 Act as he has lived in the UK for a continuous period of nine
years, having entered the UK in July 2010, and his date of birth is 6
August 2005, so that he was 4 years old when he entered the UK and is now
14 years old, and is due to start his GCSE's next year. In answering the
question about whether it would not be reasonable to expect the third
appellant to leave the UK, this is a hypothetical question, rather than an
assessment of whether he would leave the UK. In answering the question, I
should not have regard to his parents' adverse immigration history, but at
the same time, the assessment needs to be carried out on a 'real-world'
analysis, noting that all of the appellants are Nigerian nationals who have
never had settled leave to remain in the UK.

If it would not be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the
UK, then there is no public interest in his parents' removal, as they are
not subject to deportation orders, so that all of the appellant's human
rights appeals would necessarily succeed.

The first appellant's evidence

In terms of the documents, I was provided with the original hearing bundle,
to which I do not refer in any detail except to the first appellant's
witness statement, which he readopted before me in this hearing; and a
supplemental bundle, which included the first appellant's second witness
statement of 21 October 2019 and a number of other documents, which I have
considered, even where I do not refer to them expressly.

In terms of the appellants' evidence, the first appellant's witness
statements broadly outlined his prior immigration history and he accepted
that he had entered the UK on a student visa in August 2016 aged around 30;
had come to train as a chartered accountant through the ACCA qualification;
and was joined by his wife, the second appellant in November 2008; and then
by the third appellant in July 2010; and their subsequent children have
since been born in the UK.  The family live together at a privately rented
address in Belvedere.

The first appellant works as a courier part-time dropping leaflets to
houses and his wife sometimes provides catering for their church.  He is
registered as self-employed although, as he candidly accepted in oral
evidence, his earnings are relatively low and he relies substantially on
church members for both the family's accommodation expenses and also their
other living costs. The first appellant had previously been prevented from
continuing with his studies in 2014 because the London School of Business
and Finance would not agree to his continuing his studies without his leave
to remain being extended and he was not able to successfully extend his
leave.

In assessing the first appellant's oral evidence, I found him to be a frank
and credible witness who was willing to accept points that were not
necessarily in his favour.  As a consequence, I place significant weight on
his evidence.  By way of example, he confirmed that his mother continues to
live in a suburb of Lagos, in a four-bedroom home and that there would be
accommodation to which the appellants could return, if so required.  He
also accepted that he would be able to obtain work as a book-keeper in
Nigeria, a role that he had carried out prior to coming to the UK, albeit
based on his experience of having worked as a book-keeper, he did not
believe that he would earn a sufficient income to support his wife and
children, which was precisely the reason why his family in Nigeria had
originally funded his studies in the UK, so that he could gain
qualifications as a fully-qualified accountant.

He confirmed that his father sadly has passed away in January of 2018; his
mother is retired, on a limited pension; his brother is near to retirement
and has a family of his own to support and his only other sibling, a
sister, is a housewife and is unable to financially support the appellants
on their return to Nigeria.

The first appellant confirmed that while he himself had attended state
education in Nigeria during his youth, his experience was that the Nigerian
state school system had deteriorated substantially since, so that not only
would the third appellant be required to repeat a year because of the
transitional arrangements around the differently structured education
system in Nigeria; but that the quality of that education would, whilst
providing education at a basic level, be sufficiently poor that the family
would need to actively consider whether to delay entry to the state school
system and try and somehow to find the money to fund private education for
the third appellant.

Similarly, with regard to the suburb in which the family would be
returning, whilst the first appellant did not seek to overstate the matter
and whilst the suburb in Lagos had been a good one when he left Nigeria,
his evidence, having remained in contact with his family, is that, sadly,
the suburb has deteriorated so it in general terms is not as safe as it
once was.

The respondent's submissions

The respondent's submissions were, without any criticism of them, brief.
Mr Tarlow submitted that the first appellant was fairly self-sufficient and
had found work in the UK, but had also worked as a book-keeper in Nigeria
and could return to work in Nigeria.  Whilst the education of the third
appellant would necessarily be disrupted, it would not be broken and it was
in the public interest, in controlling immigration, that the family, all
Nigerian nationals and none with leave to remain in the UK, return as a
family unit.  That return was viable and I was therefore asked to dismiss
the appeal.

The appellants' submissions

Mr Jafferji asked me to accept the candid and careful evidence of the first
appellant.  He asked me to contrast the test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of
the Immigration Rules with that in sub-paragraph (vi); in other words, on
one hand whether it would not be reasonable to expect a qualifying child to
leave the UK; in contrast to very significant obstacles to the family's
integration.  In that regard, I was referred to the authority of PD and
Others [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC), in particular at paragraph [39], which
confirmed that the former test was a lower one.  I was asked to focus, in
the holistic assessment, less on the country to which the family might
return, (Nigeria), but primarily on the family life which the qualifying
child, i.e., the third appellant, would be leaving behind in the UK.

In other words, where, as here, the situation of the appellants may not be
desperate, were they required to return to Nigeria, as there would be
accommodation to return to and the third appellant would have access to a
basic level of state education, albeit at a significantly lower quality
level than in the UK, it would nevertheless be unreasonable to expect him
to leave the UK, noting particularly the important period of time and the
ties developed by the third appellant, by reference to the authority of
Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
[2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC), and considering the powerful reasons needed to
justify the third appellant's refusal, as per the starting point of MA
(Pakistan).

Discussion and conclusions

I accept Mr Jafferji's submission that whilst it is ultimately a holistic
assessment and I have to consider both the circumstances as they currently
are in the UK and also the circumstances as they might pertain on a return
to Nigeria, nevertheless the underlying emphasis has to be on the family
life as has been established in the UK. That is why section 117B(6) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 reflects an assessment under
article 8 of the ECHR.  In particular, in this case, the uncontested
evidence is that the third appellant has lived in the UK from the ages of 4
to 14 and whilst the first appellant admitted that he had had some
telephone contact with his paternal grandmother, so that there is still
some link with Nigeria, nevertheless the entirety of his schooling; his
friendship groups; and his social focus will be on his immediate family,
friends and peers in Belvedere and Greenwich, where he currently attends
school, noting the previous schools he had attended were within the local
area.  In other words, the third appellant is a child who has remained in
South London for the entirety of his formative years and it is clear, as if
proof were needed, that he has put down roots in the local community and is
described by the coach of the Greenwich Tigers Football Club, as one of his
outstanding players and very important to the team and hard working. The
coach describes him as willing to help other players on and off the field,
which is testament to the third appellant's engagement with fellow players.


This is a paradigm case of a strong and deep integration within the UK, not
only in school but in local sports.  Crucially, the third appellant is due
to start his GCSEs next year and so will have started considering his GCSE
choices this year.

Balanced against the situation of such integration in the UK and the highly
disruptive effect on that family life, would be a return to a country where
the third appellant would most likely have no memory, albeit with ongoing
telephone contact with a grandmother over the years; a home to live in,
where he would not be destitute; and access to a basic level of education;
and the support, such as they can provide, of his parents and grandmother.


In answering the question of whether it would not be reasonable to expect
the third appellant to leave the UK, for the purposes of section 117B(6) of
the 2002 Act, I concluded, without reservation, that it would not be so
reasonable, given the third appellant's age; the period of his time spent
in the UK, during his formative years; the fact that he is at a key stage
of his education and in the absence of any powerful reasons justifying his
removal.  On that basis, not only does his appeal succeed but it also
follows that as the first and second appellants are his parents and their
parental relationship with him is genuine and subsisting, there is no
public interest in their removal, so that their appeals succeed too, on
human rights grounds.  It may be that when the third appellant is no longer
a minor that the respondent chooses to review any grant of leave for the
parents, but at this stage, the appeals succeed.

I remake the FtT's decision, finding that the refusal of leave to remain
does engage and breach all of the appellants' rights under articles 8 and
therefore the appellants' appeals succeed.

Decision

The appellants' appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.



    Signed:  J Keith


              Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

    Dated:   15 November 2019






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has succeeded.  I make a fee award of the �140.

    Signed:  J Keith

     Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


    Dated:   15 November 2019




ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18848/2018
                                                               HU/18850/2018
                                                               HU/18852/2018
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30th September 2019                  |On                                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                    'ASA'
                                    'OEA'
                                    'AIA'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

By virtue of the third appellant being a child, unless and until a  Tribunal
or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellants              Mr Zainul Jafferji, Counsel, instructed by
Oasis Solicitors
For the respondent:             Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. This is an appeal by the appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge P-J S White (the FtT), promulgated  on  29  May  2019,  by
   which he dismissed their appeals  against  the  respondent's  refusal  of
   their applications for leave to remain,  based  on  their  human  rights,
   specifically their right to a private and family  life.   The  respondent
   had refused their applications in a decision dated 24 August 2018.

2. By way of background, the first  and  second  appellants  are  a  married
   couple and the third appellant is one of their sons,  born  on  6  August
   2005 in Nigeria. All of the appellants are Nigerian nationals. The  first
   appellant entered the UK in August 2006,  on  a  student  visa  which  he
   successfully extended. His wife joined him  in  November  2008;  and  the
   third appellant joined him, aged five, from Nigeria  in  July  2010.  The
   first appellant's application to renew his leave to remain  was  rejected
   as invalid in  April  2013.  He  applied  for  judicial  review  of  that
   decision.  Permission was refused and assessed by the Upper  Tribunal  as
   being totally without merit,  in  April  2015.  In  September  2015,  the
   appellants applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds, and their
   appeal was dismissed by a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Beg) on  18  October
   2016. They sought permission to appeal  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  was
   refused, and their appeal rights were exhausted  on  2  June  2017.  They
   reapplied for leave to remain based on human rights  grounds,  which  was
   rejected in February 2018 and they renewed their application  once  again
   on 5 April 2018, which was refused, and their appeal against that refusal
   was the subject of the current FtT decision.

3. The core points taken against the appellant by the respondent  were  that
   the appellants had never had settled leave to  remain  in  the  UK;  they
   could return as  a  family  unit  to  Nigeria  without  very  significant
   obstacles to their integration; and Judge Beg had  previously  considered
   the third appellant's best interests in 2016, including  his  ability  to
   continue in education in Nigeria.  The third appellant's grandparents and
   wider family continued to live  in  Nigeria,  who  could  assist  in  the
   appellants' integration there.

The FtT's decision

4. The FtT's analysis  of  the  evidence  runs  from  [8]  to  [22]  of  his
   decision.  He considered the evidence as a whole, including the  previous
   findings of Judge Beg in 2016. He reminded himself of the passage of time
   since Judge Beg's decision  in  2016,  which  meant  that  he  needed  to
   reconsider the appellants' continued presence in the UK, even if  it  was
   without leave.  He concluded that  Judge  Beg's  previous  findings  that
   there was likely to be family support available in Nigeria was likely  to
   still be the case, as the lead appellant continued to have a brother  who
   was employed in Nigeria;  and  the  family  owned  property  in  Nigeria.
   Whilst the FtT noted the integration of the third appellant  in  the  UK,
   including in school and at church, the issue  was  whether  it  would  be
   reasonable to expect the third appellant, as a 'qualifying child'  within
   the  meaning  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  section  117B(6)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, to leave the  UK.  The  FtT
   referred himself to the cases of KO (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2018] SC
   53; and JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072
   (IAC).

5. The FtT concluded that it would  be  the  best  interests  of  the  third
   appellant to remain in the UK, having lived in the UK for nearly 9 years.
   However, an assessment of the third appellant's best interests was not an
   end of the matter. The FtT concluded that  on  the  assumption  that  his
   parents would return to Nigeria, it would be  reasonable  for  the  third
   appellant to return to Nigeria with his parents, rather than to  separate
   him from them, by  allowing  him  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  them.
   Maintenance of immigration control was in the public interest.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

6. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal which are that the FtT  erred  in
   concluding that it was reasonable for the third appellant to return  with
   his parents to Nigeria,  despite  it  not  being  in  that  child's  best
   interests to do so. The authorities of MA  (Pakistan)  &  others  v  SSHD
   [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and MT and ET (child's  best  interests;  ex  tempore
   pilot) [2018] UKUT 00088  (IAC)  confirmed  that  powerful  reasons  were
   needed to justify removal of a  'qualifying'  child  and  in  particular,
   family and private was likely to deepen when the period of time spent  by
   the child in the UK was at a later age, as in the third appellant's case.



7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted permission on 14 August 2019.  She
   regarded it as arguable that the FtT had  erred  in  law  in  concluding,
   where the best interests lay in the third appellant  remaining  with  his
   parents in the UK, that it was reasonable for him to leave  the  UK;  and
   that the FtT had implicitly consider  the  reasonableness  of  the  third
   appellant's return by reference to the adverse immigration history of his
   parents, when the FtT ought to have considered reasonableness  of  return
   in isolation from their immigration history.

The hearing before us

The appellant's submissions

8. Mr Jafferji relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that  the  FtT
   had asked himself the wrong question at [19], by asking whether,  on  the
   assumption that the third appellant's parents were in Nigeria,  it  would
   be reasonable to expect the third appellant to be with them, and  whether
   separation from them by remaining in the UK would be far more severe than
   any disruption arising from living with them to Nigeria.   The  question,
   as confirmed in JG, was simpler, namely whether it would be reasonable to
   expect the third appellant to leave the UK. The FtT had failed  to  focus
   on the reasonableness of the third appellant in the UK and  had  focussed
   inappropriately on his parents' immigration history.  MT and ET confirmed
   that as a child became older, school played a more important part of  his
   or her life, so that integration in the UK would  strengthen.  The  Upper
   Tribunal in MT and ET  had  considered  the  minor  appellant's  personal
   circumstances  in  detail,  in  the  analysis  of  whether  it  would  be
   reasonable to expect the child to return to Nigeria. No such analysis had
   been carried out by the FtT in this case. Whilst the appellants  did  not
   complain about the FtT's  conclusion  that  the  third  appellant's  best
   interests were to stay with his parents in the UK, even the reasoning for
   that conclusion was limited. The assessment at [19],  which  went  beyond
   best interests to consider  whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the  third
   appellant to leave  the  UK,  was  not  adequate.  The  authority  of  MA
   (Pakistan) indicated, at [49], that for a child who had been  in  the  UK
   for seven years, their presence established a starting point  that  leave
   to remain should be granted unless there were  powerful  reasons  to  the
   contrary.  No such analysis had been carried out and no powerful  reasons
   had been identified, although the appellants' appeal did  not  depend  on
   the 'powerful reasons' principle. The minor appellant had succeeded in MT
   and ET where her mother's immigration history was far worse than the lead
   appellant in this case, who had entered the UK lawfully, and  his  appeal
   rights had only been exhausted in the later part of his presence  in  the
   UK.

The respondent's submissions

9.  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  when   making   an   assessment   of   the
   reasonableness of requiring the third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK,  JG
   allowed the question to be posed  from  the  starting  point  that  adult
   appellants would be leaving the UK as well.  That was not always the case
   where, for example, one parent was a British  citizen,  so  the  question
   needed to be put hypothetically.

10. Both MA (Pakistan) and MT & ET predated KO (Nigeria), and  the  test  of
   'powerful reasons' needing to justify the requirement  for  a  qualifying
   child to leave the UK was no longer good law. By way of example, although
   not strictly binding on this Tribunal, we  were  referred  to  the  Inner
   House, Court of Session decision given by the Lord  President,  the  most
   senior Scottish judge, in the case of SA and others v  SSHD  [2018]  CSIH
   71. In that case, the minor appellants' personal circumstances  were  far
   more difficult than the third appellant in this case and yet the Court of
   Session had  concluded  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  minor
   appellants to return with their parents. The Court  of  Session  had  not
   applied a 'powerful reasons' test and by implication that test  had  been
   overruled.

11. In this case, the FtT had clearly  considered  the  ages  of  the  third
   appellant  and  his  siblings  and   the   FtT's   conclusions   on   the
   reasonableness of the third appellant's return were open to  the  FtT  to
   make.

Discussion and conclusions on error of law

12. We conclude  that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the  FtT's
   decision.    We were referred to different sets of facts in MT and ET and
   SA and others, with each representative inviting us to conclude that  the
   set  of  circumstances  they  relied  on  was  more  extreme   than   the
   circumstances of the appellant in this case, so that depending  on  which
   set of facts we applied, the FtT's decision was either not open to him to
   make, or his findings had not only been open to  him,  but  were  not  so
   extreme as asserted.

13. These submissions illustrate the danger of relying on  facts  in  other,
   factually unconnected cases, as somehow amounting to precedent or binding
   facts, which should guide other cases. What the authorities are clear  on
   is a need  to  examine  facts  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  so  that  any
   assessment of article 8 rights, either within or outside the  Immigration
   Rules, is intensely fact sensitive.

14. We  do  not  accept  Mr  Lindsay's  submission  that  the  reference  to
   'powerful reasons', outlined  in  MA  (Pakistan),  does  not  survive  KO
   (Nigeria).  Nothing in KO (Nigeria) suggested that powerful  reasons  are
   no longer a valid factor to consider and the absence of  a  reference  by
   the Court of Session to them cannot, by inference, be seen as  suggesting
   that that part of MA (Pakistan) was wrongly decided.  In  any  event,  we
   consider that the FtT's error  of  law  did  not  depend  on  a  narrower
   consideration of 'powerful reasons', but the absence of a wider  analysis
   by the FtT of what made it reasonable to expect the  third  appellant  to
   leave the UK.

15. The FtT had concluded that it would be in  the  best  interests  of  the
   third appellant and his siblings to remain with their parents in the  UK;
   and had correctly identified  at  [19]  that  that  did  not  answer  the
   question of whether it would be reasonable to expect the third  appellant
   to leave the UK. However, in the remainder  of  the  reasoning  at  [19],
   which comprises the substance of the FtT's  analysis,  the  FtT  did  not
   explain adequately how he moved  from  the  conclusion  about  the  third
   appellants' best interests to the reasonableness of  his  departure  from
   the UK.  We accepted Mr Jafferji's submission  that  the  FtT's  analysis
   amounted to a conclusion that if one were to assume that the parents were
   to leave the UK, then  on  a  comparative  exercise,  it  would  be  less
   disruptive for the third appellant to join  them,  as  opposed  to  being
   separated from them and  remaining  in  the  UK.  The  FtT  had  made  no
   assessment, on the 'balance sheet' or holistic approach (or indeed by any
   other analysis) to weigh up the strength of roots and ties in the UK; and
   what the third  appellant  would  face  on  his  return  to  Nigeria,  in
   answering the question of whether a requirement for him to leave  the  UK
   would be reasonable or not.  The absence of such reasoning  fundamentally
   undermined the FtT's decision, so that it contains an error  of  law  and
   must be set aside.

Disposal

16. With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the  Practice  Direction,  given  the
   narrowness of the factual issues and the legal questions to be  answered,
   the Upper Tribunal will remake the decision on the  appellants'  appeals,
   rather than remit them to the First-tier Tribunal. A  hearing  to  remake
   the  appeal  decisions  will  be  listed  before   the   Upper   Tribunal
   accordingly.

17. We preserve the FtT's conclusion that it would be in the best  interests
   of the third appellant that he remains with his parents in the  UK.   The
   remaking hearing will therefore focus on the extent to which it would not
   be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.


18. The following directions shall apply to the future conduct of this
   appeal:

     a) The Resumed Hearing will be listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
        sitting at Field House on the first open date after 4 November 2019,
        time estimate 3 hours, to enable the Upper Tribunal to substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

     b) The appellant shall no later than 4 PM on 21 October 2019 file  with
        the Upper Tribunal and served upon the respondent's representative a
        consolidated, indexed,  and  paginated  bundle  containing  all  the
        documentary  evidence  upon  which  he  intends  to  rely.   Witness
        statements in the bundle  must  be  signed,  dated,  and  contain  a
        declaration of truth and shall stand as the evidence in chief of the
        maker who shall  be  made  available  for  the  purposes  of  cross-
        examination and re-examination only.

     c) The respondent shall have leave, if so advised, to file any  further
        documentation she intends to  rely  upon  and  in  response  to  the
        appellant's evidence; provided the same is filed no later than 4  PM
        on 28 October 2019.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  we  set
it aside.

A hearing in order to remake the  decision  will  be  listed  in  the  Upper
Tribunal before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith only.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  2 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith






