
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18459/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th February 2020                |On 2nd March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MZ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel instructed by Montague Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo  born
       in 1974. He appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal (Judge R Sullivan) to dismiss his appeal.

    2. The decision under appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the
       Respondent's decision of the 23rd August 2018 to refuse to grant  the
       Appellant leave on human rights grounds, and in so  doing  refuse  to
       revoke the Deportation Order signed against him  back  in  2008.  The
       Deportation  Order  had  followed  the  Appellant's  conviction   for
       'seeking leave to remain by deception', for which he had  received  a
       sentence of nine months' imprisonment and a recommendation that he be
       deported.  I return to the circumstances of  that  conviction  below,
       but it suffices to note here that this appeal concerned:

        a) an application to revoke a deportation order;

        b) which had been made following  a  recommendation  by  the  Crown
           Court under s.3(6) of the Immigration Act 1971; and

        c) the appeal was brought under s82(1) of Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002 on human rights and protection grounds.

    3. The case for the Appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that
       regardless of the merits of his 'historical'  asylum  claim  (earlier
       appeals against the decision to refuse asylum  had  been  dismissed),
       today he had a well-founded fear of persecution in the DRC because he
       had left the country illegally using a false passport, and  had  been
       convicted as a result.  In appearing for  the  Appellant  Counsel  Mr
       Batten made an application for an adjournment so that  this  argument
       could be researched and developed, but that application  having  been
       refused Mr  Batten  made  submissions  and  placed  reliance  on  the
       reported decision of the Upper Tribunal in BM &  Other  (returnees  -
       criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293, the salient part
       of which is set out in the headnote:

           "The DRC authorities  have  an  interest  in  certain  types  of
           convicted  or  suspected  offenders,  namely  those   who   have
           unexecuted prison sentences in the DRC or  in  respect  of  whom
           there are unexecuted arrest warrants in the DRC or who allegedly
           committed an offence, such as document fraud, when departing the
           DRC. Such persons are at real risk of imprisonment  for  lengthy
           periods and, hence, of treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR".

    4. In respect of the human rights  limb  of  his  appeal  the  Appellant
       argued that his deportation would, in  addition  to  amounting  to  a
       violation  of  Article  3  (see   above),   be   a   disproportionate
       interference with his Article 8 family life in this country, a family
       life consisting of his relationships with his wife and two children.

       The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    5.  In  respect  of  the  protection  grounds  the  Tribunal  placed   a
       Devaseelan[1] reliance on the decision of two  earlier  Tribunals[2],
       who had both rejected the 'historical' claim  to  be  at  risk  as  a
       result of involvement in Congolese opposition group the BDK.   As  to
       the new argument raised by Mr Batten, that the Appellant could be  at
       risk in the DRC because he used a false passport to get  out  of  the
       country, the Tribunal found as follows:

             i) That at the time that the Appellant left the DRC  there  was
                no known risk to persons using false documents;

            ii) That there was no evidence that he did in fact use  a  false
                passport to exit the country;

           iii) There is no reason to believe that the Appellant would  have
                come to the attention of the Congolese authorities  for  his
                use of a false passport;

            iv) Counsel did  not  bring  to  the  Tribunal's  attention  the
                'addendum' decision of BM (false passport) DCR  [2015]  UKUT
                00467 (IAC).

       Having made those findings the Tribunal concluded that the  Appellant
       would not be suspected by the DRC authorities of having used a  false
       document. Their  focus  is  on  catching  radical  opponents  of  the
       government and the Appellant is not one of those.  No risk  therefore
       arose.

    6. As for the Appellant's human rights the  Tribunal  accepted  that  he
       enjoys a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his  two
       children, at least one of whom is a 'qualifying'[3] child because she
       has been in the United Kingdom for a continuous period in  excess  of
       seven years.  The children have been granted leave to remain  in  the
       United Kingdom on the basis that their mother  has  leave  to  remain
       because she is now  the  parent  to  a  third,  British,  child.  The
       determination then sets out, at paragraph 38 that the "key  question,
       so far as section 117C of the 2002 Act and paragraph 398 of the Rules
       are concerned, is whether the effect of the  Appellant's  deportation
       on [his qualifying daughter] would be unduly harsh".  Following  that
       self-direction the Tribunal finds that it would not, and  the  appeal
       is duly dismissed.

       The Grounds of Appeal

    7. Mr Batten, who appeared at first instance, drafted the  grounds.   In
       essence he asserts therein that he, and those  instructing  him,  had
       only received instructions very shortly before the hearing, and  that
       his  ability  to  present  the  case  was  thereby  compromised.   In
       particular it is pleaded that Counsel needed more  time  to  research
       and present the 'BM' point and that "on the face of it  there  is  at
       least a serious possibility that he came to this country on  a  false
       passport".

    8. The grounds also make some trite observations about  the  burden  and
       standard of proof in asylum appeals, but since no ground is  actually
       developed, I disregard these paragraphs.

       My Findings on 'Error of Law'

    9. At a hearing on the 3rd June 2019 I heard submissions on whether  the
       Decision of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed for material error  of
       law. As I set out in my decision of that day, it was.   As I  explain
       herein, the grounds as argued were without merit; there were  however
       two discrete reasons why the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       could not stand.

   10. There was no arguable error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  not
       adjourning so that further instructions could be taken  on  the  'BM'
       point.  I so find because it is very difficult to  see  what  further
       elaboration might have been  made  to  the  submission  made  at  the
       hearing. There was in this case an undisturbed finding of  fact  that
       the Appellant did leave the DRC on a passport to  which  he  was  not
       entitled:  see �27(ii) of the determination of Judge Price. The Upper
       Tribunal had given guidance on whether individuals returning  to  the
       DRC might  be  at  risk  on  return  in  those  circumstances  in  BM
       (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) and BM (false passport).  The
       grounds do not explain what more the Tribunal might  have  needed  to
       know. I can therefore find no arguable unfairness or irrationality in
       its decision to press ahead with the hearing.

   11. That finding notwithstanding, Mr McVeety for the Respondent  accepted
       that the First-tier Tribunal decision was nevertheless flawed  for  a
       more fundamental error of law: the First-tier Tribunal's  failure  to
       have regard to, or set out, the basic legal framework  applicable  to
       this appeal.

   12. This appeal was brought under s82 of the Nationality, Immigration and
       Asylum Act 2002 on the grounds that the Appellant's deportation would
       breach the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  both  the  Refugee
       Convention and the European Convention on Human  Rights.  Insofar  as
       the Tribunal put these matters at  the  forefront  of  its  decision-
       making, it was plainly right to do so. The background to this  matter
       was however the application to revoke the deportation order. That was
       important because it should have  led  the  Tribunal  to  assess  the
       matter in the context of the relevant published policy, as set out in
       part 13 of the Immigration Rules.

   13. Paragraphs 390 - 391A of the Rules set out the approach to  be  taken
       when considering  an  application  to  revoke  a  deportation  order.
       Paragraph 390 sets out the general principles to be  applied  in  all
       cases:

           390. An application for revocation of a deportation  order  will
           be considered in the light of all  the  circumstances  including
           the following:

           (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;

           (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;

           (iii)  the interests of the community, including the maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;

           (iv)    the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
           compassionate circumstances.

   14. Paragraph 390A sets out additional tests where paragraph 398  of  the
       Rules applies:

           390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does
           not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           public interest in maintaining the  deportation  order  will  be
           outweighed by other factors.

   15. And paragraph 391A deals with situations in which it doesn't:

           391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
           be authorised unless the situation has been materially  altered,
           either by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or
           by fresh information coming to light which was  not  before  the
           appellate authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage  of
           time since the person was deported may also in itself amount  to
           such a change of circumstances as to warrant revocation  of  the
           order.

   16. The first question for the Tribunal here was therefore whether 398  -
       and by extension 390A - applied to the  Appellant's  case.  Paragraph
       398 reads:

           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and

           (a)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

           (b)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or

           (c)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the  view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused  serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing  that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
           if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
           outweighed by other factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A.

   17. It is not in issue that the Appellant comes under neither (a) nor (b)
       above: his sentence was one of 9 months imprisonment.  Is it arguable
       that he fell under (c)?  At paragraph 48 of the  refusal  letter  the
       Respondent asserted that he did as follows:

           "Your deportation is conducive to the public  good  and  in  the
           public interest because you have been convicted  of  an  offence
           which  has  caused  serious  harm  as  reflected  in  the  court
           recommendation for deportation. Therefore,  in  accordance  with
           paragraph 398 of the  Immigration  Rules,  the  public  interest
           requires your deportation unless  an  exception  to  deportation
           applies...."

   18. I note as an aside that this was not of course the basis  upon  which
       the  Respondent  had  originally  made  the   order,   which   refers
       specifically to section 3(6) Immigration Act 1971. Nevertheless, that
       was the Respondent's position before the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is
       well established that in 'conducive' deportations it is for the First-
       tier Tribunal to determine, having regard to all available  evidence,
       whether or not the  Respondent  has  actually  established  that  the
       conditions for deportation are met: Bah v Secretary of State for  the
       Home  Department  (EO(Turkey)-liability  to   deport).   In   Bah   a
       Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal held  that  it  is  for  the
       First-tier Tribunal decision maker to decide:

           "whether on the facts established viewed as a whole the conduct,
           character or associations reach such a level of  seriousness  as
           to justify a decision to deport"

   19. As Mr McVeety agreed, it is not apparent from  the  determination  of
       the First-tier Tribunal whether the Tribunal understood  that  to  be
       its task: it simply proceeded on the basis that the conviction itself
       meant that the Appellant was a 'foreign criminal', that his offending
       caused serious harm, and that his deportation was  conducive  to  the
       public good. From  there  the  Tribunal  proceeded  to  consider  the
       Appellant's human rights through the prism of paragraph  399  of  the
       Rules (or as it is expressed  in  the  determination,  s117C  of  the
       Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002),  and  the  "undue
       harshness" test.  As the Respondent accepts, this  was  an  error  of
       law. Unless and until the Tribunal  had  satisfied  itself  that  the
       Appellant did in fact fall within 398(c) the appeal should never have
       proceeded  on  that  basis.    The  omission  in  the  reasoning  was
       important because if the Tribunal, having regard to  the  facts,  had
       decided that the Appellant's sole conviction, some 12 years ago,  was
       not offending that "caused serious harm", it would have  reverted  to
       the more general revocation provisions in the  rules,  at  paragraphs
       390 and 391A.

   20. It was on this  basis  that  the  Respondent  agreed  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to have erred.

   21. In my written decision of the 3rd June 2019 I referred  to  a  second
       Robinson obvious error. The background to the  Appellant's  offending
       is set out in the Respondent's explanatory statement at the beginning
       of his bundle. It notes  that  on  the  13th  December  2006  a  male
       claiming to be a Kapesa Ngombi presented himself at the British  High
       Commission in Kinshasa and applied for entry clearance to the  United
       Kingdom. On the 16th April 2007 a male  using  the  Appellant's  name
       [MZ] arrived at the Asylum Screening  Unit  in  Croydon  and  claimed
       asylum. The fingerprint database revealed that MZ and  Kapesa  Ngombi
       were one and the same. The explanatory statement then says this:

           "The facts of the case were put forward  to  the  appellant,  he
           elected to make a full and frank admission to the offence he had
           committed. He stated that his true identity is of  [MZ]  ...  He
           admitted that he was fully aware that it was  wrong  to  deceive
           government officials on several occasions, but  claimed  he  was
           scared for his life"

   22. These were the facts that led to the Appellant entering,  upon  legal
       advice, a plea of guilty to a charge of 'seeking leave to  remain  in
       the United Kingdom by  means  of  deception'.  He  was  convicted  at
       Croydon Magistrates' on the 22nd May 2007. On the 30th July  2008  he
       was sentenced to 9 months' imprisonment,  and  a  recommendation  was
       made for his deportation. Thus by the time  his  asylum  appeal  came
       before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  Judge  RA  Price)  in
       September 2007  he  had  already  been  convicted  of  deception  and
       sentenced  to  imprisonment.   That  this  weighed  heavily  in  that
       Tribunal's deliberations is reflected in the fact that of  the  seven
       reasons it gives for rejecting the claim, four are concerned with the
       Appellant's deception and conviction.    It is not apparent from  the
       sentencing remarks of the Magistrate, or the decision of Judge Price,
       that any consideration was ever given to whether the Appellant  might
       have an Adimi[4] defence under Article 31 of the  Refugee  Convention
       and section 31 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999:

           Defences based on Article 31(1) of the Refugee Convention.


           (1)    It is a defence for a refugee charged with an offence  to
           which this section applies to show  that,  having  come  to  the
           United Kingdom directly from a country where his life or freedom
           was threatened (within the meaning of the  Refugee  Convention),
           he-

                (a)    presented himself to the authorities  in  the  United
                Kingdom without delay;

                (b)    showed good cause for his illegal entry or  presence;
                and

                (c)    made a claim for asylum as  soon  as  was  reasonably
                practicable after his arrival in the United Kingdom.

       I should add that whilst the defence itself was  not  discussed,  the
       Magistrate was clearly aware of the Appellant's purpose in using  the
       document: "you have pleaded guilty to seeking leave to remain in  the
       United Kingdom  as  a  refugee  by  means  which  you  knew  included
       deception" (sentencing remarks, 5th July 2007).

   23. Because that statutory defence is  only  open  to  'refugees'[5]  the
       guidance to prosecutors has,  since  its  introduction,  consistently
       been  that  these  cases  should  not  be  pursued  until  the  final
       determination of whether the accused  is  in  fact  a  refugee.   The
       reason for that is all too apparent from the chronology of this case.
       Absent a finding that he required protection, the Appellant could not
       rely upon the defence; conversely  the  conviction  appears  to  have
       played a material role in the decision to deny the Appellant the very
       protection that he  sought.   This  in  turn  has  arguably  infected
       subsequent consideration of the  Appellant's  claims:  in  July  2014
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies placed  the  Appellant's  conviction
       for deception at the forefront of his deliberations [see �24 of  that
       decision], as did the Tribunal in this instance.

   24. I am unable to say whether the s31 Adimi defence would have succeeded
       had it been argued before Croydon  Magistrates,  or  whether  on  the
       facts, it should have done[6]. What I am able to  say  is  that  this
       unfortunate chronology was clearly part and parcel  of  the  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal, and that it was clearly  relevant  to
       the global appraisal required by paragraph  390  of  the  Rules,  but
       neglected in this determination.

   25. For all of these reasons,  I  set  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal aside.   In  light  of  my  observations,  I  considered  it
       appropriate to adjourn the re-making in  order  that  the  Respondent
       would have time to consider the points I had  made  about  the  Adimi
       chronology.  I therefore directed that the Respondent should consider
       the terms of the deportation order, and paragraph 48 of  the  refusal
       letter, and to set out in writing on what basis the deportation order
       is maintained.    It is extremely unfortunate that over seven  months
       have elapsed since the initial hearing  of  this  matter,  and  those
       directions have still not been  followed.   Mr  McVeety  could  offer
       apology, but no explanation as to why. Before me he acknowledged that
       following Bah  it  was  for  me  to  determine  whether  or  not  the
       Respondent had demonstrated that the conduct  of  the  Appellant  was
       such that deportation  action  was  justified.   That  being  so,  he
       invited me to proceed to remaking  the  appeal  without  any  further
       delay.

       The Deportation Decision

   26. As I have set out above, the Appellant was  made  the  subject  of  a
       deportation order on the 17th April 2008.  That conviction arose from
       the Appellant's use of a false passport to obtain a  visa  and  enter
       the United Kingdom.

   27. The Appellant now asks that the  deportation  order  against  him  be
       revoked.

   28. I have set out the legal framework above: the relevant considerations
       are set out in Part 13 of the Immigration Rules.  The first  question
       is whether paragraph 398 applies to the Appellant. If it does, and he
       cannot bring himself within one of the  relevant  'exceptions',  then
       the presumption would be that the deportation order  should  continue
       to be enforced.

   29. I am  satisfied  that  none  of  the  alternative  provisions  within
       paragraph 398 apply.  Sub paragraph (a) does not  apply  because  the
       Appellant has not been subject to a sentence of at least 4 years. Sub
       paragraph (b) does not apply  because  the  Appellant  has  not  been
       subject to a sentence of at less than 4 years but at least 12 months.
       The only possible route by which paragraph 398 could be engaged would
       be (c):

           "(c) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the  view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused  serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law..."

   30. Mr McVeety accepted that the wording of that rule notwithstanding, in
       the context of this appeal it is in fact a matter for  this  Tribunal
       to consider whether or not the Appellant's offending caused  "serious
       harm", taking all relevant considerations into  account,  and  giving
       due weight to the  public  interest  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
       expression of where that lies: Bah applied.

   31. The Appellant was convicted of a single offence of deception, arising
       from his use of someone else's passport to facilitate  his  entry  to
       the United Kingdom in  2007.   In  Bah  the  Tribunal  directed  that
       decision makers should consider "whether  on  the  facts  established
       viewed as a whole the conduct character or associations reach such  a
       level of seriousness as to justify a  decision  to  deport",  and  in
       considering that matter:

           "the judge will  take  account  of  any  lawful  policy  of  the
           Secretary of State relevant to the exercise of the discretion to
           deport  and  whether  the  discretion  has  been  exercised   in
           accordance with that policy"

   32. Mr McVeety did not contest my conclusion that there has been in  this
       case a significant procedural impropriety  in  that  the  Appellant's
       prosecution  preceded  consideration  of  his   asylum   claim.    He
       acknowledged that the cart had been put before the horse, and that 13
       years later it would be impracticable,  if  not  impossible,  to  say
       whether the Appellant in fact had an Adimi defence (as on the  facts,
       he has consistently asserted). Mr McVeety accordingly  accepted  that
       the procedure adopted in this case was contrary to  established  Home
       Office policy, and that no consideration appears to have  been  given
       to that matter when the Secretary of  State  refused  to  revoke  the
       deportation order.  It is inevitable in these circumstances that that
       the weight to be  attached  to  the  offence  itself  -  and  to  the
       Magistrates' recommendation  -  is  considerably  reduced.     It  is
       against that background that before me the Secretary of State offered
       no submissions on whether the offending had  caused  "serious  harm".
       Having had regard to all of  the  particular  circumstances  in  this
       case, I cannot be satisfied that that test is met. Accordingly  I  am
       not satisfied that paragraph 398 of the rules has any application  to
       the Appellant's case.

   33. In these circumstances, and applying the criteria in paragraph 390  I
       am satisfied that the Deportation Order signed on the 17th April 2008
       should now be revoked.  The grounds on which the order was made,  and
       the interests of the community in maintaining  it,  now  appear  very
       dubious indeed.  The use of  fraudulent  documents  is  ordinarily  a
       serious offence but the offence must be seen in context. The  context
       here is that the Appellant used that document to obtain a  visa,  and
       to facilitate his departure from a country where he claims  his  life
       and/or liberty were at risk.   The procedural safeguards which  exist
       to ensure that it is that claim which must be considered  first  were
       ignored.  But for that error it is not possible to  say  whether  all
       that followed - the refusal of asylum,  the  deportation  order,  the
       dismissed appeals - would ever have occurred.

    Article 8

   34. The Appellant has  successfully  demonstrated  that  the  deportation
       order should be revoked. It does however remain the case that he  has
       no extant leave to remain in this country. He  seeks  such  leave  to
       remain on human rights grounds.  This is one limb  of  the  right  of
       appeal  before  me,  brought  under  s82(1)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended):

           82 Right of appeal to the Tribunal


           (1)    A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-

                (a)    the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                protection claim made by P,

                (b)    the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a  human
                rights claim made by P, or

                (c)    the Secretary of State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                protection status.

   35. The only ground of appeal open to the Appellant is that  set  out  at
       s84 (2): "an appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of  human  rights
       claim) must be brought on the ground that the  decision  is  unlawful
       under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998".

   36. Section 6(1) of the HRA 1998 provides that  "it  is  unlawful  for  a
       public authority to act  in  a  way  which  is  incompatible  with  a
       Convention right".  The 'act' with which I am concerned  is  not  the
       decision to deport. The 'act',  as  s82(1)(b)  makes  clear,  is  the
       decision to refuse a human rights claim.

   37. I therefore proceed to consider the Appellant's 'human rights  claim'
       in light of what might be termed  the  residual  public  interest  in
       refusing him leave: the fact that he never, since  the  day  that  he
       arrived in 2008, had leave to be in this country. That  is  a  matter
       that  must  be  weighed  in  the   balance:   s117B(1)   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as does the fact that the  Appellant
       is  not  financially  independent.   As  Mr   McVeety   realistically
       accepted, none of that, and indeed any other  factor  highlighted  in
       s117B, will in fact be of any relevance in a case where the Appellant
       is accepted to have a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
       with a qualifying child, and it is not 'reasonable'  to  accept  that
       child to leave: s117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
       applied. This was in fact the unchallenged finding of the  First-tier
       Tribunal: for the avoidance of doubt it was a finding well made.  The
       child in question has two younger siblings, one of  whom  is  British
       and cannot be expected to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  either  as  a
       matter of law or practicality, since her father remains here  and  as
       far as I am aware has no intention of relocating to the DRC. It would
       not by any measure be 'reasonable' to  split  these  sisters  up.  It
       would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's eldest daughter  to
       leave the United Kingdom. Applying KO (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53  it
       follows that the public interest does  not  require  the  Appellant's
       removal.

   38. The appeal is therefore allowed on human rights grounds.

       Protection

   39. Before me Mr Khan pursued two discrete claims for protection.

   40. The first related to  the  unchallenged  finding  of  fact  that  the
       Appellant left the DRC on a passport to which he  was  not  entitled.
       That passport, in the name of Kapesa Ngombi, is said to have  been  a
       diplomatic passport.  Mr Khan relied  upon  the  decision  in  BM  to
       submit that this factor in itself could place the Appellant at a real
       risk of harm.

   41. I have had regard to the following:

         . BM & Other (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015]
           UKUT 00293 (IAC)

         . BM (false passport) DCR [2015] UKUT 00467 (IAC)

         . The updated Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  Democratic
           Republic of Congo: Unsuccessful asylum seekers (January 2020)

   42. The part of BM (returnees) that Mr Khan relied upon is this:

           The DRC  authorities  have  an  interest  in  certain  types  of
           convicted  or  suspected  offenders,  namely  those   who   have
           unexecuted prison sentences in the DRC or  in  respect  of  whom
           there are unexecuted arrest warrants in the DRC or who allegedly
           committed an offence, such as document fraud, when departing the
           DRC.  Such persons are at real risk of imprisonment for  lengthy
           periods and, hence, of treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

   43. As I have alluded to above, however, this was  not  the  end  of  the
       matter. The Tribunal followed that guidance with BM (false  passport)
       which clarified the position:

           The mere fact that an asylum claimant utilised a false  passport
           or kindred document in departing the DRC will not  without  more
           engage the risk category specified in [119(iv)] of BM and Others
           (Returnees: Criminal and Non-Criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293  (IAC).
           The application of this guidance will be dependent upon the fact
           sensitive context of the  individual  case.  The  Tribunal  will
           consider, inter alia, the likely state of knowledge of  the  DRC
           authorities pertaining to  the  person  in  question.  A  person
           claiming to belong to any of the risk categories will not be  at
           risk of persecution unless likely to come to  the  attention  of
           the DRC authorities. Thus in every case there will be an intense
           focus on  matters  such  as  publicity,  individual  prominence,
           possession of a passport, the standard emergency travel document
           arrangements (where these apply) and how these matters impact on
           the individual claimant.

   44. There was no credible evidence placed before me to indicate that  the
       Congolese authorities knew or have become aware  that  the  Appellant
       used the false passport. Accordingly I am satisfied that no  risk  of
       harm can be said to arise.  My conclusion is reinforced by  the  most
       recent evidence on the matter, produced at 9.2.3 of  the  CPIN  which
       indicates that EASO is not aware of any evidence to indicate that the
       DRC authorities would have any means of knowing that someone had used
       a false instrument in this way.

   45. The second basis upon which Mr Khan advanced a protection  claim  was
       that the Appellant has, over the course  of  approximately  the  past
       year, been involved with Congolese opposition group APARECO. I  heard
       evidence  from  both  the  Appellant  and  his  comrade   from   that
       organisation  Mr  Angbakadolo.  They  consistently  stated  that  the
       Appellant has become involved because  he  has  become  disillusioned
       with the opposition groups that formerly  held  his  allegiance,  not
       least because the leader of one is now seen as a 'collaborator'  with
       the Kinshasa government.  APARECO campaign for human rights in  Congo
       and against the complicity in, and  cover  up  of,  genocide  in  the
       region.   A recent campaign has concerned the DRC government's  grant
       of immunity to genocidaires from Rwanda.  A lot of people are  really
       upset about that. I was told that the Appellant belongs to  Liverpool
       branch.  He has attended one demonstration outside the DRC embassy in
       London and  another  two  elsewhere.  He  helped  to  organise  these
       protests as part of a team.

   46. I see no reason to reject the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  is  a
       member of APARECO. It is  consistent  with,  and  supported  by,  the
       evidence of  Mr  Angbakadolo.   I  have  applied  those  findings  to
       'country guidance' given by the Upper Tribunal in BM (returnees):

           "A national of the  DRC   who  has  a  significant  and  visible
           profile within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning to his
           country of origin, at real risk of persecution for a  Convention
           reason or serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR
           by  virtue  of  falling  within  one  of  the  risk   categories
           identified by the Upper Tribunal in MM (UDPS Members -  Risk  on
           Return) Democratic Republic of  Congo  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00023.
           Those belonging to this category include persons who are, or are
           perceived to be, leaders, office bearers or spokespersons.  As a
           general rule, mere rank and file members are  unlikely  to  fall
           within this category. However, each case will be fact sensitive,
           with particular attention directed to the likely  knowledge  and
           perceptions of DRC state agents".

   47. Having applied that  guidance  I  am  unable  to  conclude  that  the
       Appellant is someone who is at any risk.  He  is  not  a  leader,  an
       office-bearer or a spokesperson. He has been a member for  about  one
       year and has attended three protests, as  well  as  meetings  of  his
       local branch.   There is nothing before  me  to  suggest  that  these
       limited activities would have come to the attention of the  Congolese
       authorities. Nor is there any reason to  believe  that  he  would  be
       considered to be an activist.

   48. It follows that the  protection  claim  must  fail  on  each  of  the
       alternative limbs upon which it was advanced.

       Anonymity

   49. The Appellant's case rests in part on  the  presence  in  the  United
       Kingdom of his two children. As such  I  am  satisfied,   having  had
       regard to the guidance in the Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  of
       2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would be appropriate to make an order
       in accordance with Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
       Rules 2008 in the following terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  both  the
           Appellant and the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

       Decisions

   50. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   51. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

       "The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

       The appeal is dismissed on protection grounds"

   52. There is an order for anonymity.

                                                                       [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          14th February 2020

                                                     -----------------------
[1] Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT
00702
[2] The decision of Immigration Judge RA Price dated the 19th September
2007, and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies dated 7th July
2014
[3] Section 117D Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
[4] R (ex parte) Adimi (FC) v Uxbridge Magistrates Court [1999] EWHC Admin
765
[5] s31(6) Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.
[6] The persistent failure of the CPS and courts to recognise that section
31 exists, or that it reflects the UKs international obligations under
Article 31 of the Refugee Convention has been subject of commentary by both
academia and the higher courts: see for instance article by Aliverti, A at
https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/research-subject-groups/centre-
criminology/centreborder-criminologies/blog/2017/03/prosecuting and the
decision of the Court of Appeal in Mateta [2013] EWCA Crim 1372.

