

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18530/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons promulgated   |
|by way of a telephone hearing.            |                                 |
|on 24 October 2017                        |on 27 October 2017               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     OMA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Sood, instructed by 1st Call Immigration
                    Services, on the telephone.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    present before the Tribunal.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        PJM Hollingworth promulgated on 21 July 2017  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
     2. The matter was listed for  an  Initial  hearing  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal sitting at the Employment Tribunal  in  Birmingham  on  24
        October 2017. Notices were sent out on 15  September  2017.  On  18
        October 2017, the applicant's representatives contacted  the  Upper
        Tribunal referring  to  two  appeals  in  which  they  stated  they
        represented  their  client  and  whose  cases  had   been   handled
        previously by Mrs Usha Sood, Counsel. Enquiries revealed  that  one
        of the cases was listed for hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
        in Nottingham whereas those with the above  reference  number  were
        listed in Birmingham. The representatives  indicated  that  it  had
        only just come  to  their  attention,  due  to  the  absence  of  a
        caseworker following his mother's death, that  the  two  cases  had
        been listed on the same day into different court rooms.
     3. It is not just a listing into two  different  court  rooms  but  to
        different cities within the Midlands and  to  completely  different
        Tribunals which appears to have  escaped  the  attention  of  those
        instructed, until this communication was sent.
     4. It is not known when Mrs Sood received her brief in respect of  the
        two hearings that would clearly have indicated to both  the  author
        of the documents and Mrs Sood the nature of the logistical problems
        that would be faced.
     5. The request by  the  representatives  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
        consider moving one of the appeal locations to allow the  cases  to
        be heard in the same centre is, frankly, ridiculous. Not  only  are
        hearings not listed for the convenience of  advocates  but  whoever
        made that request appears to fail to understand the reality of  the
        request they are making. Mrs Sood is based in Nottingham and a case
        in the Upper Tribunal  cannot  be  transferred  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal for that tribunal to hear both cases. It was not made  out
        it is appropriate to send an Upper Tribunal judge to Nottingham for
        the convenience of a representative in the  circumstances  of  this
        case.
     6. The request was refused by a Duty Judge on 20 October 2018  on  the
        basis the conflict of dates would have been known and that  no  re-
        adequate reason had been  given  for  why  alternative  immigration
        counsel  could  not  be  instructed  bearing  in  mind   there   is
        immigration bar in both Nottingham and Birmingham. The  Duty  Judge
        advised the representative that if Mrs  Sood  arrived  promptly  at
        Birmingham the Upper Tribunal had no objection to hearing the  case
        first at 10.00am, or earlier if the respondent was also present, to
        try and assist as far as reasonably practicable.
     7. It appears that what may then have happened is that the appellant's
        representatives telephoned the  Upper  Tribunal  Administration  to
        ascertain whether the case could be moved to be heard later in  the
        day. It appears, without consulting the judge responsible  for  the
        list on the day, that an indication was given that  this  could  be
        arranged.
     8. The business of the Upper Tribunal in relation to the  other  cases
        listed for hearing on 24 October 2017 was concluded by mid-morning.
        As it was not known when Mrs Sood would be able to  attend  it  was
        canvassed with Mr Mills, who was present in court, whether he would
        have any objection to the Tribunal  exploring  the  possibility  of
        whether the hearing could proceed by way  of  a  telephone  hearing
        with Mrs Sood making submissions from Nottingham on the  telephone.
        Mr Mills did not object as a result of  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
        contacted Mrs Sood's clerk asking him to canvass  the  matter  with
        Mrs Sood who, at that time, was on her feet before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.  Details  were  provided  for  contact  with  the   clerk
        assisting the Upper Tribunal. Mrs Sood agreed as a result of  which
        appropriate arrangements were made for telephone  communication  to
        be established at 12:30 PM.
     9. A good telephone  line  existed  allowing  for  clear  simultaneous
        communication. At the outset of the  hearing  Mrs  Sood  was  asked
        whether she had any objection to proceeding and making  submissions
        relating to the making and of an error of law in this way, to which
        she  had  no  objection.  The  hearing  therefore  proceeded   with
        submissions being made in relation to the making of an error of law
        in relation to which no communication problems were experienced.
    10. At the conclusion of the hearing the decision was reserved



Background


    11. The appellant, a national of Nigeria, born on 7 July 1970, appealed
        against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue  a  Derivative
        Residence Card to him (the  'EEA  decision')  and  the  respondents
        rejection of his application made on human rights  grounds  on  the
        basis of a claimed exception set out in the UK Borders Act 2007  to
        the appellant's deportation from the United Kingdom.
    12. The appellant pleaded guilty to  9  offences  committed  by  giving
        false identities in order to remain in the United Kingdom, to which
        he was not entitled, and which he used to obtain work. The offences
        occurred from May 1995  until  2013  according  to  the  sentencing
        remarks of His Honour Judge Graham sitting in the  Crown  Court  at
        Basildon on 2 January 2013. The  appellant  was  convicted  on  his
        guilty plea and sentenced to concurrent prison sentences  totalling
        18 months imprisonment in all. The respondent sought to deport  the
        appellant from the United Kingdom  as  a  result  of  his  criminal
        conduct.
    13. On 20 April 2015, the appellant applied for a Derivative  Residence
        Card on the basis that he is a third country national upon  whom  a
        British Citizen is dependent in the United Kingdom on the basis  of
        the Court of Justice of the European Union (ECJ) judgement  in  the
        case of Ruiz Zambrano. The application was  refused  on  28  August
        2015 on the basis that taking account of the  appellant's  personal
        conduct, with  specific  reference  to  what  is  described  as  an
        extensive criminal record and level of offending said to be a clear
        indicator of a propensity to reoffend,  the  appellant's  continued
        presence in the United Kingdom was  not  conducive  to  the  public
        good; as a  result  of  which  the  application  for  a  derivative
        residence card was refused by reference to regulation 21A(3)(a)  of
        the Regulations.
    14. The above reference numbers relate to the  appeals  issued  by  the
        appellant challenging the two decisions.
    15.  Having  considered  the  evidence  submitted  in  both  oral   and
        documentary form the Judge noted  the  appellant's  wife  had  been
        issued a residence permit although at that time did  not  work  but
        was looking for work.
    16. Whilst the decision does not contain a specific  paragraph  heading
        'findings' which may have assisted, the findings of the  Judge  can
        be gleaned when considering  the  decision  as  a  whole.  Relevant
        findings can be summarised in the following terms:


                  a. That the best interests of the children are  to  remain
                     with both their parents and to  remain  in  the  United
                     Kingdom. It will be highly detrimental for the children
                     to go to live in Nigeria. It is clear it is in J's best
                     interests to remain  with  his  parents  and  with  his
                     siblings [40].
                  b. The relationship between the appellant and his children
                     was accepted by the respondent [44].
                  c. The Judge accepted all the medical  evidence  submitted
                     in relation to J [45]. That medical  evidence  supports
                     the conclusion it is in J's best interests to remain in
                     the United Kingdom in order to avoid any  deterioration
                     in his medical condition [46].
                  d. Certificates  of  convictions  have  been  provided  in
                     relation to the appellant [47 - 49].
                  e. At [51] the Judge writes:


                      51.  I find that the appellant  has  engaged  in  the
                           entirely  cynical  use  of   unauthorised   entry
                           together with false  documentation  in  order  to
                           lead  his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                           substantial period of time without any permission
                           to do so. I find the conduct of the appellant  in
                           this respect, further illustrated by his criminal
                           convictions,   to   illustrate    the    complete
                           undermining of the principle of  the  maintenance
                           of effective immigration  controls.  I  find  the
                           criminal conduct of the appellant as reflected in
                           his period of imprisonment of four years, coupled
                           with a confiscation order in the sum of �130,000,
                           to  reflect  the  gravity  of  his  offending  in
                           relation to tax  credits.  The  amount  of  money
                           involved demonstrates  serious  implications  for
                           the public purse.


                  f. It would be unduly harsh for the  appellant's  children
                     to live in Nigeria which is  not  a  course  of  action
                     their mother wishes to pursue. There  was  disagreement
                     between the appellant and  his  wife  in  this  respect
                     [52].
                  g. There is an "extremely  significant"  level  of  public
                     interest in the deportation of the appellant  based  on
                     the  level  of  criminality  in  conjunction  with  his
                     immigration history. The best interests of the children
                     are a primary consideration. The question at  issue  is
                     whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
                     and above undue  harshness  for  the  children  if  the
                     appellant were to be removed [53].
                  h. The relationship between the appellant and his wife was
                     formed at a time the appellant was not  in  the  United
                     Kingdom lawfully [54].
                  i. The Judge did not find it  had  been  established  that
                     there are very compelling circumstances over and  above
                     those set out in paragraph 399 [54].
                  j. Medical services available to the child J are such that
                     the appellant's presence is not required in the  United
                     Kingdom to share responsibility with his wife  for  the
                     day-to-day care of J [55].
                  k. The appellant has provided joint care with his wife for
                     the children within the United Kingdom [56].
                  l. The respondent  has  granted  the  appellant's  wife  a
                     residence card which  the  Judge  found  confirmed  the
                     children would not be removed as dependants. The  Judge
                     notes the appellant's advocate submission that  is  the
                     appellant has full  parental  responsibility  over  the
                     children but will not be able to exercise it if  he  is
                     removed [57].
                  m. The appellant's offending is serious and that whilst he
                     has not reoffended the Judge sets out the nature of the
                     gravity of his  offending  and  its  consequences.  The
                     appellant has committed such serious offences that  the
                     consequences are such that  the  level  of  the  public
                     interest requiring his removal is justified [58].
                  n. The actions of the appellant in relation to the use  of
                     a  false  passport  document   fully   vindicates   the
                     description of the appellant's behaviour as cynical and
                     undermining the effectiveness of UK immigration control
                     [60].
                  o. The Judges considered the effect of the  disruption  of
                     the family unit upon the children [61].
                  p.  The  appellant  has  failed  to  establish  that  very
                     compelling  circumstances  exist  over  and  above  the
                     exceptions to deportation [62].
                  q. The level of public interest outweighs the splitting up
                     of the family.  The  requirements  of  the  Immigration
                     Rules  have  not  been  satisfied.  It  has  not   been
                     demonstrated that compelling circumstances exist  which
                     would enable the Judge to consider whether there  would
                     be a breach of Article 8 outside the Rules [63].
                  r. In relation to the appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
                     residence card, the appeal is also  dismissed  for  the
                     reasons set out in the respondent's refusal [64].


    17. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the operative part  which
        is in the following terms:


             3.   The grounds for this application are not clear or precise
                  as to the alleged error (s) of law. The grounds indicate a
                  lack of findings on material matters relating to  the  EEA
                  appeal. They also indicate a failure to consider  material
                  evidence  in  relation  to  the   human   rights   appeal.
                  Notwithstanding the lack of clarity in the  grounds  I  am
                  satisfied  that  they  and  the  content  of  the  judge's
                  decision do  raise  arguable  errors  of  law  capable  of
                  affecting the outcome.









Grounds and submissions



    18. The grounds on which the appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal,
        dated 3 August 2017 and drafted by Mrs Sood, appear  to  raise  the
        following issues:


                  a. The wife's evidence was that if the appellant  were  to
                     be removed neither she/the children would go  with  the
                     appellant, and as the appellant's evidence had  already
                     been  heard,  this  could  not  be  properly   pursued.
                     Judicial  management  failed  to   adjourn   or   allow
                     additional evidence on this  critical  legal  issue  of
                     whether the children could be removed, given that  each
                     has joint parental responsibility. Section  13  of  the
                     Children Act  1989  prohibits  any  child  leaving  the
                     jurisdiction with one parent, without  the  consent  of
                     the  other  parent  with  parental  responsibility,  or
                     without a court order [4].
                  b.  The  respondent's  public  policy  considerations   in
                     relation to deportation cannot be held  to  dispose  of
                     the legal issues raised  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
                     argument which sites Sanade, CA and  UK  and  submitted
                     that Ruiz Zambrano derived rights of residence under EU
                     law not automatically lost if a crime is committed, but
                     the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not  deal  with  the
                     conflicting arguments between the parties  as  to  this
                     [5].
                  c. The reality and the principle of these children needing
                     both parents was emphasised,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                     Judge accepts that the youngest  child  J  has  a  rare
                     incurable condition and all accepted that the appellant
                     is in a genuine subsisting parental  relationship  with
                     his  children.  The  importance  of  keeping   families
                     together was reiterated in the skeleton  argument,  the
                     First-tier Tribunal accepted the expert report  of  the
                     education specialist and the consequences of disruption
                     of education  and  acknowledges  the  Testamentary  and
                     Spiritual Guardianship agreement, but asserts the First-
                     tier Tribunal does not explicitly deal with the effects
                     on the family if the father were no longer there  [6  -
                     10].
                  d.  Deportation  cannot  be  proportionate.  The  fact  of
                     creating a fatherless one  parent  household  dependant
                     upon benefits is  compelling  to  prevent  deportation.
                     There will  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with
                     relationships. There has been a fundamental failure  to
                     consider the effect of disruption on  the  family  unit
                     upon  the  children  and  the  Judge  has  without  any
                     extensive best interest analysis as to the  consequence
                     of the split decided that the past offending and public
                     detriment from the crime outweighs any public  interest
                     in the family staying together [11].


    19. The reference in the pleaded grounds to the decision of  the  Court
        of Appeal in R (on the application of OO) (Nigeria) v Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 338 appears  to  have
        no arguable merit, it  being  a  challenge  to  a  judicial  review
        decision in relation to which a separate test is applied on  public
        law grounds to a review and not on an appeal  basis,  and  relating
        specifically to the impact of temporary removal pursuant to section
        94B of the 2002 Act pending the pursuit  and  determination  of  an
        appeal. Findings made by the Court in relation to  that  aspect  do
        not appear to assist in establishing arguable legal error  material
        to the decision in this case.
    20.  It  was  submitted  the  Judge  failed  to  carry  out  a   proper
        proportionality assessment focusing in particular on J  when  there
        were a number of other children.



Error of law


    21. Reference was made by Mr Mills to the  background  of  this  appeal
        which is very relevant to assessing the merits  of  the  challenge.
        There were initially two decisions and  two  appeals.  One  of  the
        children, born in United Kingdom, was aged 10 and  so  eligible  to
        apply for British citizenship and made that application  which  was
        granted. As a result, the child  could  not  be  removed  from  the
        territory of the European Union which gave rise to a  claim  for  a
        derivative  right  of  residence  following  the  decision  of  the
        European courts in Zambrano.
    22. On 15th September both applications (of the appellant and his wife)
        were refused citing criminal offences committed  by  the  appellant
        and his  wife  who  herself  received  a  sentence  of  six  months
        imprisonment. It is not disputed that an application can be refused
        on the basis of the applicant's criminality.
    23. At an earlier CMR hearing Mr Mills brought to the attention of  the
        First-tier Tribunal the decision of the Court  of  Justice  of  the
        European Union in CS (Morocco). On 7 April 2017, the Upper Tribunal
        delivered its error of law determination in Secretary of State  for
        the Home Department v. CS. In so doing, it is  the  first  case  to
        consider the application in domestic law of  the  judgment  of  the
        CJEU Grand Chamber  on  its  earlier  reference  in  Case  C-304/14
        Secretary of State for the Home Department v. CS [2017] 2  WLR  180
        (linked to Case C-165/14 Rendon Marin v. Administracion del  Estado
        [2017] 2 WLR 117. Both cases raised  the  question  whether  it  is
        permissible to derogate from citizenship rights under Article 20 of
        the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, as interpreted
        in Case C-34/09 Zambrano,  in  situations  where  a  third  country
        national parent of an EU citizen child engages in criminal conduct.
    24. The Court accepted the position of the  United  Kingdom  Government
        that it is possible, in principle, to derogate  from  such  rights.
        The test to be applied in such circumstances is whether the measure
        in question is founded on the existence of a genuine,  present  and
        sufficiently serious threat to the requirements of public policy or
        public security. This  is  a  question  for  determination  by  the
        national court. The  national  court  must  carry  out  a  specific
        assessment of all the current and  relevant  circumstances  of  the
        case, in the light of the  principle  of  proportionality,  of  the
        child's best interests and of fundamental rights.  That  assessment
        must take account in particular of  the  personal  conduct  of  the
        individual concerned, the length and legality of his  residence  on
        the territory of the Member State concerned, the nature and gravity
        of the offence committed, the extent to which the person  concerned
        is currently a danger to society, the age of the child at issue and
        his state of health, as well as his economic and family situation.
    25. The Tribunal considered the application in domestic  law  of  those
        tests. It was argued by  the  respondent,  CS,  that  the  domestic
        regime of automatic deportation was incompatible  with  EU  law  in
        such cases. The Tribunal rejected that argument. It  also  rejected
        the argument that the Secretary of State could rely solely  on  the
        existence of past  criminal  conduct  in  order  to  demonstrate  a
        genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat. In so  doing,  it
        gave important  guidance  on  the  continuing  application  of  the
        principle in Case 30/77 R v. Bouchereau [1978] 1 QB 732. The  Upper
        Tribunal found that the original First-tier Tribunal  determination
        was flawed by a series of errors of law. It set it aside.
    26. It was accepted by Mr Mills that the decision as  originally  drawn
        was unlawful as a result of which  the  hearing  was  adjourned  to
        allow the respondent to issue a supplementary decision;  which  was
        that before the First-tier Tribunal dated January  2017  and  which
        dealt with the CS (Morocco) points.
    27. The Secretary of State as part of the further  assessment  conceded
        the wife's claim as a result of which she was granted a  derivative
        residence card as per the decision in  Zambrano.  This  meant  that
        both the appellant's wife and the children were able to  remain  in
        the United Kingdom with no danger to  the  children  of  having  to
        leave the territory of the United Kingdom  and  no  danger  of  the
        children losing all their primary carers.
    28. It was submitted following the grant of a  residence  card  to  the
        children's mother that any application by the above-named appellant
        to remain on the basis of the derived residence card would fail, as
        the children would not as a result of the  decision  challenged  by
        the above appellant, be required to  leave  the  territory  of  the
        European Union.
    29. The appellant arguably fails to establish this line of argument  is
        wrong in law.
    30. Mr Mills also placed reliance upon the decision  of  the  Court  of
        Appeal in the case of Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
        and VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255. This is the case in which the
        Secretary of State formally withdrew an earlier concession made  in
        Sanade which the Court of Appeal agreed was an approach that should
        not be followed. Specific reference is made by Mr Mills to [60]  of
        that decision in which the Court of Appeal state:


             60.  On this reasoning, VM has no claim to remain in the UK as
                  a result of the citizenship rights in EU law of  his  wife
                  and children. If he is deported to  Jamaica,  KB  and  the
                  children (with KB deciding for them) will face a difficult
                  choice whether to relocate there with him or remain in the
                  UK without him. But the fact that they will be  confronted
                  with that choice, and might in practice feel compelled  to
                  go with him, does not engage EU  rights  in  a  way  which
                  creates a right under EU law for VM to remain in  the  UK.
                  As this Court held in FZ (China) v Secretary of State  the
                  Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 550, following Dereci  and
                  the decision in O, S and L (at Paras [42] -  [44]  of  the
                  Advocate Generals Opinion and para [56] of the judgement),
                  "the critical question  is  whether  there  is  an  entire
                  dependency of the relevant children on the person who  was
                  refused a residence permit or who is being deported"  (see
                  para [14] - [19]). In the present case there is no "entire
                  dependency" of AB, KSM and KDM on  VM,  in  the  requisite
                  sense, because they could remain  in  the  UK  with  their
                  mother, KB, who as a British citizen herself has  a  right
                  to be here.


    31. The appellant cannot sustain an argument that he  can  satisfy  the
        "entire dependency test" as his wife and the children's mother have
        shared care and she has been granted leave to remain to continue to
        provide care.
    32. In VM (Jamaica), it was accepted that the parents of  the  relevant
        children also had joint custody. As in that case this is a case  in
        which the remaining parent who shared custody with  the  children's
        father will take over sole care and custody of the children.
    33. I find no arguable error material to the decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal under the EEA Regulations  made  out  in  relation  to  this
        matter.
    34. In relation to the dismissal of the appeal against the  application
        for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds;  no  arguable  legal
        error is made out. A reading of the grounds indicates  disagreement
        with the conclusions of the Judge. The assertion the  Judge  failed
        to properly undertake a balancing exercise has no  arguable  merit.
        The Judge clearly considered the competing interests  and  balanced
        the same against each other,  before  concluding  that  the  public
        interest  that  exists  in  this  case  warranted  the  appellant's
        deportation from the United Kingdom even if that  resulted  in  the
        separation of the appellant from the family unit.
    35. The assertion the Judge focused solely upon J  and  not  the  other
        children has no arguable merit.  Clearly the Judge was aware of the
        composition of the family unit and refers to the same. A lot of the
        evidence focused upon J  and  his  needs  which  is  why  there  is
        specific reference to them in the decision under challenge.
    36. The assertion the Judge failed to take into account the  impact  of
        separation upon the family has no arguable merit. A  Judge  is  not
        required to set out findings in relation to each and  every  aspect
        of the case and it is clear from reading the determination that the
        Judge considered all the evidence made available  as  part  of  the
        assessment of the merits of the appeal.
    37. This is not a decision made on the grounds of public  revulsion  in
        relation to the EEA aspect.
    38. Mrs Sood relied upon the Childrens Act 1989 - The  main  principles
        and provisions embodied in this legislation are that:


        .    the welfare of children must be  the  paramount  consideration
           when the courts are making decisions about them;
        .    the concept of parental responsibility has  replaced  that  of
           parental rights;
        .    children have the ability to be parties, separate  from  their
           parents, in legal proceedings;
        .    local authorities are charged with duties to identify children
           in need and to safeguard and promote their welfare;
        .    certain duties and powers are conferred upon local authorities
           to provide services for children and families;
        .    a checklist of factors must be considered by the courts before
           reaching decisions;
        .    orders under this Act should not be  made  unless  it  can  be
           shown that this is better for  the  child  than  not  making  an
           order;
        .    delay in deciding questions concerning children is  likely  to
           prejudice their welfare.


    39. Section 1 states that when a court  determines  any  question  with
        respect to-
        (a) the upbringing of a child;  or  (b)  the  administration  of  a
        child's property or the application of any income arising from  it,
        the child's welfare shall be the court's paramount consideration.
    40. Section 1(4) states if a court is considering whether to make, vary
        or discharge a section  8  order,  and  the  making,  variation  or
        discharge of the order is opposed by any party to the  proceedings;
        or the court is considering whether to make, vary or discharge [F2a
        special guardianship order or]  an  order  under  Part  IV  certain
        procedural stapes must be taken.
    41. The appellant argues that a child cannot be removed from the United
        Kingdom without the consent of  both  parents  which  is  factually
        correct. Even if there is a  dispute  between  the  parents  as  to
        whether the children will accompany the appellant to Nigeria or not
        the appellant cannot unilaterally withdraw the  children  and  take
        them with him. The thrust of the appeal against the refusal of  the
        derived residence card is the argument that the children should  be
        permitted to stay in the territory of the European Union. It sounds
        disingenuous when arguing against the refusal of the residence card
        to claim that the children must stay in the United Kingdom and  any
        attempt to remove them is unlawful yet  to  claim  in  relation  to
        other aspects of the appeal that there is  a  likelihood  that  the
        children may be removed. The evidence clearly shows  that  children
        are going to remain in the United Kingdom and there are  no  orders
        in force granting permission to either parent to remove  them  from
        the jurisdiction.
    42. The appellant retains his shared parental responsibility and it has
        not been made out he needs to be physically in the UK  to  exercise
        the same.
    43. In relation to the Childrens Act, Mrs Sood  was  asked  during  the
        course  of  her  submissions  for  her  authority  supporting   the
        proposition that the Childrens Act 1989 should have been taken into
        account by the Judge as part of the  decision-making  process.  The
        above text relating to this act shows  that  the  act  has  a  very
        specific purpose of  codifying  previous  law  in  the  public  and
        private children sphere and  to  provide  the  mechanism  by  which
        disputes relating to  children  should  be  resolved.   The  matter
        before the Judge was not an application to resolve an  issue  about
        the children. There were no arguable issues arising  regarding  the
        children's standing or status or their welfare and no  applications
        had been had been made pursuant to the Childrens Act.
    44. The welfare principles, making the  best  interests  of  the  child
        paramount, reflects the principles considered  by  the  Judge  when
        assessing the best interests of the children.  No arguable error is
        made out in relation to the same.
    45. Mere disagreement with the outcome or desire for a more  favourable
        result does not establish arguable legal error. On the basis of the
        information made available to the Judge it is not being  shown  the
        outcome of the proportionality balancing exercise  is  in  any  way
        arguably perverse, irrational, or contrary to the evidence.


Decision

    46. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    47. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to  protect  the  identity  of  the
        children.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 26 October 2017












