
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/18964/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 May 2021                     |On 03 June 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     D R

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr S Jaisri of Counsel, instructed by Sam Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is a Nepalese national with date of birth  given  as
    10.11.88, has appealed with permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  13.1.21  (Judge
    McLaren), dismissing on all grounds her appeal against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State, dated 15.8.19, to refuse  her  application  for
    entry clearance as the adult dependent relative of a former Gurkha  now
    settled in the UK.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Loke) on 1.3.21, on the basis that the grounds are arguable. "The judge
    makes reference to 'complete financial dependency' at [33] which is not
    the test, and while he accepts that there is some financial  dependency
    the judge arguably fails  to  consider  whether  it  is  effective  and
    committed support. Furthermore, it is  arguable  the  judge  failed  to
    properly consider the provisions of Annex K and the weight to be  given
    to the historic injustice when finding at  [36]  that  bonds  over  and
    above normal loving ties were required."

 3. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 5.3.21, submits that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge directed himself appropriately. The point  is  made
    that whilst there was evidence  of  some  financial  support  from  the
    appellant's mother, "without evidence of the appellant's outgoings  the
    judge would not be in a position to  evidentially  assess  whether  the
    support was real, committed and effective. This lacuna in evidence also
    extended to the emotional dependency that the appellant stated  existed
    between herself  and  her  mother  (Determination  [33]).  It  will  be
    submitted that whilst it was an error for  the  judge  to  stated  that
    complete financial dependency was required, the error is  not  material
    given his finding that there was no evidence to indicate the  level  of
    support  that  the  appellant  was  receiving  either  financially   or
    emotionally."

 5. At [33] the judge accepted that the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  the
    appellant's mother and widow of a former Gurkha soldier, enjoyed family
    life together prior to the sponsor's relocation  to  the  UK  in  2019.
    However, the judge considered that the evidence  as  to  emotional  and
    financial dependency was inadequate and at [36] that the appellant  and
    the sponsor did not enjoy "closer bonds that then normal loving ties to
    be found between an adult child and her mother."

 6. Given that the judge found that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellant and her sponsoring mother up  to  and  including  immediately
    prior to the latter's relocation to the UK, and that both  had  applied
    together to come to the UK, as Mr McVeety conceded, it is difficult  to
    see on what basis the  appeal  should  not  have  been  allowed.  I  am
    satisfied that, as the respondent has conceded, the judge was in  error
    to seek evidence of  "complete  financial  dependency"  and  failed  to
    properly take into account the historic injustice element. Effectively,
    the judge found that family life was not present and ceased the  Razgar
    stepped approach at that point. The judge was in error. The family life
    requirement was present, with continuing  financial  support  from  the
    sponsor demonstrating  that  ties  were  maintained.  As  the  historic
    injustice element satisfies  the  public  interest  in  the  article  8
    proportionality  balancing  exercise,  the  appeal  should  have   been
    allowed. Mr McVeety  did  not  resist  the  remaking  of  the  decision
    immediately by allowing the appeal.

 7. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find  such
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  to  require
    it to be set aside. There is no purpose in rehearing the appeal  as  on
    the facts found by the First-tier Tribunal the appeal must be allowed.



Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it on  Article  8  ECHR
    human rights grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       24 May 2021

