
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18036/2018
                                                               HU/18038/2018
                                                               HU/18042/2018
                                                               HU/18044/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2019                   |On 11 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                               NA, SB, YS, YA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Hussain, Solicitor, Hubers Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 6 September 2019, I found that a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stuart promulgated  on  14  May  2019
    involved the making of an error of law and set it aside,  with  certain
    findings of fact preserved. That decision may be found in the Annex  to
    this decision.  On 17 October 2019, I reheard the matter, to  determine
    the best interests of the two child appellants, and to consider whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the  third  appellant,  a  "qualifying
    child" (see below), to leave the United Kingdom.

Factual background

 2. The full factual background is set out in my  error  of  law  decision.
    Briefly, the appellants are all citizens of Bangladesh. The  first  two
    appellants are husband and wife. The third and  fourth  appellants  are
    their sons; AS, born on 21 July 2010, and YA, born on 19 October  2017.
    The first appellant (husband, father) entered as a visitor in 2005  and
    has remained here since. The second appellant (wife, mother) entered as
    a student in 2009, leave valid until 2012. She too  has  remained  here
    since. Their two children were born here and have only  known  life  in
    the United Kingdom.  The judge reached a number of  findings  of  fact,
    which I shall set out below, relating to the likely  circumstances  the
    family would face upon their return to Bangladesh, the medical needs of
    the third appellant, the linguistic skills of  the  children,  and  the
    overall family circumstances.

 3. I found that the judge's analysis of the best interests of the children
    contradicted itself; at [44], the judge appeared to  conclude  that  it
    would not be "unreasonable to expect the [third appellant] to  relocate
    with his parents to the country of their nationality and  culture."  By
    contrast, at [48], the judge said that, "the children's best  interests
    are to remain in the UK where they benefit  from  a  good  standard  of
    education, medical, social and financial support..." These  contrasting
    findings made difficult to understand the later basis  upon  which  the
    judge was to find that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom,  for  the  purposes  of  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 4. In addition, when assessing the question of "reasonableness" the  judge
    said at [53], "the conduct and  adverse  immigration  history  [of  the
    parents] is relevant to the assessment of the public  interest..."  The
    judge  appeared,  therefore,  to  have  ascribed  significance  to  the
    immigration misconduct of both parents when determining the question of
    reasonableness, which was an error of law: see KO (Nigeria) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

 5. Having preserved the findings of fact reached by the judge, I  directed
    that the matter be retained in the Upper Tribunal for consideration  of
    the best interests of the children, and to determine whether  it  would
    be reasonable to  expect  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, for the  purposes  of  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

Legal framework

 6. This appeal was brought under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The essential issue for my consideration is  whether  it
    would  be  proportionate  under  the  terms  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention for the appellants to be removed, in the light of the family
    and private life they claim to have established here.  In  the  present
    matter, the primary remaining public interest consideration is that set
    out in section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 7. Section 117B(6) provides:

           "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

 8. As the third appellant has resided here for more than seven  years,  he
    is a "qualifying child": see section 117D(1).

 9. It is settled law that the best interests of the child  are  a  primary
    consideration when considering whether removal of  an  appellant  under
    Article 8 would be proportionate, see ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  and
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74  at
    [10] per Lord Hodge.

Evidence and documents

10. Mr Hussain relied exclusively on the evidence considered by the  First-
    tier Tribunal initially. He did not apply  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce new  evidence,
    for example in relation to developments which post-dated  the  findings
    of fact I preserved from the First-tier Tribunal.  He did not call  any
    of the appellants as witnesses, although the first, second  and  fourth
    appellants were in attendance at the hearing centre.

Discussion

11. The First-tier Tribunal found that  none  of  the  appellants  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Although Mr Hussain  previously
    sought to challenge some of the factual bases upon which those findings
    were reached, I found that the judge's findings  were  not  irrational,
    perverse, or infected by some other error of law.  This appeal turns on
    the position of AS, the  third  appellant,  and  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom. To determine  his
    best interests, and those of his brother, I must set  out  the  factual
    matrix upon which that analysis must be based.

12. At the outset of my analysis, it  will  be  helpful  to  summarise  the
    relevant preserved findings of fact from the First-tier Tribunal:

        a. The first appellant had worked  previously  in  Bangladesh.  The
           first  and  second  appellants  each  have  extended  family  in
           Bangladesh and there is family property there [43].

        b. There was no evidence of private life outside the  family  home.
           The main language spoken at home is Bengali Sylheti.  The  third
           appellant previously experienced language learning  difficulties
           when he started school, which may have been attributable to  the
           different language spoken at home [44].

        c.  The  third  appellant  had  experienced  a  range  of   medical
           conditions relating to his ears, tonsils,  and  vitiligo.  There
           was no evidence that any "curiosity and  comment"  attracted  by
           the third appellant in Bangladesh would  exceed  that  which  he
           would experience in this country in any event [45].

        d. There was no evidence that the third appellant would be  at  any
           greater risk of bullying in Bangladesh than he would  have  been
           in this country [46].

        e. There would not be very significant obstacles to the integration
           of  the  first  or  second  appellants  upon  their  return   to
           Bangladesh. The first appellant's mother remains in  Bangladesh;
           it was she who originally brought him to the UK, and she remains
           there. If it were the case that the first  appellant  had  never
           worked in Bangladesh, as he had claimed, he must have had family
           support. Both the  first  and  second  appellants  had  acquired
           qualifications and work experience, and experience  of  life  in
           this country, which would assist with them obtaining  employment
           upon their return in Bangladesh. They claimed to be  financially
           supported in this  country  by  relatives  here,  and  they  had
           provided no credible explanation as to why  that  support  would
           not be able to continue in Bangladesh, at least initially [47].

        f. An issue before the First-tier Tribunal  had  been  whether  the
           third  appellant's  medical  conditions  rendered   his   return
           Bangladesh unreasonable. In relation to these issues, the  judge
           found that he may not require grommets in the future  but  noted
           the medical diagnosis may change. There  was  no  evidence  that
           treatment would  not  be  available  in  Bangladesh;  the  first
           appellant "appears to concede" that treatment would be available
           in cities such as  Dhaka.  All  difficulties  expressed  by  the
           family in relation to the children's  relocation  to  Bangladesh
           "can be overcome" [48].

        g. Although an international move, and a change in  schools,  would
           be disruptive for the third appellant,  he  remains  in  primary
           school and is some years away  from  transferring  to  secondary
           school. The third appellant would be travelling with his parents
           and within the family unit to join extended family in Bangladesh
           [55].

13. Against that background, and without having applied to  admit  any  new
    evidence, Mr Hussain submits that there remains an absence of  finality
    concerning the diagnosis for the third appellant's ear  conditions.  He
    submitted, without reference to any underlying evidence, that there  is
    "no evidence" that the treatment required by the  third  appellant  may
    adequately be obtained in Bangladesh, still less would it  be  possible
    for the first and second appellants to pay for it.

14. Mr Hussain sought to rely on a single sentence in an  article  for  the
    Daily Star, a Bangladeshi English language paper, in which  the  author
    sought to describe the difficulties experienced by  those  living  with
    vitiligo in Bangladesh. This was an article to which Judge  Bart-Stuart
    ascribed little weight, for understandable reasons.  It  may  be  found
    pages 61 to 62 of the appellants' bundle. It describes  the  condition,
    causes, potential treatments, and highlights "World Vitiligo Day",  and
    the fact that Michael Jackson suffered from the condition. It concludes
    with these short paragraphs:

         "In our society, the vitiligo patient is treated inhumanely in  the
         family, public place [sic] and mostly at  their  workplace.  People
         avoid them just like  the  patient  of  leprosy  but  vitiligo  and
         leprosy is not the same disease [sic].

         The government should emphasise  on  the  vitiligo  day  to  spread
         knowledge and should raise the funding for treatment  and  research
         to overcome this mortifying disorder."

    This article provides little assistance.  There is no  suggestion  that
    the first and second appellants, as the third appellant's family, would
    treat him "inhumanely"; indeed, the contrary is true.  As a child,  the
    third appellant will be some way from the world of work.  To the extent
    that Mr Hussain sought to rely on the article to demonstrate  that  the
    third appellant would suffer in "public place", the  article  does  not
    refer to the underlying evidence  for  such  an  assertion,  let  alone
    provide any detail as to what such discrimination would  look  like  in
    practice.

15. Mr Hussain highlighted the length of residence of the first and  second
    appellants, submitting that, in light of how long they have been  here,
    the chances of them finding work in Bangladesh would be minimal,  which
    would in turn impact upon the overall  reception  the  third  appellant
    would face upon his return to Bangladesh.  He also maintained that  the
    third appellant has minimal Bengali language skills.

16. It is difficult to ascribe significant  weight  to  the  above  factors
    raised by Mr Hussain. Many of them sought to go  behind  the  preserved
    findings of fact reached by the judge below, or are speculative.  There
    was no new evidence to demonstrate that the third  appellant's  medical
    conditions had deteriorated, for example. There was nothing  concerning
    any private life the appellants as a whole may have established outside
    the confines of their family in the time that  has  elapsed  since  the
    hearing before Judge Bart-Stuart.  The  judge  found  that  the  family
    would return to  extended  family  and  property  in  Bangladesh,  with
    experience of and familiarity with the language.  The  foundations  are
    there for a successful return to their home country.

17. Finally, Mr Hussain submitted that the  third  appellant,  having  been
    born here in July 2010, is now eight months away from becoming eligible
    to register as a British citizen. That, he submits,  is  a  significant
    factor rendering his return unreasonable. In my view,  this  is  not  a
    factor which attracts great weight. The relevant date of assessment  is
    that of the hearing. At present, the third appellant is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh, and is a considerable period away from  being  eligible  to
    register as a British citizen. Although I can readily  understand  that
    it may be frustrating for the family if  they  managed  to  reside  for
    almost enough time for their son to acquire  British  citizenship,  but
    did not manage to meet the 10 year threshold by  only  a  short  margin
    before removal, it is not a factor which attracts  significant  weight.
    There is no near-miss  doctrine  which  aids  the  appellants  in  this
    regard.

Best interests of the children

18. I must turn first to the best interests of the children.  I accept that
    the family have a strong desire to remain in  this  country.  I  accept
    that there will be considerable disruption which will follow, at  least
    initially, in the event of an enforced international move. It could  be
    difficult for the children, especially if (as is  likely)  the  parents
    are reluctant to leave.  However, the approach that I  am  to  take  to
    determining the best interests of the children is that advocated for by
    Mr Lindsay, as set out in KO (Nigeria).

19. At [18] of KO, Lord Carnwath held that the context in  which  the  best
    interests assessment of the children must be conducted is relevant.  To
    that extent, and only indirectly, the immigration status of the parents
    is relevant:

         "The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd  in  SA  (Bangladesh)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:

             '22.  In my opinion before one embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ...'"

    Thus, the context in which my assessment of the best interests  of  the
    third and fourth appellants must take place is against  the  background
    of their parents having no leave to remain in this  country.   The  law
    expects them to return to Bangladesh (but for,  in  this  context,  the
    operation of section 117B(6)).  The reason the question of the children
    leaving the United Kingdom has arisen is, "because the parents have  no
    right to remain in the UK" (SA (Bangladesh) at [22]).

20. Lord Carnwath endorsed what was said in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 concerning  the  same
    issue, at [58]:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?"

21. Applied to the facts of the present matter, in light of  the  preserved
    findings of  fact  of  Judge  Bart-Stewart,  and  the  absence  of  any
    additional evidence before me concerning developments which have  post-
    dated the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I find that it is in  the
    best  interests  of  both  children  to  accompany  their  parents   to
    Bangladesh.  While I accept the logic of Mr Hussain's submissions  that
    the overall length of the family's residence in this  country  is  such
    that their return will entail considerable difficulties,  at  least  in
    the short-term, there is no  evidence  that  there  will  be  long-term
    detrimental effects of such a move. The children will return with their
    parents in the family unit. They will return  to  extended  family  and
    property there. They already have experience in Bengali Sylheti, and to
    the extent that they will  need  to  develop  their  linguistic  skills
    further, they will have the benefit of both parents whose mother tongue
    is that language.  They are without the right to work  here,  and  have
    been supported financially by members of the family. By contrast,  upon
    the return of the first and second appellants to Bangladesh, they  will
    both enjoy the right to work and the full panoply of rights as citizens
    of Bangladesh.

22. There is  no  medical  evidence  that  the  third  appellant's  medical
    conditions are such that his return will present particular  challenges
    meriting a departure from what Lord Carnwath said  would  generally  be
    reasonable in KO. Mr Hussain highlighted a letter dated 23  March  2019
    from the third appellant's general medical practitioner. At page 33  of
    the appellants' bundle, the letter states:

         "[The third appellant's] vitiligo may become a challenge  for  him,
         when it would be preferable for him to be in an  environment  where
         his condition is known and understood and where bullying because of
         it is not tolerated."

23. It is not clear how the appellant's London-based  general  practitioner
    is able to speak about general social conditions relating  to  vitiligo
    in Bangladesh. Although I have no reason to doubt  doctor's  sincerity,
    the basis upon which this assertion is made is not clear, and therefore
    is of little assistance.

24.  The  best  interests  of  the  child  appellants,   individually   and
    collectively, is to remain with their  parents,  in  the  family  unit,
    wherever their parents are expected to be.  The expectation is that, as
    the first and second appellants are without leave, they will return  to
    Bangladesh.  It is entirely consistent with their  best  interests  for
    the children to accompany them to Bangladesh.

Reasonable to expect

25. In light of the above  findings,  then,  I  turn  to  the  "real  world
    context" in which the question of whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
    third  appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  arises.   There  are
    significant parallels in my approach to this issue to the  process  for
    determining the best interests of the children.  The real world context
    is that the first and second  appellants  are  expected  to  return  to
    Bangladesh.  They are husband and wife, and parents to  the  third  and
    fourth appellants.  The real world  context  is  that  the  family  can
    return as a unit, in the circumstances, and for  the  reasons  set  out
    above.  That militates  in  favour  of  a  finding  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

26. Mr Lindsay also submitted that it is no  longer  necessary  for  me  to
    adopt as my "starting point" the premise that the third appellant  must
    be granted leave to remain unless there are "powerful reasons"  to  the
    contrary, as was previously the case before MA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 was overturned  by
    the Supreme Court in KO.  I agree, for the following reasons.

27. By way of preliminary observation, I note that  at  [14]  of  KO,  Lord
    Carnwath  specifically  distanced  himself  from  the  "impressive  but
    conflicting judgments" of  this  Tribunal  and  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    stating that instead he was  "attempting  a  simpler  and  more  direct
    approach".   Lord Carnwath did not purport to retain certain aspects of
    the jurisprudence which was being overturned by the  Supreme  Court  on
    that occasion.  Lord Carnwath's "simpler" approach does  not  call  for
    the implied preservation of certain elements of the earlier "impressive
    but conflicting judgments".  This strongly suggests that  the  entirety
    of Lord Justice Elias' approach in MA (Pakistan) was being  set  aside.
    Although at [19] of KO, Lord Carnwath specifically disagreed with MA at
    [40], the omission of criticism of other paragraphs of  MA's  operative
    reasoning, when viewed in the context of the overall  approach  of  the
    Supreme Court, does not  mean  that  the  remainder  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision  in  that  case  was  being  retained.   Rather,  the
    "simpler and more direct approach" meant that nothing in MA  was  being
    preserved, for the reasons set out below.

28. Lord  Carnwath  held  at  [17]  that  the  relevant  factors  going  to
    reasonableness contained in the  respondent's  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions ("IDIs") then in force,  Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
    parent) in Private Life: Ten Year Routes,  August  2015,  were  "wholly
    appropriate and sound in law".  The extract of that  guidance  referred
    to by His Lordship was as follows:

         "b.  Whether the child would be leaving with their parents.

             It is generally  the  case  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
             interests to remain  with  their  parent(s).   Unless  special
             factors apply, it will generally be  reasonable  to  expect  a
             child to leave the UK with their  parent(s),  particularly  if
             the parent(s) have no right to remain in the UK."

    As such, Lord Carnwath did not consider that the "starting point"  that
    leave must be granted in the case of a qualifying child  was  retained,
    nor that there must be "powerful  reasons"  not  to  grant  leave.   By
    contrast, "it will generally be reasonable to expect a child  to  leave
    the UK with their parent(s), particularly  if  the  parent(s)  have  no
    right to remain in the UK..."

29. Although it may be said that the above guidance is no longer  in  force
    and, therefore, that the principle it enunciates is no  longer  of  any
    relevance, I do not consider  that  to  be  a  valid  objection.   Lord
    Carnwath's reliance on the extract from the IDI  was  not  because  the
    respondent's views or guidance carried weight,  whether  because  those
    views featured  in  the  IDIs,  or  otherwise.   Rather,  His  Lordship
    considered that the quoted  extract  correctly  encapsulated  the  core
    principle which lies at the heart of the  question  of  reasonableness.
    The fact that it  featured  in  IDI  guidance  was  of  no  significant
    relevance; it could equally (for example) have featured  a  quote  from
    the skeleton argument  advanced  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    proceedings, or a decision of one of the  courts  or  tribunals  below.
    The significance of the quote from the IDIs lay in the fact  that  Lord
    Carnwath considered it to be a correct statement of the legal position,
    which he adopted, endorsed  and  in  doing  so,  preserved.   That  the
    respondent may have changed her guidance since then (which, of  course,
    she has) is irrelevant; the ratio of Lord Carnwath's approach preserves
    the principle - as previously set out in the IDI  quoted  above  -  for
    application in these proceedings.

30. The approach adopted by Lord Justice Elias in MA (Pakistan)  was  based
    on the now abandoned premise that the wider immigration context of  the
    qualifying child's parents may be taken into consideration as a  factor
    militating against the reasonableness of leave being granted.   It  was
    in that - no longer relevant - context that the  question  of  powerful
    reasons  displacing  the  starting  point  arose.   By  contrast,  Lord
    Carnwath made no mention of there being a "starting point" along  those
    lines.  Instead, he endorsed the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
    quoted above that it will "generally be reasonable" to expect the child
    to return in a situation such as the present.  Were it  the  case  that
    the MA "starting point" were preserved, by definition, there  could  be
    no suggestion that it would "generally be  reasonable"  to  expect  the
    children to return with their parents.

31. It is difficult to see how, in post-KO territory, there could  ever  be
    "powerful reasons" to withhold a grant of leave in a seven  year  child
    case.  The former suggestion that "powerful reasons" were needed  arose
    in the context where the immigration - or other  -  misconduct  of  the
    child's parents could be incorporated into  that  assessment.   If  the
    parents' conduct was particularly bad,  that  would  provide  "powerful
    reasons" to override the "starting point" which previously applied.  By
    definition, that is not, and can no longer be, the case.  The "powerful
    reasons" doctrine is incompatible with the post-KO prohibition  against
    holding the misconduct of the parents against children,  and  with  the
    "real world" analysis which lay at the heart of the case.

32. For the reasons set out above,  the  MA  (Pakistan)  approach  did  not
    feature in the operative reasoning of the Supreme  Court.   Indeed,  in
    the individual section 117B(6) case before the Supreme Court in KO, NS,
    Lord Carnwath did not resolve the case by reference to  there  being  a
    "starting point" that leave must be granted, nor did  he  suggest  that
    there must be "powerful reasons" why leave should not be granted.   His
    Lordship noted that the best interests of the children  concerned  were
    to remain in the United Kingdom, but nevertheless reasonable to  expect
    them to leave, given the expectation of where their parent  should  go.
    See [51] of KO, in relation to NS:

         "...in a context where  the  parents  had  to  leave,  the  natural
         expectation would be that the children  would  go  with  them,  and
         there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by the judge to  suggest
         that that would be other than reasonable."

33. Mr Lindsay also cites the opinion of the Lord President  of  the  Inner
    House of the Court of Session in SA and others v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2018] CSIH 71, a  case  which  post-dated  KO,  as
    authority for this proposition.  SA was a case with  similar  facts  to
    the present matter: a family of four Bangladeshi citizens, two parents,
    two children, had resided in the United Kingdom without leave for  some
    time.  The children were born here.   There  was  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal from a child psychologist stating  that  relocation
    would present a "major challenge" for the third appellant, a qualifying
    child born in 2008.  The report described her removal would lead to her
    perceiving her circumstances as a "form of exile",  with  only  "bleak"
    educational prospects by comparison to what  she  would  enjoy  if  she
    remained  in  Scotland.   The   First-tier   Tribunal   dismissed   the
    appellants' appeal against linked refusal decisions and found  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to return  to  Bangladesh;  the
    Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal.  It was a judicial  review
    against that permission to appeal refusal which was under consideration
    by the Inner House, following its dismissal by the  Outer  House.   The
    Lord President considered Lord Carnwath's approach in  KO.   He  looked
    specifically to the case of NS, outlined above.  When drawing parallels
    between SA's case, and that of NS, the Lord President said, at [30]:

         "... [as] in this case, the children [in NS] would 'lose much'.  It
         was in their best interests to remain with their parents in the UK,
         where they are settled. None of  the  children  had  had  any  life
         outside the UK and they were happy, settled and doing well..."

     Despite those findings, the Lord President held that the  reasoning  of
    the Lord Ordinary in the Outer  House,  which  had  been  to  apply  KO
    (Nigeria) to dismiss the appeal, "cannot  be  faulted".   In  the  Lord
    President's opinion, there was no suggestion that there was a "starting
    point" that leave had to be granted in a  seven  year  case,  nor  that
    there had to be "powerful reasons" to  displace  that  starting  point.
    Nor, realistically, could  there  have  been  a  suggestion  that  such
    factors  were  relevant:  such  terminology  was  the  language  of  MA
    (Pakistan), not the "simpler and more direct approach" adopted by  Lord
    Carnwath in KO.

34. The opinion of the Lord President is highly persuasive authority, and I
    am fortified in the approach that I have set out above by the  fact  it
    correlates with that of the Inner House.

35. For the above reasons, I find that it is no longer necessary  to  adopt
    as the "starting point" that leave would be granted  in  a  seven  year
    child case, nor that  leave  may  only  be  withheld  where  there  are
    "powerful reasons" to do so.  The correct approach is  to  perform  the
    "real world" assessment, as set out above.

36. I should record that  Mr  Hussain  did  not  have  any  submissions  in
    response to Mr Lindsay's submissions concerning the meaning and  impact
    of KO.

Conclusion

37. Drawing the above analysis together, therefore, I find that it would be
    compatible with the best interests of the third and  fourth  appellants
    for the family to be  removed  to  Bangladesh.  The  first  and  second
    appellants have no leave to remain in this country, yet by contrast are
    citizens of Bangladesh, with family and property there, and  are  fully
    familiar language, culture and  customs:   that  is  the  "real  world"
    context.  Under the circumstances, it is entirely reasonable to  expect
    the third and fourth appellants to return to Bangladesh with them. That
    being so, section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act does not  operate  to  render
    the removal  of  the  first  and  second  appellants  disproportionate.
    Similarly, it cannot be said that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) is engaged in
    relation to the third appellant personally (child under the age of  18,
    seven years' continuous residence, but not reasonable to expect him  or
    her to leave the United Kingdom).  It is not necessary for there to  be
    "powerful reasons" for leave not to be granted.

38. The only issues which fell to be  determined  in  the  course  of  this
    remaking hearing were whether the  removal  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants would be consistent with their best interests, and  whether,
    in light of those interests as determined, it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom. The  answer  to
    both questions is in the affirmative: removal of all four appellants is
    consistent with the best interest of the third appellant, and it  would
    be reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom. There  are  no
    other issues to be resolved. To the extent  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellants will engage and interfere with  their  private  life  rights
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the  public
    interest in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control,  as
    articulated by Parliament in Part 5A of the 2002 Act, is  a  sufficient
    justification to render their removal proportionate.

39. These appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 7 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.

Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 7 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18036/2018
                                                               hu/18044/2018
                                                               HU/18042/2018
                                                               hu/18038/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 August 2019                             |[6 September 2019]            |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                            NA (First appellant)
                            SB (Second appellant)
                            Ys (Third appellant)
                            YA (fourth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Hussain, Solicitor, Hubers Law
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Bart-Stewart  promulgated  on  14  May  2019,  dismissing  the
    appellants' appeal against a decision of the respondent dated 16 August
    2018 to refuse their human rights claims for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of their private life made on 5 April 2018.

Factual Background

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  and  was  born  on  16
    October 1966.  He arrived in this country as a visitor in 2005.  He has
    remained as an overstayer since the expiry of his visitor's leave.  The
    second appellant is also a citizen of Bangladesh, born on  11  November
    1984.  She arrived with leave to remain as a  student  in  2009,  valid
    until 30 June 2012.  The first and second appellants  are  husband  and
    wife.  The third and fourth appellants are their son and  daughter  and
    were born on 21 July 2010 and 19 October 2017 respectively.  They  have
    never held leave to remain in this country, but, due to  his  age,  the
    third appellant is a "qualifying child".

 3. The basis of the appellants' application to  the  respondent,  and  the
    basis of the appeal advanced before Judge  Bart-Stewart,  was  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the third appellant, YS, to leave the
    United Kingdom.  YS has  a  number  of  medical  conditions,  including
    include a past history of hearing difficulties and surgery in the  form
    of a tonsillectomy, adenoidectomy and bilateral  grommet  insertion  in
    September 2015.  His symptoms are said to recur from time to  time.  He
    has episodes of otitis externa and problems with ear wax.  He has  also
    been diagnosed with vitiligo and has a deep pigmentation of skin around
    his left eye.  Those medical conditions,  combined  with  his  lack  of
    understanding of Bengali Sylheti and established life in this  country,
    all combined to render it unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. Judge Bart-Stewart dismissed the appeal on the basis that  the  medical
    conditions experienced  by  YS  could  receive  adequate  treatment  in
    Bangladesh, and that it would be reasonable to expect him to leave  the
    United Kingdom, in light of the immigration misconduct of his  parents.
    The judge made a number of findings of fact  upon  which  her  findings
    concerning  the  likely  reception  that  would  await  the  family  in
    Bangladesh were based.

Permission to Appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the  judge  had  held  the  immigration
    conduct of the first and second appellants against YS, and in doing  so
    failing properly to apply KO (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC  53.   The  grounds  of  appeal  sought  to
    undermine a number of findings of fact made by the judge which were not
    excluded from the grant of permission to appeal, but Judge Grubb  noted
    that they were unlikely to have the same merit as the primary  argument
    concerning whether it would be reasonable to expect  YS  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

The Law

 6. This is an appeal brought under Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human  Rights.   The  central  issue  in  this  appeal  turns  on   the
    interpretation and application of the statutory framework  set  out  in
    Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Of
    significance for present purposes is Section 117B(6) which provides:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

 7. Having been born here over seven years ago, and resided in this country
    throughout that time, YS is a "qualifying child" (see section 117D(1)).
     As such, whether it would be reasonable to  expect  YS  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, absent any other factors, would be determinative of the
    appeals of the first and second appellants who, as  his  parents,  have
    been accepted to be in a genuine and subsisting relationship with him.

 8. It is settled law that the best interests of the child  are  a  primary
    consideration when considering whether  the  removal  of  an  appellant
    under Article 8 would be proportionate, see ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4
    and Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74
    at [10] per Lord Hodge.

Discussion

 9. Mr Hussain provided a skeleton argument which I have considered,  along
    with the grounds of appeal and all oral submissions.

10. I turn first to the grounds of appeal which contend the  judge  made  a
    number of factual errors when reaching her findings of fact.   Part  of
    the appellants' case in relation to the third appellant  was  that  his
    vitiligo would lead to extreme bullying at school  in  Bangladesh.   In
    support of that argument, the appellants had  provided  a  copy  of  an
    article in an English language newspaper in Bangladesh,  written  by  a
    medical student outlining the ostracization that some people with  that
    condition can face in Bangladesh.  The article  stated  that  they  are
    treated as though having leprosy and treated "inhumanely" in public and
    at work.  At [45], the judge had attached little  weight  to  what  she
    described as a "student's essay", noting that  there  was  no  evidence
    that the child would be subject to any more curiosity and comment  than
    the first appellant had acknowledged he receives in the United Kingdom.



11. Mr Hussain submits that the judge erred in categorising this article as
    a "student essay" for the purposes of ascribing minimal significance to
    it.  In oral  submissions,  he  contended  that  the  article  was,  in
    essence, a factual description of what life with vitiligo would be like
    in Bangladesh.  It mattered not, submitted Mr Hussain, that the article
    had been written by a medical student.  It was not being  presented  as
    expert evidence; the judge should have viewed it as  a  contemporaneous
    factual description of life in Bangladesh, and should have assessed  it
    as attracting greater weight,  submits  Mr  Hussain.   I  consider  the
    judge's findings at [45] and [46] to have  been  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.  Barring irrationality, weight is a  matter  for  the  judge.
    The appellants had not  provided  an  expert's  report  concerning  the
    likely impact  of  having  the  condition  which  YS  suffers  from  in
    Bangladesh.  The article had been written by an unqualified person, and
    the fact that it had been reproduced  in  what  was  claimed  to  be  a
    leading English language newspaper  in  Bangladesh  does  not  add  any
    further weight to the article, still less does it  render  the  judge's
    findings of fact on this point  irrational.   It  was  an  essay  by  a
    student.  The judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  refer  to  it  as  a
    "student's essay".

12. Before the judge was a letter from the appellants' general practitioner
    which  stated  that  it  would  be  preferable  for  YS  to  be  in  an
    environment, such as the United Kingdom, where his condition  is  known
    and understood and where bullying is not  tolerated.   The  grounds  of
    appeal contend that  the  judge  placed  insufficient  weight  on  this
    letter, especially given the general  practitioner  is  from  the  same
    background  as  the  appellants  and  "presumably  has  some   personal
    knowledge" of the matter in order to have made this recommendation.   I
    consider the judge to have reached findings of fact which were open  to
    her on the evidence she received.  The mere fact that a GP  shares  the
    same background as an appellant does not necessarily qualify him or her
    to provide expert evidence on the conditions  that  would  obtain  upon
    return to Bangladesh.   A  general  practitioner  in  this  country  is
    primarily able to provide evidence  or  assistance  to  a  tribunal  in
    relation to medical conditions  that  he  or  she  has  treated  during
    consultations with their patients here.  It was  within  the  range  of
    responses properly open to the  judge  for  her  to  have  treated  the
    medical evidence from the GP in this way.

13. Mr Hussain next seeks to challenge the judge's findings that sufficient
    treatment would  be  available  in  Bangladesh  for  the  ear  problems
    experienced by YS. There has not yet been  a  final  diagnosis  of  his
    condition, and matters may change, he submitted.   It  was,  therefore,
    too early for the judge to have reached a considered view.   The  judge
    addressed the position concerning the ongoing diagnosis at [48] of  her
    decision.  She noted  that  the  hearing  difficulties  may  no  longer
    require grommets in the future, and they may  be  changed  as  he  gets
    older.  To that extent, it is correct for Mr  Hussain  to  observe  the
    diagnosis is not yet final.  However, to contend that the fact that the
    diagnosis may change in the future should have had a significant impact
    on the judge's findings is speculative.  Nothing in the submissions  of
    Mr Hussain demonstrates that the judge made  irrational  findings  when
    observing at [48] that there was no evidence that treatment  would  not
    be able to be available in Bangladesh.   The  judge  records  that  the
    first appellant appeared to accept that treatment would be available in
    cities such a Dhaka.  Accordingly, I do not find that the judge reached
    an irrational finding in relation to this issue.

14. Mr Hussain submits that the third appellant's language  abilities  were
    unfairly given little weight.  The appellants had  contended  that  the
    third appellant speaks only English and would therefore  struggle  with
    the language upon his return to Bangladesh.  The judge did  not  accept
    this to be  a  credible  account  of  the  third  appellant's  language
    difficulties, noting that the first and second appellant had each given
    evidence before her through a Bengali Sylheti interpreter, and gave  no
    impression of having  a  wider  social  or  private  life  outside  the
    confines of their home or the Bengali-speaking community.   Mr  Hussain
    contended  that  the  reason  that  the  appellants  spoke  through  an
    interpreter at the hearing before Judge Bart-Stewart  was  because  the
    complexity of the proceedings meant that they would need the  potential
    availability of an interpreter in order for them to  engage  with  what
    was taking place.  That submission has no  merit.   The  judge  reached
    findings of fact that were properly open to her on the  materials  that
    she had before her and the evidence that she had heard that it was  not
    credible that  the  first  appellant  and  the  second  appellant  only
    conversed with the child in English.  The judge does not record in  her
    discussion of YS's language abilities at [44] that  the  parents  spoke
    through an interpreter only when difficulties in translation  arose  in
    the proceedings, as is sometimes the case.  They have been  here  since
    2005  and  2009  respectively,  and  still  required  the  use  of   an
    interpreter throughout the entirety  of  the  proceedings.   YS  speaks
    English at school, and initially had some  problems  with  his  speech.
    The judge considered that that was likely to be attributable  to  being
    educated in a different language to that spoken at  home.   These  were
    all rational findings.  The judge's finding that the language likely to
    be spoken at home would be Bengali Sylheti was a finding properly  open
    to her on the facts, and this submission has no merit.

15. A further criticism levied by Mr Hussain  at  the  judge  is  that  she
    formed  a  dim  view  of  the  first  and  second  appellant's  adverse
    immigration history and unfairly  counted  that  against  them  in  her
    credibility assessment.  There is no merit to this criticism.  Although
    it is right to say that the second appellant did hold leave  to  remain
    upon her arrival in the United Kingdom, and that  it  was  valid  until
    June 2012, in her evidence she accepted that she did not study for more
    than a few days following her arrival and that  she  has  done  nothing
    since.  The judge did not display  any  adverse  attitude  towards  the
    second appellant  on  this  account,  but  rather  recorded  accurately
    throughout her decision the fact that the second  appellant  only  held
    leave under these circumstances, and that she had not since  2012.   On
    any view, the second appellant has been an overstayer since  June  2012
    and the judge was right to record this fact in her decision.  There  is
    no demonstrable  prejudice  on  the  part  of  the  judge  towards  the
    appellant in this respect; the judge simply recognised and recorded the
    nature of the initially precarious,  and  later  unlawful,  immigration
    status held by the second appellant.  As she had not studied as she was
    required to by the terms of  her  leave,  the  judge  could  have  gone
    further and observed that she had been here in breach of the  terms  of
    her leave for most of the time she held leave.  Nothing turns  on  this
    criticism.

16. At  [43],  the  judge  rejected  the  appellants'  account  that  their
    remaining property in Bangladesh had been  unlawfully  appropriated  by
    the first appellant's brother.  One of the bases upon which  the  judge
    rejected that account was that there was  said  to  be  no  "supporting
    evidence" of the unlawful appropriation.  Mr Hussain takes  issue  with
    this, on the  basis  that  the  first  appellant's  sister's  statement
    corroborated this account.  I consider the judge to have been referring
    to supporting documentation  of  the  sort  that  would  be  reasonably
    expected to be generated through the fraudulent transfer of a  property
    into another person's  name,  for  example  title  deeds  or  ownership
    records of the family home.  In this respect  she  was  reflecting  the
    evidence that she recorded at [29] of her decision where she noted  the
    first  appellant's  evidence  that   his   brother   had   fraudulently
    transferred all the family assets into his name and sold a lot  of  it.
    The judge was referring to the absence of title deed  documentation  or
    other ownership records which would have referred to  the  transfer  of
    the properties into the name  of  the  first  appellant's  brother,  or
    otherwise  demonstrating  that  the  claimed  property  is  no   longer
    registered in the name of the first appellant.  Nothing turns  on  this
    criticism of Mr Hussain.

17. In summary, therefore, the factual criticisms advanced  by  Mr  Hussain
    are without merit.  The judge reached findings of fact which were  open
    to her on the evidence before her and did not feature any irrationality
    or other error of law which infects their safety.

18. However, I do consider the judge to  have  erred  in  relation  to  her
    assessment of, first, the best interests  of  the  children  concerned,
    secondly and in relation to whether it would be reasonable  for  YS  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

19. At [44], based on her earlier findings of fact, the judge conducted  an
    assessment of the best interests of the appellants' children.  It is in
    many respects a model assessment, and in line with the authorities  the
    judge was later to quote concerning determining what the best interests
    of children in such circumstances are.

20. The difficulty with the  judge's  assessment  of  the  children's  best
    interests is that she  appears  to  contradict  herself  later  in  the
    decision,  at  [48].   When  determining   the   hearing   difficulties
    experienced by YS, and his need for grommets and possible surgery,  she
    concludes [48] by stating that the children's  best  interests  are  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, where they benefit from a  good  standard
    of education, medical, social  and  financial  support.   Although  she
    finds in that same paragraph that those best interests do not amount to
    a "significant call to return to Bangladesh",  and  observes  that  all
    difficulties can be  overcome,  it  is  not  clear  which  of  the  two
    differing best interests assessments the judge based her  analysis  on.
    The decision featured two conflicting assessments of the best interests
    of the children concerned and therefore the  judge's  analysis  appears
    confused.  It is not clear, for  example,  the  basis  upon  which  she
    introduces the children's best interests as  being  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom in [48], given her  earlier  analysis  and  the  overall
    thrust of the remaining parts of her decision which find that the  best
    interests of the children are compatible with returning to  Bangladesh,
    and that it would be reasonable to expect the children to return to the
    country  of  their  parents'   nationality   and   their   nationality.
    Accordingly, I find that the judge erred in relation to her  assessment
    of the best interests of the children concerned.

21. I reject Mr Hussain's submissions, however, that it was  necessary  for
    the  judge  to  analyse  the  best  interests  of  the   two   children
    individually as well as collectively.  Such specificity is not required
    given the judge had addressed in detail the medical situation of YS and
    had clearly factored that into her assessment at [44].

22. The most significant error, however, that the judge fell  into  was  to
    hold the immigration misconduct of  the  first  and  second  appellants
    against the third appellant in the consideration of what is  reasonable
    for the purposes of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

23. Although the judge cited KO (Nigeria), which held that the  immigration
    misconduct of the parents of a child  should  not  be  held  against  a
    qualifying child, the  operative  analysis  engaged  in  by  the  judge
    appears to take the contrary approach.

24. At [53] the judge said:

         "The fact that the third appellant has been in the UK for more than
         seven years at the date of application must  be  given  significant
         weight.  Strong reasons are required to refuse  a  case  where  the
         outcome would be removal of the child with continuous UK  residence
         of seven years or more.  The conduct and  the  adverse  immigration
         history is relevant to the assessment of the public interest but it
         is not determinative in removal" (emphasis added).

25. As may be seen, in the above paragraph the judge appeared to follow the
    now impugned approach adopted by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  705,  where
    the Court of appeal held that the "starting point"  for  children  with
    more than seven years' residence in this country was that they would be
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom, and that strong reasons would
    be required to displace that starting point.  The Court of Appeal  held
    that the immigration misconduct of the parents  of  the  child  can  be
    taken into consideration as a relevant factor when considering  whether
    there are strong reasons to displace the starting point that leave must
    granted in such a case.

26.  That  interpretation  was  overturned  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria): see [17], [18] and [19].  Although the judge correctly noted
    at [52] that the immigration  status  of  the  parents  is  "indirectly
    relevant" to the position of the qualifying child her later analysis in
    [53] took the contrary approach and suggested that it was, by contrast,
    directly relevant.

27. The correct approach should  have  been  to  assess  the  "real  world"
    position of the parents, to adopt the terminology of the Supreme  Court
    in KO (Nigeria).  While that assessment does take into account,  as  an
    indirectly material factor, the immigration status of the  parents,  it
    is not in the context of holding the misconduct of the parents  against
    the child for the purposes of assessing what amounts  to  a  reasonable
    expectation for the qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.

28. The judge adopts a similar approach in [55].   There  she  specifically
    addresses the concept of reasonableness,  addressing  the  difficulties
    that the third appellant is likely to experience  upon  his  return  to
    Bangladesh.  The first half of the paragraph features  sound  analysis,
    which is entirely consistent with the approach of the Supreme Court  in
    KO (Nigeria).  However, the  concluding  words  adopted  by  the  judge
    suggest in clear terms that she had held the immigration misconduct  of
    the first and second appellants against the third.  She said

         "This is a  case  where  both  parents  have  deliberately  flouted
         immigration control and continue to be a burden on public funds.  I
         consider in the circumstances the  public  interest  outweighs  the
         family and private life of the appellants and  are  strong  reasons
         for refusing leave to remain in the UK."

29. Although it is possible to read this  paragraph  as  though  the  judge
    addressed, first, the question of reasonableness,  concluding  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the children  to  return  to  Bangladesh,
    before approaching the quite separate question of the overall balancing
    act required under Article 8 in order  to  determine  the  question  of
    proportionality (which is an  assessment  that  would  be  required  if
    section 117B(6) was not dispositive of the appeal  in  the  appellants'
    favour), when read alongside [53], that reasoning  does  not  withstand
    scrutiny.

30. Ms Cunha submits that the error is not  material.   Her  submission  is
    that it would be reasonable to expect the entire family unit to  return
    to Bangladesh, regardless  of  any  consideration  of  the  immigration
    misconduct of the first and second appellants.  Were  it  not  for  the
    conflicting assessment of the best interests of the children,  I  would
    agree with this submission.  The difficulty  is,  however,  it  is  not
    possible to ascertain what the judge's best interests assessment of the
    children was, for the reasons set out above.

31. I find the decision features a material error of law and  must  be  set
    aside and remade.  I direct that the matter is relisted  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for an assessment of the best interests of  the  two  children
    and for consideration of whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the
    third appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.   I  preserve  all  other
    findings of fact reached by Judge Bart-Stewart.

Anonymity

32. Given the age of the children and the nature of the  third  appellant's
    medical conditions, in  light  of  the  routine  publication  of  Upper
    Tribunal decisions, I make an order for anonymity.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Bart-Stewart featured an error of law  but  no  errors
of fact.  I set aside the decision  for  it  to  be  re-made  by  the  Upper
Tribunal, preserving the findings of fact set out in the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Date 2 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

