
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18586/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford               |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2019             |On 15 November 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sills, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      1. In this decision I  consider  the  appellant's  substantive  appeal
         against the decision of an entry clearance officer ('ECO') dated 21
         August 2018 refusing to grant him entry clearance in order to  join
         his mother in the United Kingdom.

      2. In an 'error of law' decision dated 11 September 2019, I noted that
         the  respondent  accepted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') dated 29 May 2019 contains  a  material  error  of
         law.  That decision has been set aside.

      3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, who was born in  May  2002.
         At the time of his entry clearance application dated 17 April  2018
         he was 15, and he is now 17.  His mother,  sister  and  step-father
         reside in the United Kingdom lawfully.

      4. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Diwnycz accepted that there  was
         no clear public interest in maintaining  the  ECO's  decision,  and
         invited me to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.   I  indicated
         that this was an entirely appropriate approach in the light of  the
         matters agreed by the parties, which I summarise below.

          i) The FTT's decision contains an  error  of  law  regarding  the
             financial requirements, but its  factual  findings  supporting
             the conclusion that all aspects of  the  relevant  Immigration
             Rules are met with the exception of E-ECC.1.6 are preserved.

         ii) It follows that the only requirement of  the  Rules  that  the
             appellant  is  unable  to  meet  relates   to   his   mother's
             immigration status.  His mother does not have leave  to  enter
             or remain.  She is however in the UK entirely lawfully as  she
             has an EEA family residence card valid until 4  October  2021.
             Given this, according to section 7 of the Immigration Act 1988
             the appellant's mother does not  require  leave  to  enter  or
             remain as she remains in the United Kingdom entirely  lawfully
             and pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

        iii) That means that the proportionality exercise under  Article  8
             must focus upon the public interest in denying  the  appellant
             entry clearance when he meets all requirements  of  the  Rules
             save one and in relation to  that  requirement,  although  his
             mother does not have leave, her status in the UK is lawful and
             will be lawful for an extended period of time.  In effect  the
             requirement to have leave should in all the  circumstances  be
             waived.

         iv) In any event, the appellant's best interests,  viewed  through
             the lens of Article 8 private and family life  firmly  support
             the grant of entry clearance, as does  an  assessment  of  the
             public  interest  considerations  in  section  117B   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Although  there
             may be  an  infringement  of  the  "English  speaking"  public
             interest, the appellant's age is such that  he  is  likely  to
             learn English quickly.  Although he is likely to  be  educated
             at public expense and will have the capacity to  access  other
             publicly funded services and benefits, his  parents  meet  all
             the relevant financial requirements of the Rules.

          v) The public interest  in  maintaining  immigration  control  is
             outweighed by the respect  that  is  due  to  the  appellant's
             family life with his United Kingdom-based family  members  and
             the acknowledgement that all of the more  substantive  aspects
             of the Immigration Rules are met.

Decision

      5. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.




Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 14 November 2019

