
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18505/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 7 October 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                           ARCHIBALD COLE AKUMIAH
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision on 28 August 2018 to maintain her deportation
    decision and to refuse to set it aside on human rights  grounds.    The
    appellant is a citizen of Ghana.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Judge's finding  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  arguably  disclosed  a
    material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  in
    particular the judge's finding that the appellant was not socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom 'solely on the ground  that
    he had committed  the  index  criminal  offence'.   Judge  Kelly,  when
    granting permission, considered it arguable that the grounds of  appeal
    disclosed a material error of law for that  reason,  and  also  because
    arguably  the  First-tier  Judge's  reasoning  on   'very   significant
    obstacles to integration' was inadequate.

 3. During the COVID-19 pandemic, triage directions given by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Blum were sent to the parties.   The  appellant  was  invited  to
    consider making further submissions, with a  right  of  reply  for  the
    respondent should he opt to do so, and both parties  were  required  to
    indicate whether a hearing was required for the material error  of  law
    issue to be decided.

 4. Mr Avery for the respondent filed further submissions in which he noted
    that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom aged  9  in  1999  and
    received indefinite leave to remain in 2000.  Far from having only  one
    criminal offence,  he  had  'an  appalling  and  escalating  record  of
    criminality' from 2011 to 2017, when he was sentenced  to  four  and  a
    half years' imprisonment on a repeat offence of possession with  intent
    to supply class A drugs.  The appellant did not fully  acknowledge  his
    responsibility for his offending.

 5. Mr Avery relied on the guidance in  Binbuga  (Turkey)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ  551  which  held  that
    association with pro-criminal peers and gang members did not amount  to
    integration into the United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal had  found
    that the appellant would be able to integrate on return and that  there
    were no very compelling circumstances as required by section 117C(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

 6. There was no challenge in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Judge's finding that the appellant had no family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Avery asked the Upper Tribunal to uphold the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge.

 7. The appellant did not respond to the triage directions.

 8. Having considered the material before the  Upper  Tribunal,  I  am  not
    satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  error  of  law  as
    identified in the grant of permission read with the grounds of  appeal.
    There is no lack of anxious scrutiny in the First-tier Judge's  31-page
    decision, which is carefully and cogently reasoned and  the  conclusion
    reached by the First-tier Tribunal was unarguably open to the judge.

Decision

 9. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     1 October
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
