
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18840/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On July 31, 2019                     |On August 7, 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              mrs malika Chbani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Moroccan national who initially entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor on March 17, 1990.   She  never  left  the  United
    Kingdom according to her application and  applications  to  extend  her
    stay were refused on September 7, 1990 and thereafter on June 8,  1992,
    June 23, 2008 and November 25, 2014.

 2. On March 6, 2018 the appellant lodged her current application on  human
    rights grounds and this was refused by the respondent on July 3, 2018.

 3. The appellant  appealed  this  decision  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and her appeal came before
    a panel of Judges, namely Judges of the First-tier Tribunal  Froom  and
    Raymond and their decision promulgated on May  1,  2019  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed  this  decision  and  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on  June  10,  2019
    finding it arguable that there may have been procedural  unfairness  by
    refusing to adjourn the hearing and that such a decision to  refuse  to
    adjourn may have impacted on the Judges' credibility assessment of both
    the appellant and her nephew.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Ms Heybroek adopted the grounds of appeal and argued that by failing to
    adjourn the case there had been procedural unfairness which impacted on
    the credibility assessment carried out by the Judges.  The  adjournment
    request arose out of the late service of a previous decision of  Senior
    Immigration Judge Moulden.  That hearing, before the Upper Tribunal  in
    2008, dealt with an error of law application, but the Judge upheld  the
    original decision including the adverse credibility findings in respect
    of both the appellant and her nephew.

 6. Ms Heybroek submitted  that  by  failing  to  adjourn  the  matter  the
    appellant had effectively been ambushed and  had  been  prevented  from
    calling different witnesses to substantiate her case and her claim that
    she had been resident in this country  for  the  period  claimed.   She
    submitted the Judge failed to attach sufficient weight to the fact that
    she had changed her passport in 2005 and the  correspondence  from  the
    Embassy in that regard, and little weight had been given  to  the  fact
    that the nephew was a doctor and his evidence should  have  been  given
    more weight in the circumstances.

 7. Mr Lindsay opposed the application and submitted that it was clear from
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter that her length of time in this  country
    was an issue from the outset and the decision letter made it clear that
    the respondent did not  accept  there  had  been  continuous  residence
    between 1998 and 2018.

 8. The letter from the Embassy did not  actually  prove  she  was  in  the
    country but simply that her passport had been updated and he  submitted
    that credibility was properly addressed by the Judges from paragraph 38
    onwards of their decision.  When the  Upper  Tribunal  dealt  with  the
    matter in November 2008, they were only concerned with a small  gap  of
    between 2001 and 2007, whereas the decision letter made it  clear  that
    there was a lack of evidence covering the whole period.  The  appellant
    and her representatives were therefore on notice of what needed  to  be
    proved and they failed to produce sufficient evidence  to  address  the
    respondent's concerns.

 9. In finding that she had not been resident here, the  Judges  had  taken
    into account the appellant's failure over a number of years to  respond
    to requests to attend for a mammogram and they also attached weight  to
    the fact that if lacked credibility she would not have engaged  with  a
    doctor over a six  year  period.   Two  witnesses  had  given  evidence
    including the appellant, but  their  evidence  had  not  displaced  the
    concerns over the lack of documentation.  The Judges had made a  number
    of adverse findings and these were not affected by the decision not  to
    adjourn the case.

10. In response Ms Heybroek submitted that the issue for this Tribunal  was
    whether the Judges should have adjourned the case and she  invited  the
    Tribunal to find an error of law and to remit the matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

    FINDINGS

11. This is an appeal brought primarily on procedural  unfairness  grounds.
    In considering whether the Judges acted unfairly  it  is  important  to
    have regard to the Record of Proceedings and what  is  recorded  within
    the determination.

12. Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the decision have  not  been  challenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal and effectively they set out why there was a  request
    for an adjournment and why  the  Judges  chose  not  to  adjourn.   The
    challenge brought today is that the Judges were wrong to proceed and it
    is said that  the  failure  to  adjourn  impacted  on  the  credibility
    assessment.

13. Whilst it is always regrettable that evidence is  served  late,  it  is
    important to note that the Tribunal decision relied on was one that was
    issued and served on this appellant over 11 years ago.   The  appellant
    would therefore have been aware that she had  previously  been  refused
    and the witness, her  nephew,  would  also  have  been  aware  of  this
    decision.

14. The refusal by the First-tier Tribunal did not  simply  relate  to  the
    findings in  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  but  was  based  on  their
    assessment of all the evidence.  The  reasons  are  extensive  and  are
    contained between paragraphs 38 and 60.

15. The Judges  gave  detailed  reasons  for  finding  why  they  were  not
    satisfied that she had been residing in this country  for  the  claimed
    period and they also gave detailed reasons why they did  not  find  the
    witnesses credible.

16. They had before them other witness statements supporting the claim that
    the appellant had been here for the  period  claimed  and  whilst  they
    attached less weight to those it is clear they did consider them as  is
    evidenced by the decision.

17. The Judges expressed concern over the fact that she  had  not  attended
    for a mammogram and a cervical smear over a period of six years and  in
    the absence of any other attendance at a doctors this was  significant.



18. Ms Heybroek submitted that the fact the Upper Tribunal decision had not
    been served undermined the First-tier Tribunal's decision in the  sense
    that the Judges placed weight  on  that  decision  without  giving  the
    appellant an opportunity to challenge it.

19. The decision letter, reference page "3 of 6", makes it clear  that  the
    appellant  had  to  provide  documentary  evidence  showing  continuous
    residence from 1998 to 2018 and the respondent was not  satisfied  with
    the evidence that was  subsequently  provided.   The  letter  from  the
    Embassy was a snapshot of one incident and did not  assist  the  Judges
    with the question of whether she had continuously resided  here  during
    that period or had not been absent  for  a  period  of  more  than  six
    months.  Ultimately, how many witnesses the appellant called to support
    her case was a matter for her.

20. The reality is that the Judges did consider  the  request  to  adjourn,
    they did consider the interest of justice and  concluded  that  it  was
    open to them to proceed, especially as there were  two  live  witnesses
    available to give evidence and ultimately  their  assessment  of  their
    evidence was crucial to the case. Their findings were open to them.

21. In the circumstances I do not find the decision to adjourn amounted  to
    an error in law and consequently the second, but  linked  ground,  that
    this impacted on the credibility assessment has no merit.

    DECISION

22. I find no error of law and I uphold the original decision.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         2 August 2019



[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.




Signed                              Date         2 August 2019



[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


