
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/18589/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2020                  |On 3 December 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             PREMNATH PALANISAMY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Turner, instructed by Greater London Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born  on  17  July  1990.   He
    appeals against the decision of FtT  Judge  Evans,  promulgated  on  25
    February 2020.  Judge Evans found  that  the  appellant  had  not  used
    deception in obtaining his English language certificate, but  dismissed
    his appeal.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the UT arise from a  consent  order  in  prior
    proceedings between the parties in the Court of Appeal, which said that
    if the appellant succeeded in the FtT on the issue  of  deception,  the
    respondent would "take reasonable steps to put him  into  the  position
    [he] would have been as of 7 September 2015 ... had the allegation  not
    been made".

 3. FtT Judge Bulpitt, granting permission, was  of  the  view  that  while
    Judge Evans had not been addressed by reference to  the  consent  order
    and to case law as he might have been, there was arguable error in  not
    allowing the appeal so that the appellant could be given  a  reasonable
    opportunity of securing further leave to remain, having been found  not
    to have cheated.

 4.  I  conducted  the  hearing  today  from   George   House,   Edinburgh.
    Representatives attended remotely.  The technology enabled an effective
    hearing.

 5. Having heard submissions, I was satisfied that  the  point  speaks  for
    itself, and is an error of law, such that the decision cannot stand.

 6. Having  heard  submissions  also  on  remaking,  I  find  it  to  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's private life  rights
    that he was deprived of the benefit of the respondent's undertaking  in
    terms of the consent order.

 7. It is to be expected that this decision will be followed by a grant  of
    leave sufficient to satisfy that undertaking.

 8. The appeal, as originally brought to  the  FtT,  is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      25 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

