
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18137/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 9 January 2020                    |On 27 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                MANDEEP SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey of Counsel instructed by SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This case comes back before the Tribunal to remake the decision in  the
    appeal further to the 'error of law' decision and Directions of  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman following the hearing on 9 October 2019.

2.   The facts and circumstances of the case are helpfully set  out  in  the
    'error of law' decision of Judge Chapman at paragraphs 1 and 2.  It  is
    unnecessary to repeat those matters here.

3.   I am grateful for the helpful and realistic position that Mr Mills  has
    adopted this morning on behalf of the Respondent in light of having had
    the benefit of considering the  skeleton  submissions  drafted  on  the
    Appellant's behalf by Ms Harvey.

4.   The issue in the appeal is narrow.

5.   The Appellant is a national of India born on 5 March 1992 who  made  an
    application for entry clearance  as  a  spouse.   The  application  was
    refused with reference to paragraph 320(11) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The decision-making Entry Clearance  Officer  was  otherwise  satisfied
    that the Appellant had demonstrated that he met  the  requirements  for
    entry as a spouse.

6.   Paragraph 320(11) was relied upon with  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    immigration history and alleged conduct whilst previously in the United
    Kingdom.  Paragraph 320(11) is a discretionary provision that  provides
    that  an  application  "should  normally  be  refused"  in   particular
    specified circumstances.  The circumstances required under 320(11)  are
    that "the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant  way  to
    frustrate the intention of the Rules  by"  -  amongst  other  things  -
    "overstaying", and that "there are other aggravating circumstances".

7.   There cannot be - and indeed there  is  not  -  any  dispute  that  the
    Appellant overstayed his leave during his previous time in  the  United
    Kingdom.

8.   The Respondent relied additionally upon the  aggravating  circumstances
    of the Appellant allegedly making frivolous applications to prolong his
    stay in the United Kingdom, and that he had worked illegally whilst  in
    the United Kingdom.

9.   Mr Mills no longer seeks to rely upon  the  allegation  in  respect  of
    frivolous applications.  It is clear that a number of  applications  in
    pursuit  of  leave  to  remain  were  made  whilst  the  Appellant  was
    previously in the United Kingdom. However  it  is  apparent  -  and  no
    longer disputed - that during the  course  of  those  applications  the
    Appellant  not  only  advanced  additional  information  in  successive
    applications (as is acknowledged in the various refusal  letters),  but
    also in the course of successive applications managed to  persuade  the
    Secretary of State that his relationship with his  spouse  was  genuine
    this not having been accepted initially in the  application  considered
    and refused on 7 October 2016.  In  such  circumstances  I  agree  with
    Mills' concession that the applications could not be  characterised  as
    frivolous.

10.  Mr Mills does not expressly concede that the Appellant's  illegal  work
    in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not  be  considered  as  an  'aggravating
    circumstance'.

11.  In this regard it is to  be  noted  that  the  Appellant  was  detained
    whilst working illegally on 6 October 2016.   Whilst  there  is  not  a
    detailed history of his employment in the UK provided by  either  side,
    it was acknowledged by the Appellant's sponsoring wife at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the  Appellant  had  indeed  worked
    whilst in the United Kingdom.  It  is  also  said  in  the  Appellant's
    witness statement that he had worked in order to provide for  his  wife
    and her son from a previous relationship, and also to fund the  various
    applications made to the Home Office and the fees  of  lawyers.   These
    admitted matters indicate that the employment was not  limited  to  the
    mere occasion on which the Appellant was arrested.

12.  However, whether or not such employment is to be  characterised  as  an
    aggravating  circumstance  essentially  becomes  moot  in  the  current
    proceedings in light of Mr Mills' concession.  For my part,  I  observe
    that very careful consideration would be  required  before  reaching  a
    conclusion in any particular case that taking employment whilst in  the
    United Kingdom was an aggravating circumstance.  Be that as it may,  as
    Mr Mills readily recognises and as I have adverted to above,  paragraph
    320(11) is a discretionary provision.  In  the  circumstances  of  this
    particular case - and bearing in mind in particular that the  Appellant
    having  been  unsuccessful  in  his  various  applications  then   made
    arrangements to leave the United Kingdom voluntarily in order  to  make
    the appropriate application for entry clearance from abroad - Mr  Mills
    concedes that  the  discretion  under  320(11)  even  if  its  required
    premises were to be established should not  be  exercised  against  the
    Appellant.  I accept that concession.

13.   In  those  circumstances  there  is  no  outstanding  reason  for  the
    Appellant's application under the Rules  to  be  refused.   That  is  a
    reflection, therefore, of where the proportionality balance  lies.   It
    is not disputed that this is an application to promote family  life  in
    that the Appellant seeks to rejoin his  wife  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Accordingly, there is no dispute that the provisions  of  Article  8(1)
    are engaged.  In light of the satisfaction  of  the  Rules  it  is  now
    readily conceded by Mr Mills that it would be disproportionate for  the
    Appellant to continue to be excluded  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appeal is allowed on that basis accordingly.

14.  Ms Harvey requests that a fee award be made in favour of the  Appellant
    and Mr Mills does not resist  that  application.   Accordingly,  a  fee
    award will be made for the fees in lodging the  appeal.   There  is  no
    application in respect of costs.



Notice of Decision

15.  I remake the decision in the appeal  further  to  the  'error  of  law'
    decision of Judge Chapman.  The  appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

16.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 20 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all the  circumstances  make  a  whole  fee
award.


Signed:  Date: 20 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
