
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18070/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On Tuesday 19 December 2017               |On Wednesday 10 January 2018     |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            MS VESH KUMARI LIMBU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dingley, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co,
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  reason
in this case to make an anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Nightingale promulgated on 23  August  2017  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 14 June 2016 refusing her leave to enter  the  UK  as
       the adult child of the widow of a Gurkha settled in the UK.


    2. The Appellant is a national of  Nepal.   Her  father  was  a  Gurkha
       veteran.  He and the Appellant's mother were settled in the UK prior
       to his death on 23 July 2013.   Immediately  after  his  death,  the
       Appellant applied to enter as a dependent child but her  application
       was rejected in 2013 and she did  not  appeal  that  decision.   Her
       application on this occasion was made in May 2016.


    3. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision on the  basis  that
       the refusal disproportionately  interfered  with  her  family  life;
       alternatively, that the Respondent had failed to take  into  account
       in her discretion the historic injustice relating to the position of
       Gurkhas and their families.


    4. The Judge dismissed the appeal.  She did so  firstly  on  the  basis
       that there is no family life between the Appellant  and  her  mother
       ("the Sponsor").  The reasoning behind that  finding  was  that  the
       Appellant is now an adult (and was at the date of application), that
       she is leading an independent life in Nepal (where she has a  number
       of siblings) and has failed  to  show  an  emotional  and  financial
       dependency on the Sponsor.  The Judge found that, even if  that  was
       wrong, there was  no  sufficiently  serious  interference  with  the
       Appellant's family life to require justification.   In  the  further
       alternative, she found that any interference was proportionate.


    5. The Appellant raises four grounds.  The first three  grounds  assert
       that the Judge has misunderstood the facts and/or evidence  and  has
       accordingly unlawfully misdirected herself.  The  fourth  and  fifth
       grounds  focus  on  the  Article  8  assessment.   In  summary,  the
       Appellant  says  that  the  Judge  has  left  out  of  account   any
       consideration of the historic injustice  in  Gurkha  cases  and  the
       jurisprudence in that regard.


    6. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shimmin  on  23
       October 2017 in the following terms so far as relevant:-


           "... 2.     It is arguable that the judge has materially erred
           in that she has misdirected herself on the facts and law and has
           failed to apply the law as set out in the grounds of appeal.
           3.    I grant permission on all grounds"


    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Discussion and conclusions


    8. I begin with the errors of fact which are asserted.   The first  two
       concern what is said at [29] of the Decision concerning the  refusal
       of an earlier application and the making of the  second  application
       which was the subject of the  decision  under  appeal  now.   It  is
       accepted that the Appellant did not appeal the earlier  refusal  but
       instead made a second application.  The Judge said  this  about  the
       reasons behind that failure to appeal and the timing of  the  second
       application:-


           "... I note the previous refusal in 2013.  No attempt  was  made
           to bring an appeal against this decision, and I  do  not  accept
           that the documents were not received until the time for bringing
           an appeal had passed.  If this were genuinely the case,  a  late
           appeal could have been brought with  an  application  to  extend
           time. It was not.  Further, no  application  was  made  for  the
           following two years during which time the appellant's father had
           passed away and she had moved away from the family home to  live
           in  Kathmandu  to,  it  is  said,  undertake  studies.   I  find
           considerable merit in the ECM's comments regarding  the  "window
           of opportunity" that was open to this appellant  and  which  has
           now passed as time has moved on."
           [my emphasis]


    9. The section about which the Appellant complains is  that  underlined
       above. As will become clear when I turn  to  consider  the  asserted
       errors of law, however, it is the last sentence  in  that  paragraph
       which is central to the Judge's reasoning and not the facts  leading
       up to that finding.  In fact, as I will  come  to  later,  the  lost
       "window of opportunity" is not that between the earlier  application
       and this application/appeal but a failure  to  make  an  application
       between 2009 (or at latest 2011) and 2013  when  the  Appellant  was
       still a child and prior to her father's death.


   10. The Appellant was born on 4 September 1995  and  did  not  therefore
       turn eighteen until 4 September 2013.    Her  parents  were  granted
       indefinite  leave  to  enter  on  9  March  2010.    They  made   an
       application for their daughter born on 16 March  1993  and  she  was
       granted settlement on 6  May  2010.    The  Appellant's  father  and
       younger sibling came to the UK before  the  Appellant's  mother  who
       stayed with her other children in Nepal.  She came to the UK  on  14
       October 2011.  An application was made for the  Appellant's  younger
       brother and he was granted settlement on 9 February 2012.


   11. The first application for the Appellant was not made until 2  August
       2013 but she was still at that time a minor.  Reasons are  given  in
       the Sponsor's statement for the delay but the fact remains that  the
       application was made  at  a  time  when  the  Appellant  could  have
       qualified for settlement as  a  minor.   The  reason  that  she  was
       refused, however, was because her father had died by the time of the
       application.


   12. What is said in the Sponsor's statement ([9]) is that the family did
       not know that they were entitled to  appeal  and  the  deadline  had
       passed by the time that they realised they could appeal.  True it is
       that the Judge's recitation of that evidence at [29] is not entirely
       in line with what is said in the statement.  However,  if  anything,
       the Judge's interpretation favours the Appellant rather than  acting
       to her detriment because the Judge's understanding provides a reason
       explaining the failure to appeal.  In any event, whether the failure
       to appeal was due to the Sponsor being unaware of the possibility of
       an appeal rather than not receiving the papers in  time,  the  point
       made by the Judge that the Appellant could have sought to appeal out
       of time still holds good.


   13. That leads me on to the second asserted error of fact concerning the
       timing of  the  second  application.   The  Judge  appears  to  have
       misunderstood  that  the  Appellant's  father  died  before   either
       application and not between applications (see [29] as cited  above).
        If the reason for the delay in making the earlier  application  had
       to do with the Appellant's father's death, that might, perhaps, be a
       relevant misunderstanding.  However, that  is  not  the  Appellant's
       case (see [6] - [7] of the Sponsor's statement).   The  rather  more
       pertinent part of the Judge's reasoning at [29] of the  Decision  is
       in any event that the Appellant  then  waited  two  years  from  the
       earlier refusal (on  3  December  2013)  before  making  the  second
       application on 27 May 2016.


   14. For those reasons, neither of the  first  two  errors  of  fact  are
       material to the Judge's reasoning on the central issues.  The  third
       potentially falls into a different category.   That  error  concerns
       what is said at [30] of the Decision about the source of  the  funds
       transmitted to the Appellant from the UK as follows:-


            "[30]      It is  said  that  the  appellant  continues  to  be
           supported by the sponsor [and] remained dependent upon her after
           leaving the family home.   I do not  find  that  this  has  been
           established on balance.  It is said that the appellant does  not
           have a bank account and therefore cannot give a schedule of  her
           outgoings, but this explanation I find not credible.   It  would
           have been easy to put together a schedule of rent costs, college
           fees, food and books and other expenses which the appellant has.
            It would have then been very easy to show financial remittances
           which  had  covered  these  expenses  from  the  time  that  the
           appellant left the family home to live in Kathmandu and the date
           of application. No such schedule or, indeed, evidence of support
           from 2013 has been produced.  The few  money  transfer  receipts
           which have been submitted are from 2016, around the time of  the
           application, despite the claim  that  this  appellant  has  been
           dependent upon the sponsor on an ongoing basis.   Further,  such
           money remittances as there are are largely sent by  the  witness
           and not by the sponsor.  The sponsor  is  of  extremely  limited
           means.  Her rent is paid by housing benefit, which she said  was
           paid directly, yet the witness said he  sometimes  had  to  "top
           up", and she also receives a pension  and  pension  credit.  The
           witness sometimes buys  food  and  helps  with  other  expenses.
           There is nothing before me to show that she  has  any  money  to
           spare to fully support or, indeed,  support  in  any  meaningful
           way, the needs of the appellant.  She is  helped  from  time  to
           time on her limited income from the witness.  The  witness  said
           that when his mother asks him he sometimes sends  money  to  the
           appellant, but this was not on a  regular  basis.  There  is  no
           evidence before me that the support, if  any,  provided  by  the
           sponsor to  the  appellant  has  been  ongoing  or,  indeed,  is
           sufficient to meet her basic needs...."


   15.  The sentence complained of is that underlined in the above passage.
        It is true that the money transfers which appear in the Appellant's
       bundle at pages [116] to [119] emanate from the Sponsor and not  the
       Appellant's brother settled in the UK (the "witness" as referred  to
       by the Judge).  However, in the first place this does not prove that
       the money comes from the Sponsor herself rather than money  provided
       to her by the Appellant's brother.  That is perhaps what is meant by
       this sentence  in  the  context  of  the  paragraph.   Although  the
       Sponsor's statement refers to her and the Appellant's father sending
       the Appellant money regularly and says that she  did  not  keep  the
       transfer receipts, that appears to  relate  to  the  time  when  the
       Appellant's father was  alive.   The  Sponsor's  statement  at  [43]
       asserts that the Appellant's siblings would be the  ones  supporting
       the Appellant if she came to the  UK  (although  the  Sponsor  would
       accommodate her).


   16. Even if this is an error of fact, once again, that sentence  is  not
       the material one to the Judge's central finding.   The  issue  dealt
       with in this paragraph is whether the Appellant can show that she is
       emotionally and financially dependent on her family in the  UK  such
       that family life continues to  exist  between  them  notwithstanding
       that she is now an adult (and appears on the evidence to  be  living
       her own life away from the family home in Nepal in  the  area  where
       three of her siblings apparently still live).  In terms of financial
       dependency, as the Judge points out, the relevant issue of  fact  is
       that there is evidence only of transfers for a period  between  2016
       and 2017 and nothing prior to this.   There is also no  evidence  of
       the Appellant's outgoings to show that she  is  dependent  on  these
       transfers for her living expenses.


   17. Even if this is an error of fact and material  to  the  issue  under
       consideration, the difficulty which the Appellant faces is that  the
       Judge, having found at [32] of the Decision that the  Appellant  had
       not established on the evidence that she still  shared  family  life
       with the Sponsor, went on at [33] of the Decision  to  consider  the
       position if family life were established.


   18. For those reasons, the third asserted error of fact, if error it is,
       is not material to the Judge's reasoning.


   19. I turn then to the two asserted errors of law.   The  first  asserts
       that the Judge has erred in her analysis as to family life  at  [32]
       of the Decision because she has failed  to  take  into  account  the
       previous historic injustice perpetrated against  Gurkhas  and  their
       families.  It is said that the case-law shows that the threshold for
       establishing family life is lower in consequence.


   20. I note first that this analysis of the case-law runs contrary to the
       submission made for the  Respondent  as  recorded  at  [21]  of  the
       Decision, that it is only at the proportionality stage that historic
       injustice becomes relevant.  It also appears to be contrary  to  the
       submission for the Appellant noted at [23] of the Decision.   It  is
       no doubt for that reason that the Judge addressed this issue at [34]
       of the  Decision  when  considering  her  reasoning  in  the  second
       alternative that proportionality  falls  to  be  considered  because
       there is family life and sufficiently serious interference with that
       family life to require justification (see  [33]  of  the  Decision).
       Indeed, it is also part and parcel of the error of law  as  asserted
       that the Judge failed to take into account  the  historic  injustice
       issue when weighing proportionality.


   21. In relation to this issue, what the Judge said was this:-


           "[34] ...Regarding the historic injustice, the sponsor's husband
           had the opportunity prior to his death to  make  an  application
           for the appellant to come to the United Kingdom  and  failed  to
           appeal the decision made in 2013.  There was an opportunity  for
           the appellant to join her parents, but the time for this has now
           passed ..."


   22. That relates back to the  point  I  made  at  [9]  above  about  the
       relevance of  the  timing  of  the  two  applications  made  by  the
       Appellant and the failure to appeal the first decision.  In fairness
       to the Appellant, the fact that her father had died before the first
       application was clearly relevant to the failure of that  application
       and it is by no means clear that an  appeal  against  that  decision
       would have succeeded.  However,  as  I  put  to  Mr  Dingley  it  is
       difficult to see how the Appellant has  suffered  any  injustice  by
       reason of the Respondent's treatment of Gurkha  cases.   The  reason
       her applications have failed is that they were  left  too  late  (as
       indeed is shown by the fact that both of her younger  siblings  were
       permitted to settle when  they  applied  prior  to  the  Appellant's
       father's death).  Mr Dingley accepted in his  submissions  that  the
       Appellant might be in some difficulty  on  the  chronology  here  in
       showing any historic injustice arising  from  her  position  as  the
       adult daughter of a Gurkha veteran.


   23. For those reasons, the error of law asserted at (d) is not made out.
        The final error asserted at (e) appears to be the same point put  a
       slightly different way  by  reference  to  the  legal  framework  as
       applicable in Gurkha cases.  However, there is no error of  law  for
       the same reason as above.  This is not a  case  to  be  set  in  the
       context of the Gurkha policies.  The  Appellant's  application  (and
       appeal) failed because she could have made an application after 2009
       (and certainly after her parents settled  here  in  2011)  at  which
       stage  her  father  was  alive  and  she  was  still  a  minor.  Her
       application failed not because of any historic injustice relating to
       the treatment of Gurkhas and their  families  but  because,  as  the
       Judge put it succinctly at [34]  of  the  Decision,  "there  was  an
       opportunity for the appellant to join her parents, but the time  for
       this has now passed."   Very  unfortunately,  the  Appellant  failed
       because her application was simply made too late.  For all of  those
       reasons, I am satisfied that there is no material error  of  law  in
       the Decision.





      DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain any material error of
    law. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale  promulgated
    on 23 August 2017 is maintained.




    Signed             [pic]           Dated:  9 January 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
