
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal              Appeal Number: HU/18475/2018
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)







                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2019                          |                              |
|                                            |On 22 October 2019            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                            Appellant
                                    -and-

                                     R W
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)

                                                             Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:         The Appellant did not attend and was not legally
represented
For the Respondent:         Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of  Jamaica.  The  Appellant  accepts  the
    that Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom  in  September  1997  but
    does not accept that he has lived here continuously  since  that  time.



2.   Six of the Respondent's children  live  here;  as  do  his  mother  and
    brother. He is in contact with his eldest son, who is now an adult, and
    also his second youngest child, who is six  years  old  and  who  is  a
    British citizen.

3.   The Respondent was convicted for six offences between  12  August  2016
    and 4 February 2019. His last offence post-dated  that  decision  under
    appeal.

4.   On 19 May 2017 the Respondent applied for leave to remain on the  basis
    of his family life with his children but his application was refused on
    28 August 2018 on the basis  that  he  did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements contained in section S-SLTR.1.6  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules because his presence was not conducive to the  public
    good.

5.   The Respondent appealed  and  his  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gibbs in a decision promulgated on 17 July 2019  on  the
    basis that he met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The Appellant appealed  against  this  decision  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted her permission to appeal on 11
    September 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   By 11.25 the Respondent had not  attended  the  hearing  or  given  any
    reason for not doing so.  The notice of hearing had been  sent  to  the
    address last given  by  the  Respondent  as  his  home  address  on  27
    September  2019  and  had  not  been  returned  to  the  Tribunal.  The
    Respondent had not provided any telephone number on which he  could  be
    contacted. Therefore, I found that it was in the interests  of  justice
    to continue with the hearing in  the  Respondent's  absence.  The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer made oral submissions and I have taken  these
    into account when reaching my findings below.  She was also of the view
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  as  the
    correct test had not been applied by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted the  Appellant  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that it was arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Gibbs erred in law when  she  found  that  the  Respondent  was  not  a
    persistent offender. He also found that the Appellant's  other  grounds
    of appeal may be arguable.

8.   In paragraph 24  of  her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs
    accepted that the Respondent had been living in the United Kingdom  for
    a continuous period of twenty  years.  Therefore,  he  was  potentially
    entitled to leave to remain under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  unless  he
    failed to  meet  any  of  the  suitability  requirements  contained  in
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

9.   In the refusal letter the Appellant had asserted that the  Respondent's
    offending brought him within paragraph S-LTR.1.6. of Appendix FM to the
    Immigration Rules which states:

     "The presence of the applicant in  the  UK  is  not  conducive  to  the
    public good because their conduct (including convictions which  do  not
    fall within paragraph S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character, associations,  or
    other reasons make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK".

10.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs  did  not  address  this  paragraph
    directly but instead, found at paragraph 20 of her decision, that:

     "The appellant's evidence is  that  the  battery  and  criminal  damage
    events were domestic in nature and that despite the charges no  serious
    violence was involved. He explained his  failure  to  comply  with  the
    Community Order was due to the fact that he was living  rough  and  was
    unable to attend on a weekly basis as he was required to do. As I  have
    said I find that the appellant is a credible witness. I find  that  the
    criminal convictions occurred within a three year  period,  which  when
    viewed in the context of residence in the UK since  1997  leads  me  to
    conclude that the appellant is not a persistent offender and, as he  is
    currently under a suspended prison sentence, he  has  every  reason  to
    behave himself going forward".

11.  The failure to address paragraph S-LTR.1.6. was, in  itself,  an  error
    of law.

12.  In her refusal letter, the Appellant had not  relied  on  paragraph  S-
    LTR.1.5. which states:

     "The presence of the applicant in  the  UK  is  not  conducive  to  the
    public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State, ...they are
    a persistent offender, who shows a particular disregard for the law".

13.  However, as submitted by the Home Office Presenting Officer,  the  fact
    that an appellant was a persistent offender would also be  relevant  to
    the question of whether it would be undesirable to allow him to  remain
    in the UK and would need to be assessed in the context  of  the  recent
    case of Tolga Binbuga v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 551, which endorsed the decision in Chege  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] Imm AR 833.  In paragraph 53 of
    the  latter  case,  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  "put  simply,  a
    "persistent offender" is someone who keeps on breaking the  law...  the
    question whether he fits that description will depend  on  the  overall
    picture and pattern of his offending over his entire offending  history
    up to that date. Each case will turn on its own facts".

14.  In paragraph 57 the Upper Tribunal also found that:

     "In order to answer  the  question  whether  someone  is  a  persistent
    offender, the decision-maker (be it the Tribunal or  the  Secretary  of
    State) must consider the whole  history  of  the  individual  from  the
    commission of the first offence up to the date of the decision and  ask
    themselves whether he can properly be described as someone who keeps on
    committing criminal offences".

15.  Therefore, in so far  as  the  question  of  persistent  offending  was
    relevant to the test contained in paragraph  S-LTR.1.6.,  the  approach
    taken by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs did not conform with  the  one
    recommended by the Court of Appeal which was that the  relevant  period
    started at the time of the first offence and continued until  the  date
    of the decision. In the current case it  was  also  relevant  that  the
    Appellant had continued to offend after the date of the decision  under
    appeal.

16.  However, I am not persuaded that paragraph 276ADE  required  the  Judge
    to  balance  the  public  interest  against  the  Respondent's   family
    circumstances. The test was that contained in paragraph S-LTR.1.6.

17.  Once the Judge had found that the  Respondent  was  entitled  to  leave
    under the Immigration Rules, he was not required to  go  on  to  decide
    that he was also entitled to leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. But if she did make such a decision, as she did in paragraph 27,
    she was under an obligation to provide reasons for the decision (See MK
    (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)). In  addition,
    she  should  have  applied  sections  117  A-D  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

18.  As a consequence, I find that there were errors of  law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gibbs' decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs'  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Gibbs and Safffer.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 17 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


