
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/18454/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 June 2021                    |On 6 July 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                KAMRAN ASLAM

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



For the appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, instructed by MA Consultants (London)

For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan  with  date  of  birth  given  as
   4.4.78, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  17.1.20  (Judge  Birk),
   dismissing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  5.11.19
   refusing his application made on 30.8.19 for leave to remain  in  the  UK
   based on family life with his sponsoring wife and stepson, F.

2. In summary, the grounds of application for permission asserted  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal's article 8 assessment was flawed in that  the  judge
   failed  to  properly  consider  EX1  in  respect   of   the   appellant's
   relationship  with  his  stepchild,  with  whom  he  claimed  a  parental
   relationship. It is argued that the judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
   finding that EX1 did not apply, and made  an  unreasoned  and  inadequate
   consideration of s117B(6).

3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 14.4.20, on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  in  the  article  8  assessment  as
   asserted in the grounds.

4. On 2.7.20, the Upper Tribunal issued directions proposing that the  error
   of law issue should be decided  on  the  papers  without  a  hearing  and
   provided for further written submissions.

5. On 9.7.20, the Upper Tribunal received by email  the  respondent's  brief
   submissions accepting that the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  at
   [28] of the decision when concluding that the appellant  failed  to  meet
   Appendix FM after earlier finding at [24] of the same  decision  that  it
   would be unreasonable to expect F, then 17 years of  age  and  a  British
   citizen, to leave the UK. At [25], the judge found that the appellant met
   the requirements of EX1 with regard to the parental relationship with the
   stepson. The respondent accepted that this  finding  necessarily  infects
   the subsequent article 8 considerations. The respondent invited the Upper
   Tribunal to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  relist
   the matter in the Upper Tribunal with no  findings  preserved,  according
   the appellant the opportunity to  provide  updated  evidence  as  to  the
   current circumstances of F, particularly given the stage he was at in his
   education.

6. The appellant's response to  the  directions,  dated  14.7.20,  concurred
   with the respondent as to the error of law.  However,  it  was  submitted
   that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  preserve  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   findings at [18] to the effect that it was accepted  that  the  appellant
   and his wife had been residing together as a couple for  over  two  years
   and that F has resided with them since returning from Pakistan, is not in
   contact with his birth father, and "Therefore, family  life  does  exist,
   and Article 8 is engaged." The appellant also sought preservation of  the
   finding at [21] of the  decision  that  F's  evidence  was  credible  and
   reasonable.

7. In my Rule 34 error  of  law  decision,  considered  on  the  papers  and
   without an oral hearing, I concluded that there was an error  of  law  in
   the judge's finding at [28] of the decision that the appellant failed  to
   meet the Appendix FM requirements, which the  judge  considered  to  bear
   heavily against him in the article 8 proportionality balancing  exercise.
   This appears to contradict the earlier findings in respect of  EX1  as  a
   parent.

8. In the circumstances, I concluded that the decision could not  stand  and
   must be set aside for error of law.  I  directed  that  the  decision  be
   remade in the Upper Tribunal.

9. There was and the case remains that  there  is  no  objection  by  either
   party to my decision being made on the papers under Rule 34  or  for  the
   decision to be remade in the light of that earlier decision.

10. The Upper Tribunal has  now  received:  (1)  the  respondent's  skeleton
   argument, dated 13.10.20; (2) the appellant's undated skeleton  argument;
   (3) the appellant's bundle for the Upper Tribunal, sent  under  cover  of
   email dated 11.5.21;  and  (4),  the  appellant's  unsigned  and  undated
   witness statement, sent under cover of an email on the  day  of  hearing,
   14.5.21. Despite my directions requiring the same, there has been no Rule
   15(2A) application and no agreed, consolidated bundle.

11. A previous listing for this continuation hearing of  4.2.21  had  to  be
   adjourned because of illness. The next listed date of 14.5.21 also had to
   be adjourned because,  despite  my  directions  requiring  one,  no  Urdu
   interpreter was provided.

12. I have carefully considered my decision in the light of the  submissions
   and the grounds of application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

Preliminary Issue

13. Whilst setting aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  its
   entirety, I left open for further submission and argument whether any  of
   the findings of fact from the First-tier  Tribunal  could  or  should  be
   preserved. In its skeleton argument, the  respondent  asserted  that  the
   evidence pointed both ways, both in favour of and against the  appellant,
   and suggested it would be illogical to preserve only  those  findings  in
   the appellant's favour. Unsurprisingly, the appellant sought to  persuade
   me to preserve the findings at [18] and [21] of the  First-tier  Tribunal
   decision.

14. After hearing from  both  representatives,  I  note  that  there  was  a
   measure of agreement that any findings as to family life  in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal decision could relate only to the situation  prevailing  at
   the date of promulgation of that decision on 17.1.20, following a hearing
   on 31.12.19. In the premises, neither party objected to  my  preservation
   of the clear findings at [18] of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  that
   the appellant and his partner had been residing together as a couple  for
   what was then just over 2 years and that Faizaan had  resided  with  them
   since his return from Pakistan. Judge Birk found that family life between
   the three did exist and, therefore, that article 8 ECHR  was  engaged  at
   that time.

15. Both the appellant and the son of his partner,  Mr  Faizaan  Ahmed  (dob
   6.6.02), attended the hearing remotely. The appellant's partner did  not.
   The contents of Faizaan's short statement dated 14.10.20 is to the effect
   that whilst (now 19 years of age)  and  continuing  with  his  university
   studies, because of the Covid-19 pandemic he mostly  studies  online  and
   only attends university about once a week. His intention even  after  the
   lockdown is fully lifted is to continue to reside at home and commute  to
   university in Nottingham. As I remarked in the hearing, the  contents  of
   this statement are unsurprising. Mr Gajjar  also  agreed  that  Faizaan's
   assertions in the statement that he is dependent on both his  mother  and
   the appellant is a subjective believe and it is for me to  determine  the
   extent of any dependency, the family circumstances as they are today, and
   in turn the relevance  in  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise.  Mr
   Gajjar and Ms Everett both agreed that we could proceed on the  basis  of
   Faizaan's statement having been adopted and Ms Everett's concession  that
   there was no point in cross-examination of Faizaan.  Mr  Gajjar  did  not
   intend to call the appellant's partner. It followed that  that  concluded
   the evidential aspect for the remaking of the decision and what  remained
   was for legal submissions.

16. Relying on the respondent's  skeleton  argument,  Ms  Everett  submitted
   that given that Faizaan had now reached  adulthood,  the  extent  of  his
   relationship with the appellant was a 'grey area' in terms of  article  8
   ECHR.  She  suggested  that  although  there  was  evidence  of  a   warm
   relationship between them, there was not a wealth of evidence to  suggest
   that there was a dependency of Faizaan on  the  appellant  sufficient  to
   engage family life under article 8 ECHR. If the Tribunal  concluded  that
   family life was engaged, Mr Everett  further  submitted  that  given  the
   circumstances and that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of  the
   Rules, it was not disproportionate to require him to  leave  the  UK  and
   seek entry clearance from Pakistan. The fact that he may not been able to
   meet the financial requirements of  Appendix  FM  could  not  render  the
   decision disproportionate.

17. Mr Gajjar relied on the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  and  submitted
   further that because of her relationship with her son in the UK,  it  was
   not reasonable to expect the appellant's partner  to  leave  the  UK  for
   Pakistan  with  the  appellant.  It  was   submitted   that   given   the
   circumstances of the Covid-19 pandemic little had changed in  the  family
   circumstances since the First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing  in  December
   2019. Mr Gajjar also agreed that given the son had now reached  19  years
   of age, this was a 'grey area' but pointed out that Faizaan did not  have
   contact with his biological father. Reliance was placed on the  statement
   in Singh & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA
   Civ 630 that, "A child enjoying a family life with his parents  does  not
   suddenly cease to have a family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of
   age. On the other hand, a young adult living independently of his parents
   may well not have a family life for the purpose of  Article  8."  It  was
   submitted but without evidential support that as Pakistan is  on  the  UK
   government's red list, the appellant would be prevented from returning to
   the UK even for short visits. Effectively, Mr Gajjar was submitting  that
   there were exceptional circumstances outside  the  Rules  which  rendered
   exclusion  of  the  appellant   unjustifiably   harsh   and,   therefore,
   disproportionate. Mr Gajjar  stated  that  section  55  of  the  Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the best interests  of  a  child
   were not relied on.

18. After considering the evidence and submissions outlined above, I  remake
   the decision in the appeal on the following factual basis:

     a. The appellant came to the UK as a visitor in 2005  and  overstayed.
        He has had no lawful leave to remain since 2005.

     b. He entered into an  Islamic  form  of  marriage  with  his  British
        citizen partner in July 2016 in the full knowledge that he  had  no
        leave to remain. They are not validly married under UK law.

     c. The appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
        for leave to remain either under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM.

     d. There are no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant's  family
        life with his partner continuing outside the UK, should she  choose
        to accompany him.

     e. The appellant and his partner were dishonest in continuing to  take
        the financial benefit discount of single occupancy of their home in
        Council Tax obligations.

     f. Despite the lies told to the local authority,  I  accept  that  the
        appellant and his partner have continued  to  live  together  in  a
        genuine and subsisting relationship, a period found by  the  First-
        tier Tribunal in December 2019 to be then more than 2 years.

     g. Faizaan, also a British citizen, has no contact with his biological
        father and since the age of 14 he has lived in the family home with
        the appellant and his mother. The appellant  has  effectively  been
        the only father-figure in his life from that age. They have a  warm
        relationship.

     h. Faizaan is now 19 years of age and will shortly  be  a  second-year
        undergraduate student at Nottingham University.  Primarily  because
        of the restrictions imposed as a result of  the  Covid-19  pandemic
        and lockdown, he has continued to live  at  home,  mainly  studying
        online and attending university occasionally. His assertion that he
        intends to commute to university even after the lockdown is  lifted
        has not been challenged.

Consideration of the Merits

19. It is clear, as Ms Everett pointed out, the  appellant  has  pivoted  to
   rely primarily on the relationship with his partner's son  Faizaan.  Both
   representatives  have  described  the  circumstances  in  which   Faizaan
   continues to live in the family home even  though  now  aged  19  and  at
   university as a "grey area" as he is no longer a child, yet  claiming  to
   be dependent on the appellant.

20. On a consideration of the evidence as a whole, and despite Ms  Everett's
   submission to the contrary, I am satisfied that the appellant does  enjoy
   family life  with  both  his  partner  and  her  son  Faizaan,  at  least
   sufficient  to  engage  article  8  ECHR,  applying  the  Razgar  stepped
   approach, and bearing in mind that the threshold for family life is a low
   one. There is and has been a family  life  in  a  family  unit  in  which
   Faizaan continues, for the moment, to be a part.

21. However,  the  key  issue  is  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise
   between on the one hand the  public  interest  in  enforcing  immigration
   control and on the other the right to respect  for  family  life  of  the
   appellant, his partner, and  her  son  Faizaan.  More  particularly,  the
   limited nature and extent of that family must  be  balanced  against  the
   competing interests. In that assessment, it is highly relevant  that  the
   appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Rules for leave  to  remain
   and that he has unlawfully overstayed his visit visa  since  2005.  I  am
   satisfied that until he made an asylum claim in 2009, later withdrawn, he
   attempted to remain under the radar and did not again seek to  regularise
   his immigration status for almost 10 years, until 2019, when he made  the
   application for leave to remain which gives rise to this appeal.

22. I must  further  take  into  account  the  s117B  considerations.  I  am
   satisfied, as the appellant admitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that
   both he and his partner knew full  well  that  he  did  not  have  lawful
   immigration status at the time when they entered into a relationship  and
   would be expected to return to Pakistan. The  appellant  does  not  speak
   English and his immigration status has always been precarious and for the
   most part he has been unlawfully present in the UK. It follows that I can
   accord but little weight to any private life developed in the UK and  the
   relationship with his partner.

23. With respect to the appellant's relationship with Faizaan, whilst  there
   is family life engaging article 8 ECHR, I have to  take  account  of  the
   reality of the circumstances of that family life. Given that  Faizaan  is
   now 19 years of age, no  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
   Immigration Act 2009 considerations of best interests arise. This is  not
   a case where the Tribunal ought to enquire whether it  is  reasonable  to
   expect Faizaan to leave the UK and I proceed on the  assumption  that  he
   will choose to remain in the UK.

24. Faizaan is not the appellant's biological son, but I accept that he  has
   played the role of father to him since approximately the age of 14. I  do
   not  undervalue  the  warmth  of  this  relationship  and  the   declared
   attachment between them,  but  this  consideration  has  to  be  balanced
   against the fact that Faizaan is now an adult at 19 years  of  age,  even
   though continuing to live at home, and  will  shortly  be  a  second-year
   undergraduate. Within a short  period,  he  will  be  looking  for  post-
   university career  opportunities.  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  no
   particular features of the relationship between Faizaan and the appellant
   that can be described as compelling or exceptional. Neither do  I  accept
   that the appellant is in any material way dependent  or  reliant  on  the
   appellant beyond what one might expect. He may be attached  to  both  his
   mother and the appellant in similar ways, but his  needs  have  naturally
   matured, and he is inevitably  in  the  process  of  developing  his  own
   independence of parental support. There is nothing to indicate that he is
   particularly  vulnerable  or  for  any  reason  to   be   considered   as
   particularly dependent on the appellant. The fact that  he  continues  to
   live at home and that there is family life between them is  not  a  trump
   card for the appellant. In reality, their situation, even  taken  at  its
   highest, can be no different to  that  of  many  other  families  with  a
   university student  adult  child;  the  family  bond  continues  but  the
   dependency need diminishes.

25. Weighing up all these factors together,  in  the  round,  both  for  and
   against the appellant, I cannot find any individual or collective factors
   sufficient to amount to exceptional or compelling circumstances  so  that
   the refusal of leave to remain decision  would  result  in  unjustifiably
   harsh  consequences  so  as   to   render   the   respondent's   decision
   disproportionate. Whether his mother choses to remain in the UK or go  to
   Pakistan with the appellant is a matter for her. I am not satisfied  that
   there are any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  doing  so,  given  her
   knowledge and experience of Pakistan. The fact  that  the  appellant  and
   perhaps also his mother will  be  physically  separated  from  the  adult
   Faizaan may be sad, but many other young men of  his  age  are  naturally
   leaving the family home to pursue education  or  careers  independent  of
   their family. They will be able to maintain contact through modern  means
   of communication and through  occasional  visits.  It  will  be  for  the
   appellant to demonstrate that he can  meet  the  requirements  for  entry
   clearance to return to the UK. This is not a Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL
   40 situation where the enforced return would be pointless on the merits.

26. The extent of the bond between  the  appellant  and  Faizaan  is  in  my
   assessment  insufficient  to  outweigh   the   strong   public   interest
   considerations in requiring his removal. In reaching this  conclusion,  I
   have taken into account the difficulties highlighted by Mr Gajjar  as  to
   Pakistan being  on  the  red  list.  However,  these  are  but  temporary
   circumstances until the pandemic has retreated. Similarly, the fact  that
   the appellant's partner may not be able to demonstrate an income to  meet
   the financial  threshold  under  Appendix  FM  does  not  strengthen  the
   appellant's case or require a shortcut to be provided for  him  when  all
   others must meet those requirements.

27. In all the circumstances and for the reasons outlined  above,  I  reject
   the submission that the refusal decision  will  result  in  unjustifiably
   harsh consequences for either the appellant, the sponsor, or  Faizaan.  I
   find the decision to refuse his application for leave to remain  entirely
   proportionate to the particular  circumstances  of  this  case,  balanced
   against the public interest.

Decision

      Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error  of
      law, I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       24.6.21







