
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18870/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (Via Teams)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st July 2021                    |On the 3rd August 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

          ADAMA KALOKOH                                            Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Uwaezuoke
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Sierra Leone who was  born  on  29
    September 2002. She appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  made  on  18  October  2019
    refusing her application for entry clearance on the basis of her family
    life with Ms Fatima Sesay, her late mother's half-sister (the sponsor).
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 4 December  2020,
    dismissed her appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing on 21 July 2021, Mr Howells,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer who appeared for the Entry Clearance Officer, told me that  the
    respondent now accepts that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in
    law and that its decision should be set aside. The appeal turned on the
    application of paragraph 297(i)(f) of HC 395 (as amended) ('... serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of
    the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for  the
    child's  care').  The  judge,  however,  had  wrongly  concentrated  on
    paragraph 297(i)(e) ('one parent is present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and  has
    had sole responsibility for the  child's  upbringing')  which,  as  the
    sponsor is  not  the  parent  of  the  appellant,  had  never  been  in
    contention  between  the  parties.  The  judge  deals  with   paragraph
    297(i)(e) only at [60] and  then,  in  the  opinion  of  both  parties,
    inadequately.

 3. I agree with Mr Howells that the decision is flawed. If the  irrelevant
    paragraphs dealing  with  'sole  responsibility'  are  discounted,  the
    analysis on the only matter  in  contention  ('serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations') is patently insufficient. Accordingly,
    I allow the appeal. there will need to a new fact-finding hearing which
    is better conducted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms  Uwaezuoke,  who
    appeared for the appellant, raised the matter of the  appellant  giving
    evidence remotely from Sierra Leone at the next hearing. Such  evidence
    may assist the next Tribunal and I draw the attention of the First-tier
    Tribunal to the request that facilities are arranged for the  appellant
    to give evidence remotely. It  would  be  helpful  if  the  appellant's
    representative were to renew that request directly  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before the next hearing date is fixed.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.

    LISTING DIRECTIONS : Return  to  First-tier  Tribunal  (hearing  centre
    appropriate for sponsor's address); 1.5 hours; not Judge Lingam;  first
    available date; no interpreter; NB: arrangements  should  be  made  for
    appellant to give evidence remotely from Sierra Leone, if possible.



        Signed                               Date 21 July 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


