
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18937/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SUJAN LIMBU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Caswell, instructed by Everest Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Nepal who was born on 7  June  1987.
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 10 August 2018  refusing  his  application  for
    settlement in the United Kingdom as the adult dependent relative of Mrs
    Jai Limbu, the widow of a former Gurkha soldier (hereafter referred  to
    as the sponsor). The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  in
    July 2019, dismissed  the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed by  legal
    error such that it falls to be set aside. My  reasons  for  reaching  a
    conclusion are as follows. First, I agree with Mr Caswell, who appeared
    for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal, the  judge  has  addressed
    the wrong test in determining the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  At
    [26], the judge writes that, 'the appellant would ... need to show that
    he  has  exceptional   compassionate   circumstances   warranting   his
    application/appeal being allowed.' This observation, in turn,  led  the
    judge to find at [30] that there was no 'evidence  of  contact  between
    the appellant and his mother in the  United  Kingdom'  which  could  be
    described as 'exceptional or beyond  the  norm.'  The  judge  does  not
    elaborate; he has not attempted to define the 'norm' as regards contact
    in these circumstances or what he considers may constitute exceptional.
    Secondly, and more seriously, the judge has overlooked the  basis  upon
    which he should have considered whether family life existed between the
    appellant and the United Kingdom sponsor. At [36], judge concluded that
    such  family  life  as  required  protection  by  Article  8  not  been
    established in this case. However, in doing so he ignored the  guidance
    provided by the Court of Appeal in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 at [36]:
         "As Ms Patry submitted, it was clearly open to the  Upper  Tribunal
         judge to have regard to the appellant's dependence, both  financial
         and emotional, on his parents. This was, plainly,  a  relevant  and
         necessary consideration in his assessment (see the judgment of  the
         court in Gurung, at paragraph 50).  If,  however,  the  concept  to
         which the decision-maker will generally need to  pay  attention  is
         "support" - which  means,  as  Sedley  L.J.  put  it  in  Kugathas,
         "support" which is "real" or "committed"  or  "effective"  -  there
         was, it seems to me, ample and undisputed  evidence  on  which  the
         Upper Tribunal judge could have based a finding that such "support"
         was present in the appellant's case. He found,  however,  that  the
         appellant had a "reliance upon his parents for income that does not
         place him in any particular unusual  category  either  within  this
         country or internationally" (paragraph 23  of  the  determination),
         and no "indication on balance of a  dependency  beyond  the  normal
         family ties and the financial  dependency"  (paragraph  26).  These
         findings, Mr Jesurum submitted, suggest that  he  was  looking  not
         just for a sufficient degree of financial and emotional  dependence
         to constitute family life, but  also  for  some  extraordinary,  or
         exceptional, feature in the appellant's dependence upon his parents
         as a necessary determinant of the existence of his family life with
         them. Mr Jesurum submitted that this approach was too exacting, and
         inappropriate. It  seems  to  reflect  the  earlier  reference,  in
         paragraph 18 of the determination, to  the  requirement  for  "some
         compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  inherent   within   [an
         applicant's] own case". In any  event,  Mr  Jesurum  submitted,  it
         elevated the threshold of "support" that is "real"  or  "committed"
         or  "effective"  too  high.  It  cannot  be  reconciled  with   the
         jurisprudence  -  including  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
         Kugathas - as reviewed by the Upper  Tribunal  in  Ghising  (family
         life - adults - Gurkha policy) (in  paragraphs  50  to  62  of  its
         determination), with the endorsement of this court  in  Gurung  (in
         paragraph 46 of the judgment  of  the  court).  It  represents,  Mr
         Jesurum contended, a misdirection which vitiates the Upper Tribunal
         judge's decision."

 3. The Court of Appeal did not go on to state in terms that it agreed with
    the submission of the appellant's counsel though it did note  that  the
    submission had 'force.' I agree with Mr Caswell that the judge, instead
    of  trying  to  find  circumstances  which  he  considered   might   be
    exceptional, should instead have examined whether the degree of support
    provided for the appellant by the sponsor  was  real  or  effective  or
    committed. For example, the judge  appears  to  give  little,  if  any,
    weight to the  fact  that  the  appellant  continues  to  live  in  the
    sponsor's home in Nepal. Such an  arrangement  plainly  can  constitute
    support in the proper sense but the extent to which the arrangement  in
    this instance was a factor in the judge's analysis is not clear.

 4. I agree also with Mr Caswell that the judge has played down excessively
    the  role  of  possible  historic  injustice  in  the   assessment   of
    proportionality. The judge was aware (as had been the Upper Tribunal in
    Rai) that the sponsor mother had travelled without the appellant to the
    United Kingdom but he has not dealt with the fact  that  she  may  only
    have done so because the  Immigration  Rules  prevented  the  appellant
    joining her at that time.

 5. I find that the judge's analysis is flawed  by  legal  error  with  the
    result that his conclusion, that family life does  not  exist  in  this
    instance, cannot stand. An  analysis  having  regard  to  all  relevant
    features of the case may lead to a different outcome as  regarding  the
    existence of family life and, if a Tribunal concludes that family  life
    does exist, then it seems possible that the outcome of the appeal might
    be different.

 6. I am aware that the judge at [10] made the observation (which  has  not
    been challenged) that witness statements on the  same  day  before  the
    same judge prepared in  another  appeal  by  the  same  solicitors  had
    paragraphs in common with  the  statement  filed  by  the  sponsor  and
    appellant. Having made that observation, the judge accordingly attached
    no weight to the  statements.  At  [32],  judge  refers  again  to  the
    statements  and  found  that  the  sponsor's  claim  that  her  husband
    frequently expressed a desire to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom  upon
    retirement was not reliable. It is not entirely  clear,  however,  what
    impact that finding had in the overall assessment. In  any  event,  the
    judge's misgivings regarding the evidence do not correct his  error  in
    assessing on the incorrect basis whether family life  may  or  may  not
    exist.

 7. In the light of what I say above, I set aside the decision. None of the
    findings of factual stand. There will need to  be  a  new  fact-finding
    exercise which is better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to  which
    this appeal is returned for that Tribunal to remake the decision.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of factual stand. The appeal is  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to rehear the appeal de novo and  to  remake
    the decision.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
