
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/18456/2016

                                                           HU/18458/2016
                                                               HU/18462/2016
                                                               HU/18466/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 March 2018                      |On 12 April 2018                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                               CHATHURIKA [l]
                                  RUWAN [A]
                                    [S A]
                                    [R A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms E Harris instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellants are  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are married.  The third  and  fourth  appellants  are  their
    daughter and son respectively.  The third appellant was  born  on  [  ]
    2009 and was, therefore, 8 years old at  the  time  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  She is now 9 years old.  The  fourth  appellant  was
    born on [ ] 2013 and is, therefore, 4 years old.  Both were born in the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The first appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  on  28
    September 2008.  Her husband,  the  second  appellant  entered  as  her
    dependant on 21  November  2008.   Thereafter,  the  first  and  second
    appellants (together with the third  and  fourth  appellants  following
    their births), were granted leave to remain until 26 September 2016.

 3. That leave was curtailed on 8 February 2016 to end on 11 April 2016  as
    a result of the suspension of the licence  for  the  first  appellant's
    college as a Tier 4 Sponsor.

 4. On 8 April 2016, the  first  appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    relying upon Art 8 of the ECHR with each of the other appellants as her
    dependants.

 5. On 22 July 2016, the Secretary of State refused each of the appellants'
    applications.

The Appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal

 6. The appellants appealed to the  First-Tier  Tribunal.   The  appellants
    relied upon Art 8 and, given that the third appellant had lived in  the
    UK  for  at  least  seven  years,  reliance  was   placed   upon   para
    276ADE(1)(iv) (in respect of the third appellant) and s.117B(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA  Act  2002")  in
    respect of each of the appellants.

 7. Judge Hopkins accepted that it was in the best interests of  the  third
    appellant to remain in the UK.   Nevertheless,  having  regard  to  the
    public interest, he found that it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    third appellant to leave the UK and live in Sri Lanka with  her  family
    and that, therefore, para 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    s.117B(6) were not met.  The Secretary of State's decision, in  respect
    of each appellant, was proportionate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    basis  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  his   assessment   of
    "reasonableness" under para 276ADE(1) (iv) and s.117B(6) of the NIA Act
    2002 and had failed to give sufficient weight to the third  appellant's
    length of residence in the UK and her best interests in accordance with
    the approach set out in the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  (R)  MA
    (Pakistan) and Others v UTIAC [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 9. On 22 January 2018, the First-Tier Tribunal (Judge  Bird)  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal.

The Submissions

10.  On  behalf  of  the  appellants,  Ms  Harris  made   essentially   two
    submissions.  First, she submitted that, following  MA  (Pakistan),  in
    assessing whether it would be reasonable to expect the third  appellant
    to leave the UK, given the judge's finding that  it  was  in  her  best
    interests to remain in the UK, there had to be "strong"  or  "powerful"
    reasons to overcome the "starting point that leave should  be  granted"
    in such a case (see [49] of MA (Pakistan) per Elias LJ).  She submitted
    that, on the judge's findings, there was nothing to counterbalance  the
    "best interests" of the third appellant.  All the appellants  had  been
    in the UK at all times with leave.   The  only  issue  of  "immigration
    control" that arose was that they had no basis to remain under the Rule
    in the future.

11. Secondly, Ms Harris criticised the judge for taking into  account  that
    the best interests of the third appellant were to remain in the UK  but
    were "not overwhelmingly so".  That, she submitted, was a reference  to
    what had been said in the  earlier  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [36]. But,  that  case  had
    not concerned a "qualifying child"  to  which  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  and
    s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002 applied - none of the  children  in  that
    case had been in the UK for at least  seven  years,  unlike  the  third
    appellant.

12. Ms Harris resiled from the point made in para 9 of the  grounds  where,
    relying upon [40] of the judgment of Elias LJ, it is contended that the
    judge had been wrong to  take  into  account  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control in assessing whether  it  was
    reasonable for  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK.   Ms  Harris
    acknowledged that at [40], Elias LJ was  setting  out  an  approach  to
    "reasonableness" in para 276ADE(1)(iv) and  s.117B(6)  which  he  would
    have preferred to adopt but for the absence of binding  precedent.   Ms
    Harris accepted that in MA (Pakistan), the Court of  Appeal  determined
    that the public interest must be weighed against  the  circumstance  of
    the third appellant, including the maintenance of effective immigration
    control as it applied to the first and second appellants as well as the
    children.

13. Nevertheless, Ms  Harris  maintained  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    legally flawed.

14. Mr Jarvis, on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that the judge
    had looked at all the relevant factors following EV  (Philippines)  and
    had reached a sustainable decision.  He submitted that  the  judge  had
    looked at the position of the children, including the  third  appellant
    who had been in the UK for seven to eight years since  birth.   He  had
    considered the level of disruption and had reached the view that it was
    not unreasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK to  live
    in Sri Lanka with the  family.   He  accepted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's IDI, which  was  referenced  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan), referred to the need to find "strong reasons"  to  outweigh
    the best interests of a child such as the third appellant who had  been
    in the UK for at least seven years.  But that was not, he submitted,  a
    legal rule.  He submitted that  there  was  nothing  in  the  law  that
    required that the appellants be granted leave just because they had not
    previously breached immigration  control  by,  for  example,  illegally
    entering or overstaying.  He submitted that the judge's finding that it
    was reasonable to expect the third appellant to  leave  the  UK  was  a
    permissible one even though it was  not  necessarily  one  which  every
    judge might have reached.  It was not, he submitted, irrational.

Discussion

    The Law

15. The judge was concerned with claims under Art 8 of  the  ECHR  made  by
    each of the appellants.  In substance,  however,  that  issue  resolved
    itself to a consideration of whether the third  appellant  fell  within
    para 276ADE(1)(iv), in which case she would be entitled to leave on the
    basis of her private life in the UK.  Further, in respect of the  first
    and second appellants,  who  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the third appellant, reliance was placed on s.117B(6)
    which reflects the wording of para 276ADE(1)(iv).

16. Para 276ADE(1) so far as relevant provides as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         ...

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK  for  at  least  seven  years   (discounting   any   period   of
         imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         applicant to leave the UK; ..."

17. Section 117B of  the  NIA  Act  2002  sets  out  the  "public  interest
    considerations" relevant to Art 8.  Section 117B(1) provides that:

         "The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
         interest."

18. Section 117B(2) then states, in  effect,  that  it  is  in  the  public
    interest that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  speak
    English.  Section 117B(3) provides it is in the public interest, namely
    the economic wellbeing of the UK, that individuals who seek to enter or
    remain in the UK are financially independent.

19. Section 117B(4) provides  that  "little  weight"  should  be  given  to
    private life or to family life formed with a qualifying  partner  where
    the individual is in the UK unlawfully.

20. Section 117B(5) provides  that  "little  weight"  should  be  given  to
    private life established by a person  when  that  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.

21. Then, we come to s.117B(6) which provides that:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

22. For the purposes of s.117B(6) a "qualifying child" means a  person  who
    is under the age of 18 and who is either (1) a British citizen, or  (2)
    has lived in the UK for a continuous period  of  seven  years  or  more
    (s.117D(1)).

23. We will focus on the statutory provision in s.117B(6).  It  was  common
    ground before us that if either the third appellant met the requirement
    in para 276ADE(1)(iv) or  the  first  and  second  appellants  met  the
    requirements in s.117B(6) - which are in substance identical - then the
    removal of all of the appellants would not be proportionate.

24. It is clear that s.117B(6) is, when it applies,  determinative  of  the
    "public interest" issue in that the public interest "does  not  require
    the person's removal" (see MA (Pakistan) at [17] - [20] and Rhuppiah  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [51]).

25. The three requirements to satisfy s.117B(6) are that:

         (1)  the person is not liable to deportation;

         (2)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child;

         (3)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK.

26. There is no dispute in this case as to the first and  second  of  those
    requirements.  None of the appellants are "liable to  deportation"  and
    the first and second appellants have a "genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship" with the third appellant who  is  a  "qualifying  child".
    The sole issue is whether it would be "reasonable to expect" the  third
    appellant to leave the UK.

27.  The  leading  authority  of  the  meaning  of  the  statutory   phrase
    "reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom"  is  MA
    (Pakistan) which is binding upon both the Court of Appeal and the Upper
    Tribunal (see AM (Pakistan) and Others v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180).

28. In MA (Pakistan), the Court of Appeal accepted that whether or  not  it
    was reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave  the  UK  was  not
    conclusively resolved by a finding that it  was  in  the  child's  best
    interests to stay in the UK.  At [47], Elias LJ said:

         "Even where the child's best interests are to stay, it may still be
         not unreasonable to require the child to leave.  That  will  depend
         upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of  the  links  in
         the UK and in the country where it is proposed he should return."

29. The Court of Appeal, nevertheless, recognised that when a child  was  a
    "qualifying child" because he or she had been in the UK for seven years
    that was a matter which must be given "significant weight" (at [49]).

30. The Court of Appeal concluded that whether it would be  "reasonable  to
    expect" such a child to leave the UK,  not  only  required  that  their
    circumstances must be taken into account, but also the public  interest
    must be factored in.  The Court of Appeal approved the approach in  its
    earlier decision of MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450  when
    considering, in the context of a deportation case,  s.117C(5)  and  the
    requirement that the effect of deportation on a partner or a child must
    be  "unduly  harsh"  in  order  for  public  interest  not  to  require
    deportation of a person sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less
    than four years.  At [45] in MA (Pakistan), Elias LJ stated:

         "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct  of
         the applicant and any other matters relevant to the public interest
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' concept under Section 117C(5),  so
         should it when in considering the question of reasonableness  under
         Section 117B(6)".

31. The Court of  Appeal,  nevertheless,  pointed  out  that  in  order  to
    outweigh a child's best interests, in determining whether it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK,  the  child's  best
    interests were such that there must be a "powerful" or "strong" reasons
    why leave should not be granted.

32. At [46], Elias LJ explained as follows:

         "After such a period of time the child would have  put  down  roots
         and developed social, cultural and educational links in the UK such
         it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child  is  required  to
         leave the UK.  That may be less so when the children are very young
         because the focus of their lives would be more on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

33. That latter comment, of course, reflects the accepted jurisprudence  in
    the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and  Zoumbas  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.

34. However, as Elias LJ stated at [49], the effect  of  s.117B(6)  -  when
    considering a child who is a "qualifying child" - is that

         "as a starting point ... leave should be granted unless  there  are
         powerful reasons to the contrary."

    The Judge's Decision

35. Turning now to consider Judge Hopkins' decision, he accepted  that  the
    best interests of the third appellant (who is a  qualifying  child  who
    was 8 year old and had lived her whole life in the UK) were  to  remain
    in the UK.  At paras 30 -  31,  he  said  this  about  both  the  third
    appellant and her younger brother, the fourth appellant:

         30.  "The Third Appellant is now 8.  She has lived in  the  UK  for
             the whole of her life.  It is in her best interests  that  she
             should remain in this country, as she would otherwise have  to
             adjust to a different country.  Although she has been  to  Sri
             Lanka, these were only for short visits.  So I accept she  has
             had little opportunity to absorb the culture.  I accept she is
             doing well at school.  She has a good record of attendance and
             she is meeting the expected standard in her subjects.  If  she
             has to leave the UK, there would inevitably be some disruption
             to her education.  It is  less  easy  to  say  that  the  best
             interests of the Fourth Appellant lie in his remaining in  the
             UK, since he is not yet 4.  At that age, it is  unlikely  that
             there would be any significant difficulty in him adjusting  to
             life in Sri Lanka, as his emotional needs  are  likely  to  be
             almost entirely met within the family unit.

         31.  However, the fact that the Third  Appellant's  best  interests
             lie in her remaining in the UK does not necessarily mean  that
             it would not be reasonable  to  expect  her  to  leave.   Much
             depends upon the degree to which it is in her  best  interests
             to stay.  The need for effective  immigration  control  is  an
             important factor that also has to be taken into account.   The
             fact  that  none  of  the  other  Appellants  can   meet   the
             Immigration Rules is a matter that carries weight."

36. At para 32, the judge considered s.117B(2) and  noted  that  the  first
    appellant spoke English and, although the second appellant  lacked  his
    wife's ability in English, nevertheless, he would not impose any  undue
    burden on taxpayers and be able to integrate into society.

37. At para 30, the judge accepted, applying s.117B(3) that the  appellants
    were financially independent.

38. Nevertheless, at para 34, correctly, the judge noted that the fact that
    the appellants met the requirements of s.117B(2) and (3) did  not  give
    them a positive right to remain in the UK.

39. At para 35, the judge noted  that  the  first  and  second  appellants'
    private life had been formed whilst their immigration status in the  UK
    was precarious, although they had never been in the UK unlawfully.   It
    was, as a result, entitled to "little weight".  Again,  correctly,  the
    judge went on to note that it was not likely that the third and  fourth
    appellants were aware of their precarious status and, taken with  their
    young ages, the "little weight"  provision  in  s.117B(5)  had  limited
    impact in affecting the weight to be given to their private lives.

40. Then at para 36, the judge  acknowledged  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants were "hardworking and responsible people".

41. At paras 37 - 42, the judge again turned to the private  life  and  the
    impact of removal upon the third appellant as follows:

         "37.     In considering  the  strength  of  the  Third  Appellant's
             private life in the UK, I note she had only just amassed seven
             years of residence in the UK at the time of  the  application.
             I appreciate, however, that, in  considering  whether  removal
             would be proportionate, I have to look at the situation at the
             time of hearing.  She has now spent about 8 year and 3  months
             in the UK.  In Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decision  affecting
             children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) it  is  stated
             that, in the case of children, lengthy residence in a  country
             other than the state of origin  can  lead  to  development  of
             social,  cultural  and  educational  ties  that  it  would  be
             inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of compelling  reason
             to the contrary, and  that  past  and  present  policies  have
             identified seven years as such  lengthy  residence.   However,
             seven years from  the  age  of  four  is  likely  to  be  more
             significant to a child than the first seven years of life,  as
             very young children are focussed on their parents rather  than
             their peers and are adaptable.  The Third  Appellant  has  not
             spent seven years in the UK  from  the  age  of  four.   Since
             starting full time education she has moved schools due to  the
             family relocating  from  Wembley  to  Ruislip.   Consequently,
             there has been  a  limited  opportunity  for  her  to  develop
             longstanding friendships.

         38.  It is claimed on her behalf that her  educational  and  social
             development would be significantly hampered by  her  inability
             to speak Sinhala.  I am not satisfied that it  is  a  language
             that would be completely alien to her, since  she  would  have
             heard it spoken in the home.  Nevertheless, I  accept  she  is
             much more confident in English and she would  at  the  present
             time struggle to  understand  Sinhala.   The  First  Appellant
             states she has tried to teach her daughter her  mother  tongue
             but she has got more used to speaking English  due  to  having
             spent a lot of time with child minders and latterly at school.
              Although the Second Appellant has  not  demonstrated  at  the
             hearing that his English language skills are very good,  I  am
             prepared to accept that he  can  communicate  with  the  Third
             Appellant in English to a sufficient degree.

         39.  I accept it is unlikely that her parents could afford  to  put
             her into a fee paying English medium school in  Sri  Lanka  at
             the present time, since, although they are both  hard  working
             and  the  First  Appellant  is  a  graduate  from  a   British
             university,  their  employment  record  to   date   does   not
             demonstrate  that  they  have  been  able   to   embark   upon
             prestigious careers in the UK which might impress a  potential
             employer to the extent of offering either of them  a  position
             that is highly paid.   I  accept  that,  due  to  her  limited
             knowledge of the Sinhala language, the Third  Appellant  would
             find it difficult at first to adapt to Sri  Lanka  as  regards
             education and developing friendships. Even if she is  able  to
             understand some conversational  Sinhala,  this  would  not  be
             sufficient to enable her to participate fully  in  the  school
             system.

         40.  However, I am not satisfied that these difficulties would have
             significant consequences in the long term.  Her parents  speak
             Sinhala, as do her wider family in Sri  Lanka.   There  is  no
             reason to think she would not pick up the language  relatively
             quickly when she is in an environment where it is used all  of
             the time.  I do not find that  she  is  currently  at  such  a
             crucial stage in her education that a  short  term  disruption
             would make a significant difference to her future.  It may  be
             that her knowledge of English would in due course turn out  to
             be an advantage in comparison with  Sri  Lankan  children  who
             have not had the exposure to it that she has had.

         41.  As regards the claim that the Third Appellant is sensitive  to
             mosquito  bites,  no  medical  evidence  of  this   has   been
             presented, other than the very brief letter from a  doctor  in
             Sri Lanka saying she has been treated for skin  sepsis.   That
             letter does  not  indicate  whether  she  has  any  underlying
             condition which would  render  her  especially  vulnerable  to
             similar problems in the future.  Although it is claimed by the
             First Appellant that she is allergic to mosquitoes, no medical
             evidence has been presented to indicate that this is the case.
              The medical notes from the Third Appellant's doctors  in  the
             UK do not contain anything that suggests that she suffers from
             any particular allergies.

         42.  I accept that she had an experience in  Sri  Lanka  which  may
             have made her anxious that an insect bite in the future  might
             cause a similar reaction.  But there is  no  proof  that  such
             fears are well founded.  There is no evidence that any anxiety
             she may have amounts to a psychological condition which  could
             not be readily overcome following a removal to Sri  Lanka  and
             there is no evidence before me that conditions in that country
             would be particularly difficult for persons like her."

42. At para 43, the judge then reached his adverse conclusion in respect of
    s.117B(6) and para 276ADE (1) (iv) as follows:

         "I find that, although it is in the best  interests  of  the  Third
         Appellant  that  she  should  remain  in  the   UK,   it   is   not
         overwhelmingly so.  I find that she could adapt to  living  in  Sri
         Lanka without suffering significant long term  consequences.   When
         balanced against  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
         immigration controls and the fact that the Appellants'  immigration
         status in the UK is precarious, I find it has not been  shown  that
         it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  her  to  leave  the  UK.
         Consequently,  she  does  not  come  within  para  276ADE  of   the
         Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act  does  not
         apply.  I find the decisions of the Secretary of State in  relation
         to each of the four Appellants is  proportionate  to  a  legitimate
         aim.  Therefore there is no breach of Art 8 of ECHR."

    Our Conclusions

43. As we have already indicated, Ms Harris did not seek to rely upon  para
    9 of the grounds to the extent that it sought to pray in  aid  [40]  of
    Elias LJ's judgment in MA (Pakistan) to the effect that the  judge  had
    been wrong to take into account the public  interest  in  reaching  his
    finding as to whether it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK.  Clearly,  at  para  40  Elias  LJ  was  not
    setting out his final conclusion in respect of the proper  approach  to
    s.117B(6).  Rather, Elias LJ was considering s.177B(6), as he put it in
    [36], "free from authority" and testing against that the  Secretary  of
    State's submissions in MA (Pakistan) that the public interest had to be
    taken into account in assessing the  "reasonableness"  of  expecting  a
    qualifying child to leave the UK.  As Elias LJ made  plain  at  [43]  -
    [45], the matter was not "free from authority" and, as we have  already
    set out, he applied the approach of the Court of Appeal in the  earlier
    deportation case of MM (Uganda).  He accepted the Secretary of  State's
    submission that the "public interest" had to be taken into  account  in
    assessing whether it was reasonable to expect  a  qualifying  child  to
    leave the UK.

44. Judge Hopkins was, therefore, correct to take into account  the  public
    interest in determining whether s.117B(6) applied.

45. Where, however, we have concluded that Judge Hopkins fell into error is
    that he failed to apply the approach mandated in MA (Pakistan) that the
    third appellant's best interests (as  a  qualifying  child)  should  be
    given "significant  weight"  such  that  only  "strong"  or  "powerful"
    reasons would outweigh those best interests.

46. Plainly, Judge Hopkins found that it was in the third appellant's  best
    interests to remain in the UK.  His findings in paras 30 - 31 and 37  -
    42, could not be clearer.

47. The weight to  be  given  to  those  best  interests  was,  of  course,
    ultimately a matter for the judge's judgment.   However,  at  para  43,
    having noted that the third appellant's best interests to remain in the
    UK, he went on to conclude that  they  were  "not  overwhelmingly  so".
    That, in our  judgment,  reflects  a  misunderstanding  of  the  weight
    properly to be given to the best interests of a qualifying  child.   It
    appears, in effect, to downgrade the weight to be given to them.

48. In EV (Philippines) the Court of Appeal did contrast the  situation  of
    where a child's best interest were "overwhelmingly" to  be  in  the  UK
    with one whose interest were only "on balance" to remain -  the  former
    more likely 'tipping the balance'  against  the  public  interest  (see
    [36]).  But, the Court was not concerned  with  a  the  proportionality
    exercise required by s.117B(6) where a 'qualifying child'  is  involved
    and  the  importance  there  of  the  'child's  best  interests'   when
    determining the "reasonableness" of that child leaving the UK.

49. The judge's self-direction is inconsistent  with  the  approach  in  MA
    (Pakistan) and, in our judgment,  amounts to an error of law.

50. What were the "strong" or "powerful" reasons which could  outweigh  the
    third appellant's best interests?  None of the appellants had ever been
    in the UK unlawfully.  Their immigration history was such that they had
    always had leave to enter or remain since the first appellant  came  to
    the UK in September 2008 and the second  appellant  in  November  2008.
    Their immigration history was not "poor"; rather it was  wholly  proper
    and exemplary.  Of course, none of the appellants could  now  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for the future (with the possible
    exception of the third appellant under para 276ADE(1)(iv)) and  so  the
    public interest of "effective immigration control" set out in s.117B(1)
    was engaged.  It is difficult to envisage  an  immigration  history  of
    this  kind  as  capable  of  amounting  to   "strong"   or   "powerful"
    countervailing reasons to outweigh the  best  interests  of  the  third
    appellant.  If it did, it would appear potentially to do so in many, if
    not most,  cases  and  thereby  deprive  s.117B(6)  of  any  meaningful
    application.

51. Whilst we accept Mr Jarvis's submission that the judge did look at  all
    the relevant factors, in accordance with EV  (Philippines),  especially
    at [34] - [37], as we have already  pointed  out,  that  case  did  not
    concern a child who had been in the UK for at least seven years.  In MA
    (Pakistan), Elias LJ at [49], noted that the  "same  principles"  would
    apply under s.117B(6) but importantly went on to state:

         "However, the fact that the child had been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and secondly, because  it  establishes  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

52. It was, in our judgment, the judge's failure to acknowledge the  proper
    weighting to be given to the third appellant's best interests that  led
    him into error.  That error was, in our judgment, also material to  his
    decision.

53. Mr Jarvis acknowledged that the judge's decision was not necessarily  a
    decision  which  every  judge  on  the  evidence  would  have  reached.
    Nevertheless, at least for the purposes of the error of law  issue,  he
    submitted that the decision was not irrational.

54. We do not agree.  In our judgment, the judge's finding  concerning  the
    immediate impact upon the third appellant's education if  she  returned
    to Sri Lanka is highly significant.  She does not speak Sinhalese  and,
    as the judge found in para 39, her parents would not be able to  afford
    to send her to a fee-paying English medium school.  The judge  accepted
    that due to her "limited  knowledge"  of  the  Sinhalese  language  the
    appellant would "find it difficult at first to adapt to  Sri  Lanka  as
    regards education and developing friendships".  He accepted  that  even
    if she were able to understand  some  conversational  Sinhalese:  "This
    would not be sufficient to enable  her  to  participate  fully  in  the
    school system".

55. The third appellant was 8 years old (she is now 9 years  old)  and  has
    lived in the UK since she was born.  She has been attending a school in
    the UK and, as the judge found in para 30, she is doing  well,  with  a
    good attendance record  and  meeting  the  expected  standards  in  her
    subjects.  He accepted that there would "inevitably be some  disruption
    to her education" if she went to Sri Lanka.  The  judge's  findings  in
    paras 38 and 39 go,  in  our  judgment,  beyond  "some  disruption"  to
    identify a significant detrimental effect to her, albeit  that  she  is
    only 8 years of age.

56. Bearing in mind that the only aspect of the public interest engaged  in
    these appeals is that of "effective immigration control" on  the  basis
    that none of the appellants have any basis in the future for  remaining
    under the Immigration Rules, despite the careful consideration  of  the
    evidence by the judge, in our judgment his conclusion was not one  open
    to him  given  the  significant  detriment  to  the  third  appellant's
    education if she returned to Sri  Lanka.   We  recognise  that  she  is
    relatively young but, nevertheless, there is  nothing  in  any  of  the
    appellants' immigration or other history which could rationally, in our
    judgment, be sufficiently "powerful" or "strong" to outweigh  the  best
    interests of the third appellant such that it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK.

57. Consequently, for  these  reasons  we  are  satisfied  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law in dismissing each of the appellants'  appeals.
    The judge's decision cannot stand and we set it aside.

58. Neither representative, when we invited them to do so, wished  to  make
    any further submissions as regards remaking the decision if we found an
    error of law.

59. As before the judge, the crucial issue is the application of  s.117B(6)
    and whether it is reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the
    UK.  She is now 9 years old.  We apply the approach  we  have  set  out
    above derived from the Court of Appeal's decision in MA (Pakistan).  We
    note the judge's primary findings of fact that  we  set  out  above  in
    relation to her (and the fourth appellant's) best interests.   We  have
    regard to the public interest which we  have  set  out  above  that  is
    limited to the effective maintenance  of  immigration  control,  namely
    that the appellants cannot now meet the requirements of the Rules.   We
    note that their presence in the UK has always been lawful - there is no
    question of any of them having a 'poor' immigration history.  There are
    no 'strong' or 'powerful' countervailing factors to outweigh  the  best
    interests of the third appellant and the  "starting  pint"  that  leave
    should be granted.

60. For the reasons we have given above, we are satisfied that it would not
    be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.  She meets
    the  requirements  in  para  276ADE(1)(iv).   The  first   and   second
    appellants  also  meet  the  requirements  of  s.117B(6)  and,   as   a
    consequence, the public interest does not require their removal.

61. It follows, in our judgment, that the removal of each of the appellants
    would amount to a disproportionate interference with their private  and
    family life in the UK and amount to a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

62. We remake the decision allowing each of the appellants'  appeals  under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               10 April 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeals, we make a fee award in respect  of  any  fee
paid or payable.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               10 April 2018
