
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18830/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 September 2020                |On 15 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [S]

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mr Karim Andani of Ashwells Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by an Upper Tribunal Judge on 20 April 2020
         against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shergill,
         promulgated on 29 May 2019 following a hearing at Manchester on  10
         May  2019.  Time  was  extended  as  the   application   was   made
         substantially out of time, the deadline being 25 July 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Kenyan national born on 8 August 1981.  He  came
         to the UK with and his son S[1] on 23  October  2016  allegedly  to
         attend the wedding of his sister's daughter. The UK sister, P, is a
         British national and her daughter, H, was from her first  marriage.
         P also has a son, C, from a second  marriage.  Both  her  marriages
         ended in divorce. At some point the appellant's mother and  another
         sister also  arrived  here.  They  all  overstayed.  The  appellant
         maintains that his mother has since returned to Kenya but there  is
         no evidence of that. According to the respondent, his  sister  made
         an application to remain. No details are provided. On 20 May  2017,
         after the expiry of his leave and after service of form RED.0001 on
         16 May 2017 as an overstayer,  the  appellant  married  P  whom  he
         claimed was not a sister after all. He then made an application for
         leave to remain as her spouse.

      3. The appellant and  P  were  interviewed  but  the  application  was
         refused on 3 September 2018. The respondent was not satisfied  that
         the marriage was genuine or subsisting or that there would be  very
         significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration on return to
         Kenya. It was noted that his son was not  a  qualifying  child  and
         that he had not adopted P's two children.

      4. The appeal came before Judge Shergill initially on 1 March 2019. He
         expressed concern that S had been separated  from  his  mother  and
         minor sister in Kenya for much longer  than  had  been  agreed  and
         directed that further evidence be provided to address this area  of
         concern. Detailed directions were issued to both the appellant  and
         the respondent at the time and further directions were issued on 28
         March 2019. By the time of the second  hearing  in  May  2019,  the
         respondent  had  obtained  the  visa  application  forms  for   the
         appellant, his mother and S,  and  had  raised  the  issue  of  the
         validity of the marriage to P given the  contents  of  the  VAF  in
         which the appellant claimed to have been married and claimed that P
         was a sister. The  respondent  also  queried  the  absence  of  any
         evidence of divorce from the appellant's first marriage.

      5. Judge Shergill heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,  P  and  H
         which he found to be unsatisfactory. He expressed concerns that the
         marriage may indeed be void and that the appellant  and  P  may  be
         within the prohibited degrees of relationships under  the  Marriage
         Act. He found that there was no genuine or subsisting marriage  and
         that there was, therefore, no genuine parental relationship between
         the appellant and C or that S's best interests were  to  remain  in
         the present situation. He  found  there  were  serious  credibility
         issues  and  that  no  innocent  explanation  had   been   offered.
         Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

      6. The appellant was refused permission to appeal on 28 June  2010  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien but  was  granted  permission  on
         renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      7. The matter would ordinarily have then been listed for a hearing but
         due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take  precautions  against
         its spread, this did not occur and  directions  were  sent  to  the
         parties on 12 May 2020. They were asked to present  any  objections
         to the matter being dealt with  on  the  papers  and  to  make  any
         further submissions on the error of law issue within  certain  time
         limits. As no responses were received, further directions were sent
         on 19 June 2020.

      8. The Tribunal has received written submissions from  the  respondent
         dated 26 June and from  the  appellant  on  13  July  2020.  I  now
         consider whether it is appropriate to determine the matter  on  the
         papers.

      9. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

     10. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and  to  all  the
         evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. I take the  view
         that a full account of the facts are set out in those papers,  that
         the arguments for and against the appellant have been  clearly  set
         out and that the issues to be decided are uncomplicated. There  are
         no  matters  arising  from   the   papers   which   would   require
         clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed  for  that
         purpose. I have regard to the  importance  of  the  matter  to  the
         appellant and consider that a speedy determination of  this  matter
         is in their best interests. I am satisfied that neither  party  has
         raised any objection to the matter being determined on  the  papers
         although they have had ample opportunity to do so. I  am  satisfied
         that I am able to fairly and justly deal with this matter  in  that
         way and now proceed to do so.

         Submissions

     11. On 26 June 2020, Mr Melvin, on behalf of the respondent, replied to
         the directions and made the following  submissions:  (i)  that  the
         grounds had no merit and an extension of time should not have  been
         granted; (ii) that the judge set  out  the  immigration  status  of
         those involved and his findings on the evidence that he heard  from
         the appellant and his witnesses; (iii) that  the  judge  found  the
         appellant to be a thoroughly incredible and evasive witness who had
         given a confusing, conflicting and  untruthful  account  of  events
         leading to his overstaying; (iv) that the judge did not accept  any
         of the evidence given and had serious concerns over the validity of
         the claimed marriage in the  UK  given  the  lack  of  evidence  of
         divorce from the previous spouse in Kenya; (v) that the evidence of
         H was also found to be unreliable and that  she  was  found  to  be
         complicit in the  deception  which  undermined  the  weight  to  be
         attached to her evidence; (vi) that the judge listed the number  of
         lies that had been told and found  that  the  marriage  itself  was
         likely to be void, leading to the  conclusion  of  no  family  life
         between  the  parties  and  no  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
         relationship; (vii) that  the  judge  found  it  was  in  the  best
         interests of S to return to his life in Kenya  attending  the  same
         school as his sister; (viii) that the judge had clearly  taken  S's
         circumstances into account as a primary  consideration;  (ix)  that
         the judge was not satisfied that the purported family circumstances
         were  as  claimed  given  that  the  visa  application  showed  the
         appellant to be a married man; (x) that given the  judge's  finding
         that family life in the UK did not exist, it was irrational for the
         Upper Tribunal to have granted permission on the basis  that  there
         had been an inadequate best interests assessment of S, particularly
         where the judge  recorded  serious  uncertainty  over  the  child's
         family circumstances in Kenya; (xi) that it was not  accepted  that
         the judge had adopted a contemptible tone or that the findings  did
         not make sense; and (xii) that the only rational conclusion  to  be
         reached was that it was proportionate for  the  appellant  and  the
         child to return to Kenya.

     12. In his response to the reply  from  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
         appellant complains that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  best
         interests of the children  in  making  his  decision.  Reliance  is
         placed on section 117B(6) and it is submitted that the  conduct  of
         the parties has no bearing on the best interests of  the  children.
         It is submitted on this basis alone  the  decision  should  be  set
         aside.  It  is  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
         fundamental error of fact because S is not four years old  but  14.
         There  was  no  consideration  of  his  best   interests   or   the
         relationship between "the stepbrothers". Reference is  made  to  Mr
         Melvin's submissions and it is pointed out again that the child  in
         question is not four years old but 14. It  is  submitted  that  the
         judge was very angry and that no meaningful analysis was undertaken
         regarding  the  best  interests  of  the  children.  There  was  no
         assessment as to the schooling needs of S and  the  judge  did  not
         consider whether the child would be able to enrol in a local school
         on return. It is submitted that although the judge found that there
         was  a  possibility  of  a  prohibited  relationship  between   the
         appellant and P,  no  evidence  of  this  had  been  advanced.  The
         respondent had granted permission for the parties to be married. It
         is submitted that the extension of time was properly granted in the
         interests of justice because there was  a  reasonable  prospect  of
         success. It is submitted that the judge erred by not  referring  to
         the interview after which consent to  marriage  was  given.  It  is
         submitted that if the respondent now believes the marriage was  not
         legitimate then it is for her to produce the  evidence  to  support
         her position. Reference is made to the statement  from  S's  mother
         which expressed a view that he would have forgotten Swahili  during
         his absence and would  be  unable  to  return  to  school.  Further
         reference is made to facts which it is conceded were not before the
         court. It is submitted that if lies were told, the  judge  did  not
         undertake an analysis of the materiality of the  lie  or  turn  his
         mind to the fact that people  lie  in  court  for  a  multitude  of
         reasons. It is submitted that  there  is  manifestly  a  subsisting
         relationship between the appellant and  his  biological  child  and
         that the child had become settled in the UK through no fault of his
         own. It  is  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  undertake  an
         assessment of the adverse implications of the child's  repatriation
         to Kenya; for example, the  impact  on  his  education  at  such  a
         critical time in his life. It is submitted that the judge  made  an
         "off the hoof" judgement.

         Discussion and conclusions

     13. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the  submissions made by both parties.

     14. I have regard to the fact that my colleagues granted permission  to
         appeal in strong terms. He considered that it was arguable that the
         judge's assessment of S's best interests  was  flawed  because  the
         assessment  came  at  the  end  of   the   determination   as   "an
         afterthought". He also considered that the judge's adverse findings
         were arguably made in a contemptible tone which infected  the  best
         interests assessment and that the reasoning at paragraph 17 made no
         sense. He considered that the judge  had  also  arguably  erred  in
         failing  to  have  regard  to  evidence  advanced  to  support  the
         relationship between the children.

     15. Having had the benefit of more time than my  colleague  would  have
         had in deciding a permission application, I find that certain facts
         were  misapprehended  and  findings  of   facts   overlooked   when
         permission was granted. For example, S is  not  four  but  fourteen
         years old. This error plainly did  not  come  from  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's determination as there is no mention therein of  a  four
         year old child. I note that  the  appellant's  written  submissions
         refer to this error but as it was made in the  permission  decision
         and not by the First-tier Tribunal, it has no material relevance to
         the outcome of the appeal  or  the  assessment  of  the  claim.  Mr
         Melvin's reference to a four year old child was either  drawn  from
         the grant of permission or was a typographical error  where  the  1
         was omitted from 14. Again, this has  no  bearing  on  the  judge's
         consideration. He did not make this error.

     16. Further, the judge demonstrated his concern for S's best  interests
         not at the end of the determination as is alleged but in fact  very
         early  on  in  his  determination  (at  paragraph  3)  and  indeed,
         adjourned the initial hearing in order to seek further evidence  on
         that very issue because he was so concerned. It  was  said  in  the
         grant of permission that the reasoning  in  paragraph  17  made  no
         sense and the following sentence pertaining to S is cited: "he  has
         after all been yanked away from his  birth  mother  and  sister  in
         circumstances  where  that  was,  so  it  is  claimed,   not   ever
         envisaged". I am unclear what was found in this phrase to  make  no
         sense. What the judge was referring to was the decision to separate
         S indefinitely from his mother and sister in Kenya when only a  one
         month visit to attend a wedding had been planned.  Without  further
         clarification, I cannot find that this reasoning  was  in  any  way
         unclear. Nor am I able to detect any contemptuous tone. Indeed, the
         grounds made no such allegation. Although it is now remarked on  in
         the recent submissions, that was plainly the  result  of  what  was
         said by my colleague and I shall turn to those submissions later.

     17. What appears to have been overlooked in the grant of permission  is
         the very important finding made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         that there was no genuine and subsisting marriage which in turn led
         to the finding that there was no family life  between  the  parties
         including the children.

     18. The finding regarding the marriage is the crux of the  entire  case
         as if that finding was properly made then  the  grounds  on  family
         life cannot be sustained.

     19. In so far as the  grounds  seek  to  challenge  that  finding,  the
         following argument is made: "The Home  Office  refused  to  believe
         that we were in a subsisting relationship. Since  the  decision  we
         have lived together and we continue to live together... We continue
         to be married and have been for a considerable period of time". The
         grounds fail entirely  to  engage  with  the  judge's  reasons  for
         finding that the marriage was not genuine  or  subsisting  and  the
         grant of permission also fails to flag up any argument  about  that
         finding. The judge was rightly concerned about many aspects of  the
         account he had been given and of the utter failure of the appellant
         to resolve/explain the anomalies he identified. In the  appellant's
         grounds and in the submissions  received,  it  is  maintained  that
         people lie in court for a multitude of  reasons  but  there  is  no
         attempt to identify what lies were told or why. Such a  claim  only
         serves to further  undermine  the  appellant's  integrity  yet  the
         submissions bizarrely attack the judge for failing to consider  the
         materiality of the lies but without specifying what they were.

     20.  The  judge  identified  the  following  serious  problems  in  the
         evidence: (i) that the appellant said he  was  married  and  living
         with his wife in Kenya when  he  made  his  application  for  entry
         clearance in September 2016 but that he subsequently maintained  in
         his application for leave to remain in  June  2017  that  they  had
         divorced in February 2014: (ii) that no  evidence  of  the  claimed
         divorce had been adduced; (iii) that the  wife  in  Kenya  has  not
         referred to a divorce in her letter, only  to  a  separation;  (iv)
         that the appellant had claimed on his VAF to be coming to visit  P,
         described as his sister, but that he subsequently claimed  she  was
         not a relative at all and that he married her; (v) that there  were
         discrepancies over when H's wedding was meant  to  take  place  and
         when it was called off  which  suggested  that  the  appellant  had
         applied for a visa after the wedding had been cancelled; (vi)  that
         there were discrepancies over where the appellant  lived  prior  to
         his visit to the UK because although he claimed he lived  with  his
         wife in Kenya, she said that they had lived apart since 2014 and  P
         said that he lived with his mother.

     21. The appellant was questioned about why he had passed himself off as
         married on his VAF if it was the case that  he  had  been  divorced
         some two and a half years earlier. It is  plain  from  the  judge's
         Record  of  Proceedings  and   the   evidence   recorded   in   the
         determination (at 8-9) that no coherent reply was  forthcoming  and
         indeed this matter remains  unresolved.  The  appellant  maintained
         that he had to write the truth that he was married which  makes  no
         sense at all if his subsequent evidence was that  he  was  in  fact
         divorced at the time. He claimed that he  only  continued  to  live
         with his wife (or ex-wife) because he had  no  other  accommodation
         but that is contradicted by her evidence. Although he claimed  that
         he was supposed to move in with his mother,  he  could  not  do  so
         because of her "issues" but P had said in  her  evidence  that  the
         appellant and his mother had been residing together  prior  to  the
         visit and that the appellant would take his son to visit his  (S's)
         mother and their other child who lived with her (at 10). The  judge
         also noted that the appellant's first wife has spoken of separation
         in 2014 in her letter; there was no mention of  a  divorce  and  no
         mention of any continued co-habitation (at 10). The judge was fully
         entitled to find that the appellant had either lied on his VAF when
         he said he was married or that he was lying to the  court  when  he
         said he was divorced and had been free to marry P (at 11  and  13).
         This  matter  remains  unexplained  and  seriously  undermines  the
         appellant's credibility.

     22. The judge noted that the appellant was described as single  on  his
         marriage certificate whereas by his own evidence he claimed to be a
         divorced man. The judge had regard to the appellant's evidence that
         he had informed the registrar that he  was  divorced  but  rejected
         that claim as he was not satisfied that the  registrar  would  have
         accepted  the  appellant's  oral   statements   without   requiring
         documentary evidence. He was also concerned that the wife in  Kenya
         made no reference in any of her letters to a divorce  which  called
         into question the ability of the appellant to marry again. That was
         a conclusion he was entitled to reach (at 12).

     23. The written submissions from the appellant maintain no evidence was
         advanced to support the judge's conclusion that the appellant and P
         may be prohibited from marrying. I would  say  in  reply  that  the
         evidence was there in the appellant's VAF. It was he who  described
         his present wife as his sister.

     24. It is also submitted for the  appellant  that  the  respondent  had
         given the appellant and P permission to marry and  that  the  judge
         did not refer to the pre marriage interview. That did not form part
         of the evidence before the judge so he  cannot  be  criticized  for
         failing to have regard  to  evidence  that  was  not  adduced.  The
         interview record is not before me either and, as consent was  given
         for the marriage, I can only assume that the appellant did not tell
         the Home Office that he was a married man at the time. The issue of
         whether he remained married to his wife in Kenya  at  the  time  he
         married P only became known to the Secretary of State when his  VAF
         was obtained.  I  also  note  that  the  letter  giving  permission
         maintains that it "does not constitute a determination  as  to  the
         genuineness of the relationship  on  which  it  is  based"  so  its
         relevance to the issues raised by the  judge  is  of  very  limited
         weight.  The submissions further maintain that  if  the  respondent
         now maintains that the marriage is not legitimate, evidence of this
         should be adduced.  As  stated  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  the
         evidence is in the form of the VAF and the absence of any  evidence
         of divorce.

     25. There were also problems about the wedding the appellant claimed he
         was coming to attend. His visa application was made for a one month
         visit with an expected arrival  date  of  23  October  2017  and  a
         duration of one month's stay. P's evidence was  that  in  fact  the
         wedding was planned  for  December  2016  and  was  called  off  in
         November (at 14). That would mean that the appellant  had  intended
         to leave the UK even before the wedding had taken place had it gone
         ahead as planned. However, the evidence of H,  the  alleged  bride,
         was entirely at odds with that. Her evidence was that  the  wedding
         was meant to be in July/August 2016 and that it had been called off
         in May or June. She was unsure of the dates which the  judge  found
         very strange indeed given that it was her wedding and  was  planned
         as an extravagant and very expensive affair according to  her  oral
         evidence (as  recorded  in  the  Record  of  Proceedings).  If  her
         evidence was reliable, then the appellant had  lied  further  about
         the purpose of his trip and had obtained entry clearance  on  false
         pretences.

     26. Additionally, the evidence raises the following  difficulties:  (i)
         that both the appellant and S's mother  were  named  as  his  legal
         guardians on his VAF but that the  appellant  subsequently  claimed
         that he had custody of the child; (ii) the  appellant's  mother  on
         her VAF gave details of a sister she had in New Malden whereas this
         person was not mentioned on the  appellant's  VAF  in  the  section
         requesting information of relatives in the UK; (iii) that she  gave
         her marital status as married and said  she  was  living  with  her
         husband but that the appellant claimed at the hearing she  had  not
         been and that they had problems; and (iv) that despite the  judge's
         directions no evidence of the appellant's mother's return to  Kenya
         has been adduced.

     27. Given all these serious problems and conflicts with  the  evidence,
         which remain unexplained, it is hardly surprising  that  the  judge
         reached the conclusion the evidence was a "web of lies" and that it
         was not possible for him to make any firm findings on whether P was
         actually a sister or not but he  was  certain  that  "there  was  a
         constructed purposeful attempt to bring the appellant over  to  the
         UK by circumventing immigration control" (at 16).

     28. It was in that context that the judge concluded that there  was  no
         extant family life between the appellant and P as a married couple.
         Based on that finding there can be no question at all of any family
         life between S and P or the appellant and C or between S and C.  At
         best the two boys are friends, they are not "step-siblings" as  the
         written submissions claim and at its highest S's removal would mean
         the loss of a friendship formed over a relatively short period. The
         judge properly found that S's best interests would be to return  to
         Kenya where he had a mother and sister and to return to the life he
         had there. I note that the submissions make a big issue  about  the
         failure of the judge to consider the difficulties the  child  would
         have in being repatriated but in fact no oral submissions were made
         on the issues now relied on in the written submissions and there is
         no reason why S would be unable to resume his  education  in  Kenya
         given that he was able to adapt to life and school in the UK.   The
         judge did not hold the conduct of the appellant and P  against  the
         children. He properly found that there was no family  life  because
         there was no genuine marriage.

     29. It is asserted that the judge did not have regard to the  statement
         from S's mother in which she maintained that S would have forgotten
         Swahili during the four years he has been here and  so  would  have
         difficulties at  school.  First,  this  statement  post  dates  the
         hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and so can have  no  bearing
         on the judge's decision. Second, even if it  had  been  before  the
         judge, it could  have  no  material  impact  as  I  note  that  the
         languages spoken by the appellant do not even  include  Swahili  so
         plainly it is possible to live, study and  work  in  Kenya  without
         Swahili if indeed it is the case that he has forgotten  it.  Third,
         the claim that he has forgotten the language is mere supposition as
         it was not part of the appellant's  evidence.  Fourth,  it  is  not
         credible that in a matter of just four years the child  would  have
         forgotten a language he had spoken for some 11 years. Fifth, it  is
         not suggested that the child does not speak any  of  the  languages
         spoken by his father which enabled him to live and work in Kenya.

     30. The judge was also entitled to  find  that  no  reliance  could  be
         placed on s.117B(6) as there was no genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship. The  grounds  suggest  that  there  was  between  the
         appellant and S; that is accepted but S is not a  qualifying  child
         and would be returning to Kenya with the appellant.

     31. There has been no suggestion that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(v) can be met.

     32. The written submissions from the appellant refer at various  points
         to the statements from S's mother. There is, however,  no  evidence
         of how these statements have been prepared, no evidence of how they
         have come to be  in  the  UK,  no  evidence  of  them  having  been
         witnessed, no evidence to show that they have been prepared  freely
         by the alleged signatory and nothing to  independently  verify  her
         signature. The statement attached to the written  submissions  post
         dates the hearing and cannot be relied on to criticize the  judge's
         findings.




         Decision

     33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors  of
         law and it is upheld.

         Anonymity

     34. No request for an anonymity order has been made at any stage.




    Signed


    R. Keki?


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 9 September 2020
-----------------------
[1] I continue the use of anonymity by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


