
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18262/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 02 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                  CLIVE [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Agbim of Cleveland Law
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian promulgated on 5 April 2019 dismissing the  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 2 August 2018 on human rights grounds.




2.   The Appellant is a citizen of the United States of America born  on  16
    January 1997.  He visited the  United  Kingdom  as  a  child  but  more
    recently last entered the United Kingdom on 10 May 2017 as  a  visitor.
    He was granted leave to remain until 30 May 2017 in accordance with his
    indication that he was intent on visiting for only two weeks.   (It  is
    not usually the case that a visitor is limited in such  a  way  in  the
    grant of leave to enter, the usual period being six months.  It may  be
    that the limitation was prompted in some respects by  suspicion  as  to
    the Appellant's intentions given that it is recorded  in  the  'reasons
    for refusal' letter ('RFRL') herein that when he arrived in the  United
    Kingdom he  was  in  possession  of  his  educational  and  vaccination
    certificates and his X-Box games consul.)


3.   On 30 May  2017  the  Appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain.   The
    application was supported by a covering letter dated 26 May  2017  from
    his representatives.  The application was made on the basis of  private
    and family life with reference to Article 8, and also with reference to
    "exceptional circumstances".  The substance of the application  as  set
    out in the application form  and  the  covering  letter  was  that  the
    Appellant wished to remain in the United Kingdom with  his  mother  and
    his brother.  In this regard emphasis was placed in particular upon the
    serious disabilities of the Appellant's brother 'T' (d.o.b.  22  August
    2002) who  it  was  said  required  'around-the-clock'  care,  and  the
    deteriorating health of the Appellant's mother  who  had  been  looking
    after T alone for a significant period of time.  It was said  that  the
    arrival of the Appellant had improved matters significantly.


4.   It is a curious feature of the application that some of the  supporting
    medical documents are dated within a day  or  two  of  the  Appellant's
    arrival: for example, a letter from the GP responsible for the care  of
    the Appellant's mother is dated 11 May 2017.  There is also  supporting
    evidence by way of a letter from Hackney Ark Children and Young  People
    Centre for Development and Disability in respect of T  referencing  the
    Appellant's contribution dated 24  May  2017.   This  circumstance  was
    commented upon in the RFRL.  Be that as it may, the Appellant  provided
    further supporting medical documents in respect of both his brother and
    his mother and also a letter from his brother's school  dated  1  March
    2018.


5.   The Respondent refused the application for leave to remain for  reasons
    set out in a RFRL dated 2 August 2018.


6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


7.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in  the  Decision  and
    Reasons of Judge Andonian.


8.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 9 May 2019.


9.   In the premises there appears to be no dispute as to  the  severity  of
    the Appellant's brother's disabilities.   These  are  detailed  in  the
    supporting medical evidence and are also summarised in the decision  of
    Judge Andonian. Nor is it suggested that there are anything other  than
    very particular care needs arising  by  reason  of  such  disabilities.
    Again, this is a matter set  out  in  the  various  supporting  medical
    documents and is a  matter  of  consideration  in  the  course  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


10.  The appeal was brought on Article 8 grounds, and  necessarily  involved
    a wider consideration of aspects of the Appellant's private and  family
    life: however, at the core of the  application  -  and  inevitably  the
    focus in the appeal - was the relationship between  the  Appellant  and
    his brother, and the Appellant's role in providing care and support for
    his brother, both in general terms and by way of providing much  needed
    assistance  to  his  mother  (who  provided  evidence   regarding   the
    deterioration of her physical abilities).  The issues  in  this  regard
    did not, it seems to me, involve any real dispute  as  to  the  primary
    facts in respect of T's condition and circumstances; rather  the  focus
    was the availability or otherwise of care and support if required.


11.  In this latter regard Judge Andonian in substance  concluded  that  the
    Appellant  had  not  really  provided  anything  approaching   adequate
    evidence that his brother's care needs would not be met if he  were  to
    leave  the  United  Kingdom.   In  this  context  the  Judge  expressly
    recognised that there might be a difference  between  "the  best  care"
    that the Appellant  might  provide  and  the  provision  by  the  local
    authority in which case the Appellant would be "adequately  cared  for"
    (paragraph 34).


12.  Having made references to the evidence and the enquiries  made  by  the
    Appellant  and  more  particularly  his  mother  in  respect   of   the
    availability of care - e.g. see paragraphs 28-32 of the Decision -  the
    Judge found "She has not asked for other help from Social Services  and
    other  organisations  who  could  assist  if  the  Appellant's   mother
    approached them" (paragraph 33).  The Judge concluded  in  this  regard
    "The truth of the matter is that insufficient enquiries have been  made
    for full-time carers" (paragraph 34).


13.  The grounds of appeal are broken down into six separate  grounds  which
    contain an element of duplication and overlap.  It seems to me that  in
    substance the grounds may be characterised  as  asserting  disagreement
    with the evaluation of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and in my judgment
    ultimately do not identify any specific error of law.


14.  The first ground of appeal disputes the Judge's conclusion  that  there
    were not exceptional circumstances in the case: it  is  submitted  that
    the Judge had fallen into error at paragraphs 13-17  of  the  Decision.
    However it is absolutely clear that those paragraphs of the Decision do
    not represent  the  Judge's  reasoning  but  are  part  of  a  detailed
    rehearsal of the contents of the Respondent's RFRL.  To that extent the
    first ground of appeal does not directly challenge the substance of the
    Judge's own reasoning by referencing those particular paragraphs.


15.  Nonetheless, it is the case that the Judge reached this  conclusion  at
    paragraph 32:

         "I have taken into account all the factors  in  this  case  in  the
         round and holistically, but  it  is  my  view  that  there  are  no
         exceptional circumstances in this case for the Appellant to  remain
         in the UK".


16.  The thrust of the first ground is otherwise that it is  suggested  that
    it was impractical to expect the National Health Service to provide the
    Appellant's mother with 24 hours a day care or NHS support.   It  seems
    to me that this mischaracterises the reasoning of the Judge.  The Judge
    in fact did not accept that the Appellant's brother  required  24  hour
    care, in particular because he spent some of the time at  school.   The
    Judge's essential reasoning was based on the absence  of  any  evidence
    that further care as required would not be made available by the  local
    authority, there having been no request for such  care.   Moreover,  in
    this context it was noted that proper enquiries had not  been  made  by
    the Appellant's mother because she was in essence in what was described
    as a "comfort zone" (paragraph 33) by  reason  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was for the moment offering her assistance;  the  real  point
    again being that the mother had not made  enquiries  as  to  what  care
    might be available in the event of either increasing care needs or  her
    decreasing ability to meet the current care needs in the absence of the
    Appellant.


17.  Grounds 2 and  3  seek  to  criticise  the  Judge's  reasoning  in  the
    Decision at paragraphs 18 and 20 - which are again paragraphs in  which
    the Judge is merely setting out the Respondent's case  from  the  RFRL.
    Accordingly these grounds do not constitute a criticism or challenge to
    any specific aspect of the Judge's own independent reasoning.


18.  In any event, the substance of Grounds 2 and  3  is  really  to  submit
    that the Judge should have attached more weight than  it  is  suggested
    that he did to particular items of  supporting  evidence.   I  can  see
    nothing in the grounds that constitutes a  pleading  of  error  of  law
    rather than a dispute or disagreement with  the  fact-finding  and  the
    ultimate decision of the Judge.


19.  Similarly Ground 4 is drafted as  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement:
    "The learned Immigration Judge is wrong to suggest that the Appellant's
    presence in the United Kingdom is not crucial in the care  provided  to
    his brother ...".


20.  Ground 5 similarly pleads that the Judge was "wrong" in respect of  the
    availability of 24 hour home care.  As noted above, the  Judge,  whilst
    referring to the possibility of 24 hour care,  did  not  actually  find
    that that was a requirement.  It seems to me, again, not only is this a
    mere disagreement but it misses the  essential  basis  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning.


21.  Ground 6 for the main part also seeks to dispute the  Judge's  approach
    to the case by allegation  of  not  applying  "enough  weight"  to  the
    supporting medical evidence.  This is not to identify an error of  law.
    It is asserted in this context  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give
    "paramount" consideration to the best interests of T  who  is  still  a
    minor, and in this regard reference  is  made  to  section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 1989.  I  remind  myself  that
    the duty under section 55 is a duty imposed on the Secretary of  State.
    To that extent it  is  clear  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  had
    reference to that duty in the RFRL quoting specifically  the  provision
    of section 55 and addressing it.  Insofar as the best  interests  of  T
    were a matter of consideration in the  appeal,  although  there  is  no
    express reference to section 55 in the Decision it is plan and  obvious
    that the focus of the Judge's reasoning related to  the  issue  of  the
    welfare of T and how his particular needs could be met in  the  absence
    of  the  Appellant.   That  was  the  primary  basis  upon  which   the
    application and appeal were advanced.  In the circumstances it seems to
    me clear enough that the Judge has had regard to  the  very  particular
    circumstances of T and the necessity of protecting  and  promoting  his
    best interests by ensuring that he had adequate care.


22.   I  also  remind  myself  that  'best  interests'  would   not   be   a
    determinative feature in this appeal, and it is clear  that  the  Judge
    has had regard to the circumstances of the Appellant's arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom and the absence of any  expectation  that  he  might  be
    permitted to remain.  In this context the Judge has also had regard  to
    the public interest requirements and the five step stage  under  Razgar
    (see paragraph 37).


23.   I  recognise  and  acknowledge  the  very  particular  and   difficult
    circumstances of the Appellant's brother, and indeed of the Appellant's
    mother  in  her  attempts  to  care  for  her  severely  disabled  son.
    Reference is made to this in particular at paragraph 31 of the Decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal:

         "The Appellant's mother has  incredible  emotional  resilience  and
         patience and has brought her son up  as  part  of  the  family  and
         community and with the involvement of friends and  neighbours,  but
         it is not easy especially as the son has grown into adolescence and
         the responsibility is very great, considering the  future  and  the
         long terms needs of the son".

    However, notwithstanding the sympathy  that  is  to  be  felt  for  the
    Appellant's family  in  their  very  particular  circumstances,  I  can
    identify nothing amounting to an error of law in the  approach  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge whether by reference to the Grounds of Appeal
    or otherwise.


24.  For the avoidance of any doubt,  so  far  as  the  family  relationship
    between the Appellant and his mother is concerned, it is  to  be  noted
    pursuant to the application letter that there has  been  a  substantial
    period of separation because of  marital  breakdown,  so  the  covering
    letter indicates that the Appellant had been separated from his  mother
    at a young age and taken to America by his father.  He is now an  adult
    whose avowed intention was only  to  come  initially  as  a  visitor  -
    although as I have indicated there must be some doubt in  that  regard;
    the reality is that he had an independent life as a young adult in  the
    United States of America prior to his  last  arrival  in  the  UK.  The
    consequences  of  the  Respondent's  decision  only  really  puts   the
    Appellant back into the position he would have been in if  he  had  not
    overstayed his leave to enter - that is to say, a person  visiting  the
    mother with whom for the main part he had not grown up.




Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.


26.  The appeal remains dismissed.


27.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
