
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18638/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons for Promulgation
On 23rd November 2018  On 28 December 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  JESUS [R]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel, instructed by Mantini
Montecristo
For the respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is a resumed hearing from 6 July 2018 when I found the material
       error of law in the decision of First-tier Judge Rowlands. The judge
       had dismissed the appellant's application for leave to remain on the
       basis of his article 8 rights. This related primarily to his
       relationship with his daughter [MU]. The parties are referred to the
       earlier decision promulgated on 21 August 2018 by way of background.

    2. The preserved findings were that the appellant is a national of
       Bolivia who came to the United Kingdom in 2002, initially as a
       visitor. He obtained various leaves as a student until 2007 and then
       overstayed. In or around 2005 he began a relationship with another
       Bolivian national, [MV]. Their daughter [MU] was born on 14 March
       2008. She has lived in the United Kingdom all her life and now holds
       British nationality.

    3. The appellant overstayed until 17 February 2012 when he applied for
       leave to remain on the basis of his article 8 rights. This was
       refused with no right of appeal. In October he was served with a
       notice requiring him to leave which he did not comply with. In
       January 2014 he again unsuccessfully applied for leave to remain and
       then overstayed until 15 December 2015 when he applied again.

    4. The appellant's relationship with [MV] ended in 2012 and she has now
       married a Spanish national and continues to live in the United
       Kingdom along with her husband and her daughter. The appellant has
       maintained a good relationship with his former partner and would see
       his daughter on a regular basis. [MV] has made her home in the United
       Kingdom with her husband and daughter and there is no suggestion they
       would relocate to Bolivia. Beyond overstaying the appellant is not
       engaged in any conduct which would render his continued presence
       undesirable.

    5. The appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
       daughter. Section 117 B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002 applies. This provides:

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                leave the United Kingdom.

Consideration

    6. In considering the appeal I now have the benefit of the Supreme Court
       decision in KO (Nigeria) and Others (Appellants) v Secretary of State
       for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.I have also been
       provided with a copy of the respondent's IDI guidance to decision-
       makers of the 22nd February 2018.

    7. Mr Lemer argued that the Supreme Court decision was determinative in
       this case in the appellant's favour. I was referred in particular to
       paragraphs 23,32, 36 and 39 on the decision.

    8. Ms Kenny referred me to the First-tier judge finding the appellant
       had an appalling immigration history. The judge had referred to him
       having overstayed since 2007 and when his partner became pregnant
       there was no reason why they both could not have return to Bolivia.
       The judge suspected they remained to take advantage of the National
       Health Service.

    9. The judge did not accept it was necessary for the contact between the
       appellant and his child to be as regular as it was or that it needed
       to be face-to-face.

   10. I was referred to the IDI at page 9 and the reference to exceptional
       circumstances which would render the refusal a breach of article 8
       because it would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
       applicant or their family. Ms Kenny argued that the reality would be
       if the appellant were removed there would be a physical separation
       from his child but when balanced against the judge's finding of an
       appalling immigration history it did not meet the threshold to allow
       the appeal.

   11. In response, Mr Lemer referred me to the wording of section117B(6)
       and the issue arising was whether it would be reasonable to expect
       the child to leave.

Conclusions

   12. The primary consideration is the appellant's child. She is now 10
       years of age and has been born and lived all her life in the United
       Kingdom. She holds British nationality. Her parents separated in 2012
       at which stage she was 4 years of age. She has continued to see her
       natural father on a regular basis. She is now living with her mother
       and her stepfather.

   13. It was suggested she could see her natural father less frequently and
       from a distance. Possibly she could visit him in Bolivia. However,
       this scenario would result in a dilution of their relationship. It is
       my conclusion the ongoing presence of her natural father is in her
       best interests.

   14. Having determined were her best interests lie it is necessary to
       consider the wider public considerations. In this situation the
       statutory consideration in Section 117 B(6) of the Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is prescriptive. The Supreme Court
       decision in KO (Nigeria) and Others (Appellants) v Secretary of State
       for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53 has considered
       this provision and whether this is to be tempered with the family's
       immigration history. The conclusion is that this is a freestanding
       provision.

   15. The First tier judge had described the appellant as having an
       appalling immigration history. This is relative. He has been an over
       stayer for a number of years. The judge records that the appellant
       came here in July 2002 on a six-month visit Visa and in time he
       obtained leave to remain as a student which was variously extended
       until 31st August 2007. There are no other features however which
       would render his presence undesirable.

   16. The judge did not have the benefit of the Supreme Court decision and
       the guidance on the relevance of the conduct of the parent. The judge
       failed to have regard to section 117B(6).

   17. Paragraph 18 of the Supreme Court decision points out that parental
       conduct can be relevant when considering where the parent or parents
       are likely to be and why the child might have to leave. In the
       present case her mother has a right to be here and there is nothing
       to suggest she has any intention of leaving the United Kingdom. She
       has custody of the child and the reality is that irrespective of what
       happens to the appellant, the child would remain in the United
       Kingdom.

   18. Looking at matters another way, that is, through section 117B(6), it
       clearly would be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United
       Kingdom. The reality is she will not be leaving. It is my conclusion,
       bearing in mind the statutory provision and the guidance given by the
       Supreme Court, that it would be disproportionate to require the
       appellant to leave given the family life he has with his daughter.
       Consequently, I would remake the decision allowing the appeal.

Decision

The appeal is allowed on article 8 grounds


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

Date:  20 December 2018

