
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18620/2019
                                                               HU/18621/2019
                                                               HU/18622/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2021                   |On 27 January 2021                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Kanittha [S]
                               Nanthaphong [T]
                               [KT] (a minor)
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the appellant:     Ms Susana Cunha, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondents:   Mr Michael Brooks, Counsel instructed by AKL
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission from the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimants'  appeals  against   her
    decision on 31 October 2019 to refuse  them  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds, with reference to the paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    claimants are a mother and father and their 6 year  old  daughter,  all
    citizens of Thailand.

Background

 2. The first  and  second  claimants  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  from
    Thailand.  The first claimant (the wife) entered on 28  September  2005
    as a work permit holder and the second claimant (the  husband),  on  31
    August 2005, also with a work permit.

 3. The wife, born in 1981, was then 24 years old and the  husband  was  27
    years old.  Their families in Thailand  assisted  them  with  money  to
    enable them to set up home together in the United Kingdom.

 4. The husband's work permit expired on 31  August  2006  and  the  wife's
    expired 8 September 2006.

 5. The third claimant (the daughter) was born  to  the  first  and  second
    claimants on 3 May 2014 and has  never  lived  in  Thailand.   She  has
    attended school for approximately two years in the United  Kingdom,  at
    the very beginning of primary schooling.  She is six years old and will
    be 7 years old on 3 May 2021.

 6. The claimants assert, and produced a friend to confirm,  that  although
    the husband and wife speak Thai  at  home,  the  daughter  speaks  only
    English and is culturally integrated  here.  They  were  ambitious  for
    their daughter, then 5 years old: they wanted her to grow up  to  be  a
    doctor or a lawyer, ambitions which they  considered  unattainable  for
    them in Thailand.

 7. The husband and wife took no steps to regulate their  position  in  the
    United Kingdom. On the contrary: the wife worked unlawfully in kitchens
    and restaurants, and the husband worked as a chef until he was arrested
    in 2019.  They have been here now for over 15 years, 14 of those  years
    without valid leave to remain.   On  13  June  2019,  the  husband  was
    encountered working as a  chef  in  a  restaurant  and  served  with  a
    RED0001.

 8. On 29 July 2019, the claimants made the present application.  They said
    they had no income or savings and nowhere to  return  to  in  Thailand.
    They said that without money, it would be extremely difficult  to  find
    accommodation, and that without savings, they would not be able to  pay
    for their daughter's education.

Refusal letters

 9. In her refusal letters, the Secretary of State noted that none  of  the
    claimants was entitled to leave to  remain  as  a  partner  or  parent,
    because none of them had any leave to remain  after  8  September  2006
    (and in the case of the third claimant, she has  never  had  any  valid
    leave to remain).

10. The Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the family's reintegration in  Thailand.   She
    considered that, contrary to what they said, the claimants were  likely
    to have family and friends in Thailand, since they had  left  there  as
    adults.  They were free to work and to access whatever  state  benefits
    were available in Thailand.  There were  no  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration and paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) would not assist them.

11. There were also no exceptional circumstances for which leave to  remain
    ought to be given outside the Rules.  Education in Thailand was free at
    state schools until grade 9, and in addition, the  government  provided
    three years of free pre-school and three years of free upper  secondary
    education, which were not compulsory.   The third  claimant  was  still
    very young and would be able to adapt to life  in  Thailand,  with  the
    help of her parents.   It would not be 'unjustifiably  harsh'  for  the
    family to be expected to return and live in their country of origin.

12. The Secretary of State refused all three  applications.  The  claimants
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

13. First-tier Judge Lloyd heard oral evidence from the  first  and  second
    claimants, setting out the history as  summarised  above.   He  made  a
    number of findings of fact:

      a) That the wife and the husband had been co-operative and  candid  in
         their evidence;

      b) That the daughter was 'not at all  comfortable  with  their  native
         Thai language' although he rejected the claim that  she  speaks  no
         Thai at all;

      c) That the daughter had spent some 1� years in school,  speaking  and
         studying in English;

      d) That the wife and husband had acute concern  for  their  daughter's
         educational future, and that it was  'probable'  and  a  legitimate
         concern that she would fall behind significantly in her educational
         progress and might never recover the benefit she  had  gained  from
         her time in the United Kingdom;

      e) That there would be 9 years of free education available in Thailand
         for the daughter, but probably not to the GCSE examination  or  'A'
         level standards which would prepare her for University in Thailand;



      f) That corporal punishment was routine in Thai schools,  which  would
         be a huge shock for the daughter;

      g) That the difficulties for the daughter  in  finding  herself  in  a
         totally unknown educational, linguistic and social culture would be
         acutely unsettling and 'not short of chaotic for an active  5-year-
         old girl who has known only life in the United  Kingdom  since  her
         birth here'; and that

      h) The family had social and familial connections with  Thailand,  but
         that the circumstances in which the daughter would have to grow  up
         there were totally unsatisfactory and that the daughter had  strong
         connections to the United Kingdom.

14. The judge found that it was in the best interests of  the  daughter  to
    remain with her parents, and that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    her to leave the United Kingdom if her parents were to be removed.   He
    directed himself that having regard  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, 'the interests of the  child  are
    paramount' and  that  applying  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended), the public  interest  did
    not require the daughter's removal to Thailand.

15. The First-tier Judge allowed  the  appeals.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

16. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal asserted that the First-tier
    Judge had failed to make material findings under paragraph 276ADE as to
    whether there were very significant obstacles to the  reintegration  of
    the wife and the husband in Thailand and that the   failure  to  attach
    weight to the claimants' inability to meet the requirements of Appendix
    FM had also infected the exceptional circumstances consideration in his
    decision; that the First-tier Judge erred in finding that  the  child's
    best interests were 'paramount' when Lady Hale JSC in ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 directed  that
    they were 'a primary' consideration.

17. The Secretary of State contended that the First-tier Judge erred in law
    in consideration of the daughter's best interests, with reference to EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874 and KO (Nigeria) & Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53, in particular  the  latter,  as
    the First-tier Judge's reliance on MA  (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  &
    Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 could not  survive  the  observations  of  the
    Supreme Court at [19] in KO (Nigeria).

18. Finally, the  Secretary  of  State  contends  that  a  section  117B(6)
    assessment was not appropriate, as the daughter was  not  a  qualifying
    child,  and  that  the  First-tier  Judge   erred   in   applying   the
    reasonableness test.

19. Permission to appeal was granted on all  grounds  by  First-tier  Judge
    Feeney.

Rule 24 Reply

20. There was no Rule 24 reply on behalf of the claimants.

Further directions

21. On 6 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek gave  triage  directions
    in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.

22. On 1 October 2020, having regard to the responses from both parties,  I
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal without a hearing and
    directed that the decision in  this  appeal  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis described in the grant of permission.

23. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

24. At the beginning of the Upper Tribunal hearing, following the  decision
    in The Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants v The  President  of
    the Upper Tribunal (Immigration And Asylum Chamber)  [2020]  EWHC  3103
    (Admin), I asked the parties whether they considered that the error  of
    law decision should be reopened.

25. For the claimants, Mr Brooks said that he recognised  that  there  were
    material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Judge and that
    he did not seek reopening of the material error of law decision.

26. The appeal then proceeded to the substantive remaking.

27. It was agreed that the error of law decision should be  varied  to  the
    extent that the First-tier Judge's findings of fact  should  stand  for
    the purpose of remaking the decision.

Technical issues

28. I heard oral  submissions  from  Mr  Brooks,  but  there  were  serious
    technical difficulties for  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Ms
    Cunha, who was sharing a fairly weak internet  connection.   Her  image
    froze repeatedly and her speech was 'chopped up' to an extent  that  it
    was almost impossible to understand.

29. After discussion with the parties, it was agreed that they  would  both
    submit written submissions and that I would remake the decision on  the
    basis of the  papers  and  those  decisions.   I  emphasise  that  this
    approach was adopted with the  express  consent  of  Ms  Cunha  and  Mr
    Brooks.

Secretary of State's submissions

30. For the Secretary of State, Ms Cunha accepted that  the  wife  and  the
    husband had been in the United Kingdom unlawfully since 2006, and  that
    the daughter did not speak Thai and had never  travelled  to  Thailand,
    her education and cultural assimilation being in the United Kingdom.

31. Ms Cunha conceded that for the purpose  of  the  present  hearing,  the
    daughter, who will become a qualifying child in  May  2021,  should  be
    treated as already so qualifying and therefore section 117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act was applicable and the sole question was the reasonableness of
    her  removal.    Ms  Cunha  then  cited  at  length  passages  from  ZH
    (Tanzania), EV (Philippines) and the difference  in  treatment  of  the
    section 55  best  interest  question  in  the  Family  Courts  and  the
    Immigration  and Asylum Tribunals, as set out in A  (A  Child)   [2020]
    EWCA Civ 731 at [36]-[38] in the judgment of the then Senior  President
    of Tribunals, Lord Justice Ryder, who gave the judgment of the court.

32. She then set out the guidance of the Court of Appeal in NE-A  (Nigeria)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239 as  to
    the  treatment  of   qualifying   children,   and   KO   (Nigeria)   on
    reasonableness, at [16]-[19] in the opinion of Lord Carnwath JSC,  with
    whom Lord Kerr, Lord Wilson, Lord Reed and Lord Briggs agreed.

33. The submissions proper begin at [16] on page  8  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's document and is helpfully  concise.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the uprooting of the daughter to Thailand  might  present
    some challenges, but argued that given her young age, she  would  still
    be mostly focused on her immediate family and that she could expect  to
    have to adapt to a change of school in due course, as she  grew  older.
    She was young enough to  adapt  to  inevitable  changes  of  her  home,
    school, doctor and even family structure: if her parents  were  granted
    leave to remain,  they  would  seek  to  work  lawfully,  altering  the
    presence they played in their daughter's life.

34. Given the Covid-19 pandemic, the daughter  would  have  had  much  less
    interaction with her school and teachers during 2020 and would have had
    to adapt to new ways of learning in the home.  There  was  no  positive
    obligation on the Secretary of State to provide  the  daughter  with  a
    better education than she would receive in Thailand.

35. Applying KO (Nigeria), although the daughter was not to be  blamed  for
    her parents' poor migration history, the reasonableness of removing her
    fell to be considered in the context  of  their  removability  and  the
    precarious/unlawful status they had in  the  United  Kingdom.   On  the
    facts, the  public  interest  outweighed  the  best  interests  of  the
    daughter and the appeal should be dismissed.

Claimants' submissions

36. For the claimant, Mr Brooks set out the  history,  reminding  me  that,
    applying Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
    UKSC  74,  it  was  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
    circumstances and best interests  before  deciding  whether  they  were
    outweighed by the public interest in controlling migration.

37. Mr Brooks contended that the preserved findings of  fact  included  his
    acceptance that the mother and father, as the  daughter's  parents  had
    high aspirations for a professional career for  their  daughter,  which
    would be unavailable to  her  in  Thailand.   Women  in  Thailand  were
    generally housewives.

38. Mr Brooks expanded on the rather brief findings by the First-tier Judge
    that the circumstances in which the claimants would live on return were
    unacceptable.  The wife's mother (the daughter's grandmother) lived  in
    a two room house, along with the wife's brother, who has a drug problem
    and had in the past been violent.   The sleeping room was perhaps 4m  x
    2m; the other room was the kitchen.

39. Corporal punishment of children was common for  parents,  teachers  and
    family in Thailand.

40. The First-tier Judge had found that both the wife and the husband would
    now be disadvantaged in the labour market because of their age.

41. The daughter was not comfortable in the Thai language, which she  could
    not read or write, and she lacked a close connection to  that  country.
    It would be 'acutely unsettling' for her to be  in  a  totally  unknown
    educational, linguistic and social  culture  in  Thailand.    It  would
    defeat any enhanced educational prospects, making it  likely  that  the
    daughter would end as a housewife.

42. The daughter would have to live, with her parents, in  a  household  of
    six people in two rooms, one of whom (her uncle)  had  previously  been
    violent.   For all these reasons, it was not reasonable to  expect  the
    daughter to leave the United Kingdom and the appeal should be allowed.

43. I reserved my decision, which I now give. Having regard to the  consent
    of both  representatives  at  the  hearing,  and  the  submissions  now
    received, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to make a  decision  on
    whether the First-tier Tribunal decision contains a material  error  of
    law on the basis of the decisions and submissions before me.

Analysis

44. I remind myself of the findings of fact and the matters accepted by the
    Secretary of State. In finding that  the  wife  and  husband  had  been
    cooperative and candid, the First-tier Judge  effectively  found  their
    evidence to be broadly credible.  He did not accept that  the  daughter
    spoke no Thai, but did accept that she was 'not at all comfortable'  in
    Thai and that in her early primary  schooling,  she  was  speaking  and
    studying in English.

45. The concerns expressed about  the  possibility  of  enhanced  education
    leading to a professional qualification do not  go  to  reasonableness:
    rather, they sound in relation to Article 2 of  Protocol  No.1  to  the
    ECHR, the qualified 'right to education'.  In an unanimous judgment  in
    Holub & Anor v Secretary Of State For Home Department [2000]  EWCA  Civ
    343 at [25] the Court of Appeal held that:

         "24. Mr Luba contended that if the right [to education] was to have
         any content it should  at  least  encompass  the  provision  of  an
         effective education. ...

         25. We think Mr Luba is right about this  and  would  adopt  as  an
         accurate statement of the law the  following  passages  from  Human
         Rights Law and Practice by Lester and Pannick  (paras.  4.20.4  and
         4.20.6) :

         The general right to education comprises four separate rights (none
         of which is absolute):

             (i) right of access  to  such  educational  establishments  as
             exist;
             (ii)  a  right  to  effective  (but  not  the  most  effective
             possible) education;
             (iii)  a   right   to   official   recognition   of   academic
             qualifications ......

         As regards the right to an effective education, for  the  right  to
         education to be meaningful the quality of the education must  reach
         a minimum standard.

         But we do not think that the right is more extensive than this.  If
         Mr Luba's submission that there is  a  right  to  an  "appropriate"
         education means something more than an effective education  in  the
         sense described above we do not accept it. There is nothing in  the
         authorities or the literature to which we have been referred  which
         supports such a submission. The Convention does not confer a  right
         to education in any particular  country  and  so  does  not  invite
         comparison between educational systems.

         26. So Article 2 is limited in scope. Does the evidence  show  that
         Luiza's removal from her school in England and return to the Polish
         education system would breach her Article 2 right? We do not  think
         so. It is certainly not enough to say that Luiza will get a  better
         education  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Poland  clearly  has  a  well
         developed system of education. It is not  surprising  that  someone
         who has been out of it for several  years  will  have  difficulties
         getting back into it. But in this case Luiza appears  to  have  the
         ability to overcome these difficulties. Not only is  she  extremely
         bright but she has obviously kept up her Polish to a high  standard
         by attending the Polish Saturday School, no doubt assisted  by  her
         mother who is a highly regarded Polish teacher.  We  do  not  think
         that it can  be  said  that  Luiza  will  be  denied  an  effective
         education if she returns to Poland."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

46.  The evidence which was before the First-tier  Judge  showed  that  the
    daughter would have  access  to  'such  educational  establishments  as
    exist', for 9 years, without charge, although she might need some  help
    in adjusting to learning in Thai.  More than that  is  not  reasonable,
    having regard to the qualified nature of the right to education.

      a) That the difficulties for the daughter  in  finding  herself  in  a
         totally unknown educational, linguistic and social culture would be
         acutely unsettling and 'not short of chaotic for an active  5-year-
         old girl who has known only life in the United  Kingdom  since  her
         birth here';

      b) That the use of corporal punishment in Thai  schools  and  families
         would be a huge shock to the daughter; and that

      c) The family had social and familial connections with  Thailand,  but
         that the circumstances in which the daughter would have to grow  up
         there were totally unsatisfactory and that the daughter had  strong
         connections to the United Kingdom.

47. The real world situation is that, absent any exceptional circumstances,
    or a finding that it would be unreasonable for their daughter to return
    to Thailand, her country of nationality, with  them,  the  parents  are
    removable. The remaining factual matrix concerns the  use  of  corporal
    punishment in Thai families and in schools.  It does not appear to have
    been the claimants' case that they use  corporal  punishment  in  their
    home, or that the daughter's grandmother would  do  so.   The  risk  of
    corporal punishment in Thai schools sounds in Article 3 ECHR if at all,
    and is not pleaded thus.

48. Finally, there is the question of the accommodation which the claimants
    can be offered by the wife's mother, who lives in  a  2-room  apartment
    with the wife's brother, who has in the past been violent,  and  has  a
    drug problem.  The addition of this little family to that accommodation
    will make it very crowded, but  the  adult  claimants  are  capable  of
    working, and have managed to do so under difficult circumstances in the
    United Kingdom.

49. If the appeal is considered without the benefit of section 117B(6),  as
    neither exceptional circumstances nor significant obstacles  have  been
    shown on the facts as found, it can not succeed.

50. The adult claimants also say that they are 'too old' to be able to  get
    jobs.  They will be 54 and 57 this year, but I was  not  taken  to  any
    evidence which suggests that  there  are  no  jobs  for  chefs,  or  in
    restaurants or kitchens, for people that age in Thailand.

51. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Ms  Cunha  confirmed  that  it  was  her
    understanding that the Secretary of State is  not  currently  returning
    anyone to Thailand during the pandemic, the worst of which is  expected
    to last for several months yet.  Neither the parents, nor the daughter,
    can in practice be removed today, which makes the consideration of this
    appeal somewhat academic.

52. In May 2021, if they are still here then, the daughter will  reach  the
    age of 7 and become a qualifying child, and section 117B(6) of the 2002
    Act will apply. Let me be  clear:  it  does  not  apply  today,  but  I
    consider it out of an abundance of caution, in case the family  is  not
    removed until after the daughter's birthday.  In  those  circumstances,
    the argument that is not reasonable to expect this child to  leave  the
    United Kingdom if her parents are removed would need to be  considered.



53. Setting aside the educational argument, which cannot succeed  as  there
    is no  lack  of  'effective  education'  in  Thailand,  the  claimants'
    principal contention is that they will suffer overcrowding on return in
    the grandmother's apartment.  That by itself would not be sufficient to
    make the daughter's removal unreasonable.

54. As to the schooling  argument,  in  relation  to  her  friendships  and
    integration,  she  would  by  then  have  had  18  months  of  pandemic
    conditions, for  much  of  which  she  was  at  home,  not  at  school,
    undertaking remote learning.  The claimant  is  still  very  young:   I
    consider that she would be much more closely linked to her parents than
    to the school, and that it would not be unreasonable to expect  her  to
    return to Thailand with her parents, where the extended family could be
    expected to help her parents to resettle, as they did when  they  moved
    to the United Kingdom.

55. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



DECISION


56. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.


    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     14 January
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



