
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18689/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 16 October 2020                   |On 20 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turpin
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following an initial hearing at Manchester on  7  August  2020,  I  set
    aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  My  reasons  were  as
    follows:

 2. The appellant was born in 1988 and is a female citizen of Albania. By a
    decision dated 30 October 2019, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's human rights application to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    with her brother and his  children.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 17 January 2020, dismissed
    the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. At the initial hearing by Skype for Business at Manchester on 7  August
    2020, I told representatives that I intended to set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and gave my reasons. I shall, therefore,  be
    brief.

 4. One of the grounds of appeal focuses upon the alleged  failure  of  the
    judge to consider the application of section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act
    (as amended). The section provides:

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

    The appellant is not liable to deportation and lives with  children  of
    her partner and with whom she claims to enjoy a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship. Those children are 'qualifying children' for the purposes
    of the Act. However, at [34], whilst the judge discusses  section  117B
    but makes no reference to the provisions of subsection  (6).  At  [32],
    the judge wrote:

    However, what is clear to me from the evidence not least of [a  trained
    social worker and friend of  the  family],  that  over  the  years  the
    children now 14 (twins) and 11 have grown very close to  the  appellant
    and further away from their mother. In effect it is suggested that  the
    appellants become their surrogate mother. It is not disputed  there  is
    family life between the appellant, her brother and the children. It  is
    reasonable to assume that over the years the appellant has developed  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the children. However, she  is
    not the parent of the children but of course there is no suggestion  of
    the children should leave the UK even if the appellant does.

 5. What the judge says is factually accurate but she  has  overlooked  the
    possibility that a 'parental relationship' exists between the appellant
    and the children such that subsection (6) is  engaged.  In  R  (on  the
    application of RK)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR  [2016]  UKUT  31  (IAC),  the
    Upper Tribunal held;

         "1.  It is not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
         responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship.

         2.   Whether a person who is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
         "parental relationship" with a child for the purposes of  s.117B(6)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 depends on  the
         individual circumstances and whether the role that individual plays
         establishes he or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.

         3.   Applying that approach, apart  from  the  situation  of  split
         families where relationships between parents have broken  down  and
         an actual or de facto step-parent exists, it will be  unusual,  but
         not impossible, for more than 2 individuals  to  have  a  "parental
         relationship" with a child. However, the  relationships  between  a
         child and professional or voluntary carers or  family  friends  are
         not "parental relationships"."

    It appears that the judge has moved directly from her finding that  the
    appellant is not the natural parent of the children to a  rejection  of
    the application of subsection (6) in its entirety. It may well  be  the
    case that, where the natural parent of a child is living  in  the  same
    jurisdiction and has contact with the  child,  it  may,  as  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted, be unusual for another  non-related  adult  to  have  a
    'parental relationship' with that child. However, it  was,  given  that
    the appellant  claims  that  her  relationship  with  the  children  is
    'parental', for the judge to make specific findings as to  whether  the
    relationship fell under the statutory provision and if  not,  why  not;
    the absence of a blood relationship was not, as the  judge  appears  to
    have thought, determinative. I stress that I do not at this  stage  say
    that the relationship does fall within sub-section (6). Indeed, I  wish
    to hear further submissions before re-making the decision in the  Upper
    Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  findings  at
    [23] and [24] are preserved. The  only  issue  in  the  appeal  remains
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. The Upper Tribunal  shall  remake  the
    decision at or following a resumed hearing on a date to be fixed.

 6. At the resumed hearing at Manchester on 16 October  2020,  Mr  McVeety,
    who appeared for the respondent, told me that the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the appellant enjoys a  parental  relationship  with  the
    children and that the children's  natural  mother  does  not  have  any
    contact with them. He acknowledged that, on  the  particular  facts  in
    this appeal, the respondent's own policies and the operation of section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act do not require the children,  who  are  British
    citizens, to leave the  United  Kingdom  with  the  appellant.  In  the
    circumstances, there exists  no  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    removal.

    In the light of Mr McVeety's submissions, with which I agree, I  remake
    the decision and allow the appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 30 October 2019.

    Notice of Decision

    I remake the decision. I  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision dated 30 October 2019.

Signed   Date 16 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
