
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18477/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the Papers at Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2020                          |On 09 December 2020           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                               ms Allah-Rakhi
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  She appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision on 30
    October 2019 to refuse her application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of her private life.

2.    The judge dismissed the appeal but subsequently permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.    Following the sending out of directions on 11 August 2020  a  response
    was received from both parties.  I mention in particular  the  response
    from the Secretary of State in which it was accepted that the judge had
    erred in law in that in light of the decision of the Supreme  Court  in
    AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC 17, the wrong test had been applied  for  the
    evaluation of the appellant's claim for  leave  to  remain  on  medical
    grounds.

4.    I agree with the view expressed on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    and with the proposed outcome.  This appeal is allowed  to  the  extent
    that it is remitted for a full re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal in
    Glasgow before a judge other than Judge Conway.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]


Signed                                             Date 3rd December 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


