
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18205/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2020                            |On 11 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                         Mr Manohar Chongbang Limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Monson, promulgated on 26 July 2019. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 7 November 2019.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Nepal who was aged 33 at the time of his
    application for leave to enter the UK  as  the  over-aged  child  of  a
    former Gurkha soldier, made on human rights grounds.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer refused that application on  12  July  2018
    because the requirements of Annex K of the Rules were not met  and  the
    ECO was not satisfied that the appellant had established a family  life
    with his parents in the UK, who moved to the UK 7 years earlier.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  sponsor  was  not
    called to  give  evidence,  the  judge  noting  that  counsel  for  the
    appellant "reported" his further instructions on queries raised by  the
    respondent's representative. Counsel for the appellant stated  that  he
    was not seeking to establish dependency but only that there  was  "real
    or committed or effective support." The judge indicated that  he  would
    be assisted by  oral  evidence  of  the  sponsor,  however  the  appeal
    continued by way of submissions alone. The First-tier Tribunal accepted
    that there was a subsisting family life between the appellant  and  his
    parents at the time of their departure from Nepal for the UK but  found
    it unlikely that there was subsisting family life at the  time  of  the
    hearing. The Tribunal considered that the ongoing contact  between  the
    appellant and his parents was that of "normal  emotional  ties  between
    adult members of a Gurkha family." The appeal was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal

 6. There are four grounds of appeal.  Firstly,  that  there  had  been  an
    incorrect application of the  family  life  threshold.  Secondly,  that
    alternative support was not relevant to Article  8(1)  support  between
    the appellant and his  parents.  Thirdly  and  fourthly,  there  was  a
    failure to have regard to material matters.

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  ground  4  was
    arguable however, permission was not refused on any ground.

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. At my invitation, Mr Jesurum focused his submissions on grounds  4  and
    2. Mr Tarlow wished only to state that the decision under challenge was
    sustainable, that the judge came to a conclusion that he  was  entitled
    to come to and that even if there was an error, it was not material.

Decision on error of law

10. The comments of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  [37]  of  the  decision
    indicate that the judge assessed the existence  of  family  life  by  a
    comparison of what he considered to  be  normal  for  people  from  the
    appellant's culture. At [36]  the  judge  reproduced  a  section  of  a
    document from Mr Kaynan Bhakta, a Nepalese  sociologist,  which  formed
    part of the appellant's bundle. That segment spoke of the strong family
    ties in Nepalese families and  the  importance  of  observing  rituals,
    travel  to  Nepal  and  maintaining  close  relationships  with  family
    members. The judge utilised this  material  at  [37]  to  come  to  the
    following conclusion; "Against this background,  I  consider  that  the
    ongoing contact between the appellant and  his  parents  is  consistent
    with normal emotional ties between adult members of a  Gurkha  family."
    I accept Mr Jesurum's argument that the judge's approach was  erroneous
    in this regard in that he compared the appellant's  circumstances  with
    what he was told about the normal emotional  ties  within  families  in
    Nepalese culture. Such  an  approach  could  result  in  discriminatory
    outcomes if an appellant from a culture with strong ties is expected to
    show more to establish the existence of family life than  an  appellant
    from a culture with less strong ties. I am satisfied that this error is
    material as the judge plainly came to his conclusion in  the  light  of
    consideration of evidence regarding Nepalese  or  Gurkha  families  and
    without such an error, he could have reached a different outcome.

11. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the facts  of  this
    matter were not fully explored at the First-tier Tribunal owing to  the
    lack of live witness evidence or even a complete witness statement  and
    it would be unfair to deprive the parties of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Monson.



Signed:                                 Date: 7 February 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

