
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18890/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2019                   |On 21 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                yeasmin akter
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett instructed by City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  15  January
    1983.  She entered the United Kingdom on 26  October  2009  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student with leave valid from 24 August
    2009 until 13 April 2013.

 2. On 12 April 2013, the appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4
    (General) Student and was subsequently granted  leave  until  22  April
    2014.

 3. On 22 April 2014, the appellant applied for further leave as a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant.  That application was refused on  7  December  2015.
    The appellant appealed but her appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    dismissed on 9 May 2017.  Subsequent  applications  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal were refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal on 6 December 2017 and  30  May  2018  respectively.
    The appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 18 June 2018.

 4. On 12 June 2018, the appellant made a further application for leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395  as  amended)
    and Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. That application was based upon her marriage  to  Majharul  Islam  Rony
    ("the sponsor") whom she had married in the UK on 30  March  2010.   At
    that time, the sponsor was a Bangladesh citizen who  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 20 March 2017.  Subsequently, the sponsor
    became a British citizen by naturalisation on 27 November 2018.

 6. On 31 August 2018, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for leave under Appendix FM and under Art 8  of  the  ECHR.
    The basis of the decision  under  the  Rules  was  that,  although  the
    appellant met the eligibility requirements in s. E-LTRP of Appendix FM,
    she did not meet the 'suitability requirements' in s. S-LTR.4.2 as  the
    Secretary of State was satisfied that the  appellant  had  submitted  a
    fraudulently  obtained  TOEIC  certificate  with  her  application  for
    further leave as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  in  April  2013.   The
    Secretary  of  State  was,  therefore,  satisfied  that  she  had  used
    deception in making that application.  As a result, the appellant could
    not succeed under the 'partner' rules in  Appendix  FM  or  under  para
    276ADE(1).  Further, the Secretary of State concluded that the  refusal
    of leave would not result in 'unjustifiably harsh consequences' to  the
    appellant or her family so as to justify the grant of leave outside the
    Rules under Art 8.

The Appeal to the FtT

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 2 April 2019, Judge M Dorrington allowed the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 8. In reaching that decision, the judge accepted, as had the judge in  the
    earlier  appeal,  that  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  fraudulently
    obtained TOEIC certificate and had  therefore  practised  deception  in
    applying for leave as a Tier 4 Student in April 2013.  In addition, the
    judge, again as had the judge in the earlier appeal, accepted that  the
    appellant had used deception on another occasion, namely in her Tier  2
    application in April 2014, when she had submitted a  false  Certificate
    of Sponsorship.

 9. Nevertheless, Judge Dorrington was satisfied that the appellant met the
    'partner' rules in Appendix FM, despite  not  meeting  the  suitability
    requirement due to her deception, because para EX.1  applied  as  there
    were 'insurmountable  obstacles'  to  the  appellant  and  her  husband
    continuing their family life in Bangladesh.  As the appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules, the judge concluded that her  removal  would
    breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

10. In addition, the judge found that, in any event, there were 'compelling
    reasons'  such  that  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  and   the
    appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

The Appeal to the UT

11. On 1 May 2019, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gumsley)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal to the UT.

12. On 11 July  2019,  the  appellant's  appeal  was  heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In a decision sent on 12  August  2019,  DUTJ  JFW  Phillips
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in  law  in
    allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 and set the decision aside.



13. Judge Phillips found that the FtTJ had erred  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the 'partner' rules  in  Appendix  FM
    because para EX.1 applied.  Judge Phillips identified  that  para  EX.1
    could not condone a failure  by  an  individual  to  meet  one  of  the
    'suitability'  requirements  only  a  failure  to  meet  one   of   the
    'eligibility' requirements.  Consequently, Judge  Dorrington  had  been
    wrong in law to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8 on  the  basis
    that, given that she met the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  it
    would be disproportionate to remove her.

14. Further,  Judge  Phillips  concluded  that  the  judge's  reasoning  in
    allowing the appeal, in any event, outside the Rules  was  inadequately
    reasoned.

15. Judge Phillips adjourned the appeal  in  order  that  the  decision  in
    respect of Art 8 could be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

The Resumed Hearing

16. Following a transfer order, the appeal was relisted  before  me  on  10
    October 2019 in order to remake the decision in respect of Art 8.

17. At the hearing, the appellant was represented by  Mr  Burrett  and  the
    respondent by Mr Howells.

18. Without objection from Mr Howells, Mr Burrett invited me to  allow  the
    appellant  and  her  husband  to  give  brief  oral  evidence  on   the
    implications for them of the appellant (and the sponsor)  returning  to
    Bangladesh.  Mr Burrett accepted that there were no additional  witness
    statements but, during the course of their respective oral evidence, he
    drew my attention to the witness statement of the appellant and sponsor
    in the First-tier bundle at pages 23-29  and  30-33  respectively  both
    dated 1 March 2019.

19. In addition, again during  the  course  of  the  evidence,  Mr  Burrett
    provided me with a letter from the appellant's GP (Dr  Howgrave-Graham)
    dated 27 September 2019.

20. Mr Howells indicated that he had no objection to any of  this  evidence
    being admitted and, as a consequence, I agreed to  admit  all  the  new
    evidence under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

21. As a consequence, the  appellant  gave  brief  oral  evidence,  in  the
    absence of the sponsor.  Thereafter, the sponsor returned to court  and
    also gave oral evidence.  I then heard submissions from Mr Howells  and
    Mr Burrett respectively.

The Law

22. It was common ground between the parties that the appellant could  only
    succeed under Art 8 outside the Rules.

23. Mr Burrett accepted the judicial findings in the earlier appeal and  by
    Judge Dorrington in the present appeal that the appellant had practised
    deception on two occasions when making  her  applications  for  further
    leave in April  2013  and  April  2014  by  submitting  a  fraudulently
    obtained TOEIC certificate and Certificate of Sponsorship respectively.
     He  accepted,  therefore,  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    'suitability'  requirement  in  S-LTR.4.2  of  Appendix   FM.    As   a
    consequence, she could  not  rely  upon  the  'partner'  Rule  or  para
    276ADE(1) and a claim based upon her private life under that Rule.

24. Article 8.1 of the ECHR provides that:

         "Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence."

25. Article 8.2 provides that:

         "There shall be no interference by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  ...  the  economic
         wellbeing of a country [and] for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or
         crime....".

26. In approaching the application of Art 8 the applicable structure is set
    out in the well-known five-stages in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] 2 AC  368
    at [17] as follows:

          i) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or family life?

         ii) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Art 8?

        iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             for one or more of the listed legitimate aims?

          v) If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

27. In determining whether any interference with  an  individual's  private
    and family life that  engages  Art  8.1  is  justified,  the  issue  of
    proportionality requires that a "fair balance" is struck  between  "the
    rights of the individual and  the  interests  of  the  community"  (see
    Razgar at [20]).  The former includes the rights of those with whom the
    appellant has established family life (see Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39).

28. In striking that fair balance, the Tribunal is addressing  the  'public
    interest  question'  as  defined  in  s.117A(3)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 'NIA Act 2002') and  the  Tribunal
    "must ...have regard"  to  the  considerations  listed  in  s.117B  (in
    respect of which see, in particular Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58).

29. So far as relevant to this appeal those considerations are set  out  in
    s.117B(1)-(5) as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

             ..."

30. Where a  person  meets  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    providing Art 8.1 is engaged, then a decision to refuse leave  will  be
    disproportionate (see TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1109  at
    [34]).

31. By contrast, where an individual does not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Tribunal must accord  'considerable  weight'  to
    the fact that the appellant has not met the Rules  which  set  out,  at
    least prima facie, the balance to  be  struck  between  the  individual
    circumstances and the public interest (see R (Agyarko  and  Another)  v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [47] and [56]-[57]).

32. Where relevant under para EX.1 of Appendix FM  or  when  considering  a
    claim outside the Rules, whether there are  'insurmountable  obstacles'
    to family life continuing outside the UK will be  an  important  factor
    (see Agyarko at [42]-[45]).   That  phrase  must  be  understood  in  a
    "practical and realistic sense, rather  than  as  referring  solely  to
    obstacles which make it literally impossible for  the  family  to  live
    together"  abroad  (see  Agyarko  at  [43]).   It  requires  that   the
    individual will face  "very  serious  hardship"  or  "very  significant
    difficulties" in continuing family life outside the UK' (see Agyarko at
    [44] and [45]).

33. In striking the 'fair balance' under Art 8.2, and having regard to  the
    considerations set out in s.117B and where an individual does not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules, then in order for the public interest to
    be outweighed there must be  'unjustifiably  harsh  consequences'  (see
    Agyarko at [45] and [48]).

34. In seeking to establish a breach of Article 8, the burden of  proof  is
    upon the appellant to establish on a balance of probabilities that  Art
    8.1 is engaged.  Thereafter, it  is  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    justify any interference under Art 8.2.

Discussion and Findings

35. It was common  ground  between  the  parties  that  Judge  Dorrington's
    primary findings of fact set out in para [25] of his determination were
    preserved.  So far as relevant to my consideration of the  appeal  they
    are set out as follows at para [25(i)] - [25(xxviii)]:

             "(i) The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.

             (ii) She entered the UK on 26  October  2009  with  a  student
                    visa.  She has remained in the UK since that date.

             (iii)    She met her husband, Mr  Majharsul  Rony,  when  they
                    were both lawfully present in the UK  and  they  married
                    when they both had a lawful right to remain in  the  UK.
                    The marriage was on 30 March 2010.

             (iv) They have lived together since being married.  They  were
                    and remain in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

             (v)  They have no children.

             (vi) The Appellant's husband was granted indefinite  leave  to
                    remain in the UK on 20 March 2017.

             (vii)    By the date of the appeal hearing he had already been
                    granted  full  British  Citizenship  in  November  2018.
                    Previously he was a citizen of Bangladesh.

             (viii)   At the date of the appeal hearing the  Appellant  had
                    been in the United Kingdom for  almost  10  years.   Her
                    husband had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  over  ten
                    years.

             (ix) On 22 April 2014 the Appellant ceased to  have  a  lawful
                    right to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  because  her
                    subsequent application to remain as  a  Tier  2  general
                    migrant was refused by  a  decision  of  the  Respondent
                    dated 07 December 2015.

             (x)  The Appellant appealed that decision on 22 December 2015.
                     That appeal was heard before First Tier Judge White  on
                    19 April 2017 and was dismissed in  a  written  decision
                    dated 09 May 2017.

             (xi) Since that date the only new evidence that was not before
                    Judge White, but which was before me,  relating  to  the
                    substance of the appeal heard by  Judge  White  was  the
                    British Citizenship of the Appellant's husband  and  the
                    email that appears at pages  51-53  of  the  Appellant's
                    bundle.

             (xii)    There was no reply to that email.

             (xiii)   The email at pages 51-53 of  the  Appellant's  bundle
                    does not advance her case in a way that was not  already
                    before Judge White.

             (xiv)    The Appellant argued that her photograph taken on the
                    day of the English Test in 2013 was consistent with  the
                    time of year and that the  evidence  from  her  and  her
                    husband was such that I should find  she  had  not  used
                    deception in  her  immigration  journey.   However,  the
                    photograph only demonstrates she  attended  the  English
                    test.  That does not prove she took the test.   In  that
                    respect it would not be probable for a proxy  to  attend
                    and be photographed in the stead  of  every  person  who
                    they were standing in for that day.  That would  attract
                    immediate  suspicion.   In  reality  the  actual  person
                    would, I find, have to attend and then the  proxy  could
                    undertake the test for  them.   The  photograph  carries
                    little, if any, meaningful weight.

             (xv) She also argued that the evidence before  me  showed,  on
                    balance, that she had not used any  form  of  deception.
                    However this misses the most important point,  like  the
                    reliance on the photograph.  All of this evidence  (save
                    the two matters detailed above) was before  Judge  White
                    at the previous First Tier Tribunal.

             (xvi)    In considering the principles set out in  the  appeal
                    case of  Devaseelan  (see  paragraph  22  above)  I  was
                    satisfied, on the balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
                    findings of Judge White have not,  and  should  not,  be
                    displaced.   In  that  respect  the  Appellant  did  use
                    deception on two occasions in her immigration journey.

             (xvii)   Neither the  Appellant  nor  her  husband  have  been
                    convicted of any criminal offences since entering the UK
                    either before or after the last First Tier Tribunal.

             (xviii)  The Respondent accepts that the Appellant  meets  all
                    of  the  suitability   requirements   in   her   instant
                    application for leave to remain except under Appendix FM
                    paragraph S-LTR.4.2 namely that she has previously  made
                    false representations.

             (xix)    However the provisions under paragraph S-LTR.4.1.  of
                    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules are not a mandatory
                    reason for refusal.  They state "The  applicant  may  be
                    refused on grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-
                    LTR.4.2 to S-LTR.4.5.  apply."  [emphasis  added].   The
                    decision maker is therefore afforded discretion.

             (xx) Since the Appellant arrived in the  UK  I  was  satisfied
                    that she had integrated herself into UK society.  As far
                    as I can see she had only returned to Bangladesh on  one
                    occasion in 2012.

             (xxi)    The Appellant had  obtained  numerous  qualifications
                    (albeit obtained before the decision of Judge White  and
                    the certificates of  those  qualifications  were  before
                    Judge White) including  a  bachelor's  degree  from  the
                    University of Sunderland and a BTEC Level 5 HND  Diploma
                    from the St Peter's College of London.   She  had  taken
                    and passed,  in  Bangladesh,  an  International  English
                    language test in December 2008 and it was clear from the
                    hearing  and  from  the  papers  before  me   that   her
                    understanding and speaking of English was very good.

             (xxii)   I am satisfied that the only reason why the Appellant
                    has not worked since 22 April 2014 is because from  that
                    date she has not had a lawful right to remain in the UK.

             (xxiii)  The Appellant's husband has been  accepted  as  fully
                    integrated into the United Kingdom as evidenced  by  the
                    grant British Citizenship.  He works  in  a  responsible
                    job as a manager and undertakes other activities for the
                    good of society as a whole such as the giving  of  blood
                    which he has done for many years.

             (xxiii)  He had to have an operation to his knee in 2010.   He
                    still needs physiotherapy but is able to walk  and  does
                    so unaided.  I find that neither the  present  condition
                    of his health nor his ongoing health needs are such that
                    they could not  be  provided  for  in  Bangladesh  to  a
                    reasonable standard.

             (xxv)     The  Appellant  and  her  husband  have  family   in
                    Bangladesh.  They have only revisited the  country  once
                    in 2012.  I accept that their marriage in the UK was not
                    made with the approval of their family which  will  have
                    adversely  affected  their  relationship   with   family
                    members.

             (xxvi)   The Appellant and her husband have  made  friends  in
                    the UK.  Those friends have  been  made  and  maintained
                    over many years.

             (xxvii)  The Appellant and her husband still have  friends  in
                    Bangladesh but the last time they  visited  the  country
                    was  2012.   The  Appellant's  husband  stated  in  oral
                    evidence that they had  "friends"  (plurality  used)  in
                    Bangladesh  when  answering  questions  asked   by   the
                    Presenting Officer for the Respondent.

             (xxviii) At all material times the Appellant and  her  husband
                    have not avoided the Home Department  authorities,  they
                    have not gone underground and they have always  remained
                    in contact with them."

36. Two points to notice from these preserved factual findings.  First, the
    judge's  finding  in  para  [25(xvi)],  that  the  appellant  practiced
    deception on two occasions is accepted.  Second, it was accepted by  Mr
    Howells that, in fact,  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's  appeal  in
    December 2015, by virtue of s.3C of the Immigration Act, her leave  did
    not expire until 18 June 2018 (rather than as Judge Dorrington said  in
    para 25(ix) on 22 April 2014) when she became appeal rights exhausted.

37. Turning now to Art 8.  It was also accepted before  me  that  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor have established a private life  in  the  UK.
    That is self-evidently correct given the length of time that they  have
    both been in the UK - over ten years.  The appellant  in  her  evidence
    told me that she had worked initially in KFC as  a  waitress  and  then
    subsequently as a sales assistant in a petrol station for about a year.
     Her educational record shows that she had studied in the UK attaining,
    inter alia, a BA from the University of Sunderland (see para 25(xxi) of
    Judge Dorrington's findings set out above). Likewise, the  sponsor  has
    established private life in the UK.  I accept his evidence,  which  was
    not challenged by Mr Howells, that he has been employed for  ten  years
    by Euro Garage Ltd (see para  14  of  his  witness  statement).   As  I
    understood his evidence, he is employed by Subway and has recently been
    promoted and is a manager.  In addition, Judge Dorrington's findings at
    para 25(xxvi) was that the appellant and her husband have many  friends
    in the UK and that those friendships have  been  maintained  over  many
    years.

38. There is no  doubt,  therefore,  that  the  appellant's  removal  would
    interfere with her private life in the UK as it would with the  sponsor
    if he were to leave the UK to live in Bangladesh with the appellant.

39. I also accept that the appellant and sponsor have family life together.
     Their relationship is patently a genuine one as Judge Dorrington found
    in para 25(iv) set out above.  That was also plain to me  having  heard
    both the appellant and sponsor give oral evidence before me.

40. Mr Howells, in his submissions, sought to contend that there  would  be
    no interference with the family life between the appellant and  sponsor
    if he were to accompany her to Bangladesh if she were removed.

41. I do not accept that submission.  First, it fails to  take  account  of
    the very real dilemma faced by a couple,  such  as  the  appellant  and
    sponsor, if one is removed from the UK.  Both the appellant and sponsor
    were asked  during  their  oral  evidence  whether  the  sponsor  would
    accompany the appellant if she were removed.  She said  that  they  had
    "kept talking about this" and that "me and him  cannot  be  separated".
    When it was asked whether she meant that he  would  therefore  go  with
    her, she replied that they did not have anywhere to go  and  that  they
    would be on the streets in Bangladesh.  She said,  "I  don't  have  any
    answer".  The dilemma is readily apparent.  Likewise, when the  sponsor
    was asked about this and whether he would accompany the  appellant,  he
    said "I don't know".  He said that they had been  living  together  for
    nearly ten years and until recently they had not spent a  single  night
    apart.  The sponsor also gave evidence why he would not wish to  be  in
    Bangladesh by giving up his life in the  UK  where  he  had  lived  and
    worked for over ten years and to return to Bangladesh where he had,  in
    his view, no prospects of employment or  family  support.   Again,  the
    dilemma of a couple in the circumstances of the appellant  and  sponsor
    was  readily  apparent.   That  dilemma,   in   itself,   creates   the
    interference with their family and private  life  in  the  UK.   In  VW
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5 Sedley LJ said this (at [42]):

         "In many such cases, nevertheless, it is  too  much  to  ask  of  a
         decision-maker that he or she should form a  confident  or  even  a
         probabilistic view of  what  will  follow  a  proposed  removal  or
         deportation in terms of family-breakup or continuity.  The evidence
         may simply not make it  possible.   Some  appellants  will  command
         belief when they say what they will do, so that the  decision-maker
         can proceed to assess the proportionality of removal or deportation
         on a reasonably firm footing.  Others may try to practise a form of
         emotional blackmail on a decision-maker, such that the latter  does
         not know what in truth will happen if removal or  deportation  goes
         ahead.  In yet other cases it may be clear that what the  appellant
         says is the reverse of what he or she would in the event do.   Many
         others may truthfully say that they do not know what they will  do;
         or the decision-maker may conclude, whatever they say, that this is
         the case.  In such cases it would be risky  and  unfair  to  demand
         that a decision-maker should treat what  is  at  best  an  educated
         guess as a future fact.  Here, in my judgment, it is  the  hardship
         of the dilemma itself which has to be recognised and evaluated."

42. I would particularly emphasise the final  sentence  that:  "It  is  the
    hardship  of  the  dilemma  itself  which  has  to  be  recognised  and
    evaluated."

43. I accept that there is a very considerable hardship and  dilemma  which
    would be faced by the appellant and sponsor if she  were  removed.   On
    the evidence before me, I am satisfied that  the  centre  of  both  the
    appellant and sponsor's lives is in the UK.  The latter's circumstances
    are exemplified by his  earlier  grant  of  ILR  and  that  he  is  now
    naturalised as a British citizenship.  I accept that his  working  life
    has been spent in the UK.  Whilst, of course, the appellant's  position
    has been, and  remains,  precarious,  Judge  Dorrington's  unchallenged
    factual finding is that not only is the sponsor "fully integrated  into
    the United Kingdom" (para 25(xxiii)) but also that  the  appellant  has
    "integrated herself into UK society" (para 25(xx)).  I agree with those
    findings based upon my assessment of the evidence, including  the  oral
    evidence of both the sponsor and appellant.

44. The dilemma is inescapable and I am unable to make a clear  finding  as
    to how it would be resolved if the appellant were removed.   There  is,
    however, a very real likelihood that the sponsor would remain in the UK
    causing a fracture in their living arrangements.

45. Secondly, bearing in mind the sponsor's roots in the UK  as  a  British
    citizen and someone whose centre of life has relocated from  Bangladesh
    to the UK over the last ten years, I am satisfied that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect him to return to  Bangladesh.   In  reaching  that
    finding, I bear in mind Judge Dorrington's findings that the  appellant
    and sponsor married  without  the  approval  of  their  families  (para
    25(xxv)).  I heard oral evidence from both the  appellant  and  sponsor
    that, in effect, their families have disowned them.  They both told  me
    about their last visit to Bangladesh in 2012 when they were  unable  to
    see their families because of this and  that  they  stayed  in  hotels.
    They had called them from the airport but the families did not want  to
    see them.  I accept that evidence and I also accept the  evidence  that
    that situation continues today.   Neither  the  appellant  nor  sponsor
    would, therefore, have the support of their families if  they  returned
    to Bangladesh.  I accept the sponsor's evidence that it  is  likely  he
    would have difficulty in obtaining employment in Bangladesh.   Even  if
    that were only in the short term, without family  support  he  and  the
    appellant would be in  difficulties.   Although  it  was  not  explored
    before me, Judge Dorrington found  at  para  25(xxvii)  that  they  had
    friends in Bangladesh but it has not been suggested that they would  be
    able to obtain support from them.

46. Consequently, I find that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    sponsor to give up his life in the UK, now as a  British  citizen,  and
    return to Bangladesh.

47. I find that Art 8.1 is engaged - the appellant's  removal  will,  on  a
    balance of  probabilities,  interfere  with  the  family  life  of  the
    appellant and sponsor and the private life in the UK of the appellant.

48. The focus of Mr Howells' submissions and those of Mr Burrett was on the
    issue of proportionality under Art 8.2.

49. Mr Howells relied upon the strong public interest under s.117B(1) given
    that the appellant had on two occasions practised deception.

50.  He submitted that the appellant's  private  life  should  be  accorded
    "little weight" under s.117B(5) as  her  immigration  status  had  been
    precarious and there were no exceptional  circumstances  to  justify  a
    more flexible approach as recognised in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC  58
    at [36] and [49].

51. Relying upon Lord Reed's judgment in Agyarko at [49]-[50],  Mr  Howells
    submitted that the appellant's family life had been established when it
    was known that the appellant's ability to remain in the UK as a  spouse
    was precarious.

52. Mr Howells submitted that there was no basis for concluding that  entry
    clearance would be granted to the  appellant  as  any  application  was
    likely to be refused on suitability grounds.

53. Mr Howells submitted that even if their families had disowned them, and
    he invited me to treat the appellant's evidence with caution given  her
    previous deceptions, there was no need for family support.   There  was
    no background evidence  to  support  the  contention,  based  upon  the
    appellant and sponsor's evidence, that they would have difficulties  in
    obtaining employment in the government sector or privately.  Mr Howells
    submitted that the appellant is highly qualified and  the  sponsor  has
    worked for ten years and there was no reason to believe  he  could  not
    succeed in obtaining employment in Bangladesh.

54. Mr Howells reminded me that both spoke English and that  both  were  in
    good physical health.  As regards the appellant's mental health, and  a
    supporting letter from her GP.  Mr Howells submitted  that  her  health
    issues was said to be largely based on a fear of being  separated  from
    her husband.

55. Mr Howells accepted that it would be difficult for them to go back  but
    they were likely to be able to re-establish  themselves  and,  applying
    Agyarko, they were not unjustifiably harsh consequences such  that  the
    public interest was outweighed.

56. Mr Burrett relied upon Judge Dorrington's primary findings of fact.  He
    submitted that the appellant's private life and her  family  life  with
    the sponsor (no reliance was placed upon family  life  with  any  other
    person in the UK) would be interfered with disproportionately.

57. He accepted that the Secretary of State was entitled to rely  upon  the
    appellant's  deception  on  the  two  previous  occasions   but   those
    deceptions were, in his words, "to some extent  historic".   They  also
    predated the appellant's marriage on 30 March 2010.

58. Mr Burrett submitted that the appellant had had lawful leave throughout
    until June 2018 although he did accept  that  had  the  deception  been
    known or not practised then the  appellant  would  not  have  had  that
    leave.

59. He submitted I should have regard to the fact that the appellant  would
    not be able to obtain entry clearance because she would  not  meet  the
    suitability  requirement  nor,  indeed,  if  the  sponsor  returned  to
    Bangladesh with her was she likely to meet the  financial  requirements
    as he would no longer be working in the UK.

60. Mr Burrett accepted that the sponsor's British citizenship  was  not  a
    trump card but it was an important factor.  Their ties were in  the  UK
    and not in Bangladesh and he relied upon the lack of family support  in
    Bangladesh as exemplified by the inability to  contact  their  families
    when they went to Bangladesh in 2012.  He submitted  that  the  sponsor
    was effectively being forced to leave the UK and lose everything  here.
    It would be unreasonable to expect him to do  so  and  disproportionate
    for the appellant to be removed.

61. In carrying out the 'fair balance' under Art 8.2, I carry  forward  the
    findings of fact I have already  made  together  with  those  preserved
    findings of Judge Dorrington set out above at para 34.   The  issue  of
    'proportionality' is finely balanced.

62. I begin with the public interest.  That is undoubtedly engaged in  this
    appeal.  It is not restricted to the fact  that  the  appellant  cannot
    meet the requirements of the Rules.  As Mr Howells submitted, there  is
    a strong public interest in  the  appellant's  removal  given  the  two
    incidents of deception which she practised in April 2013 and April 2014
    in  making  applications  for  leave  to   remain.    I   accept   that
    characterisation.  The fact that the  appellant  has  not  subsequently
    committed any further  acts  of  deception  or  has  otherwise  led  an
    exemplary life in the UK does not, in my judgment, diminish that public
    interest.  Although, those factors may weigh on the  positive  side  in
    striking the fair balance against the public interest.

63. I, therefore, proceed to consider the circumstances  of  the  appellant
    and sponsor to be weighed against that strong public interest.

64. I accept, however, Mr Howells' submission that as regards the  parties'
    private life, s.117B(5) applies as the appellant's  immigration  status
    was 'precarious' (and has always been precarious) and so is entitled to
    'little weight'.  Mr Burrett did not identify any exceptional or  other
    circumstances which might justify  a  more  flexible  approach  to  the
    application of s.117B(5).  That does not  mean,  of  course,  that  the
    impact upon their private lives should be given no weight at all.   The
    case, in  my  judgment,  turns  principally  on  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant and sponsor's family life.

65. As I have already found, I accept that the centre of both the appellant
    and sponsor's lives is now in the UK.  The sponsor is a British citizen
    and that is an important factor in determining first, whether he should
    be expected to return to Bangladesh and, secondly in  recognising  that
    their marriage has progressed from being one  between  two  individuals
    who require permission to remain in the UK to a marriage where  one  of
    the individuals has a right of abode in the UK.  I accept, as did Judge
    Dorrington, that both the appellant and  sponsor  are  integrated  into
    life in the UK.

66. I accept that the appellant and sponsor have  been  disowned  by  their
    families in Bangladesh because their marriage was not approved by them.
     The consequence of that is that neither the appellant nor the  sponsor
    will be able to obtain any support, financial or otherwise  from  their
    families in Bangladesh.  I find that, in effect, they will be 'left  to
    their own devices' in finding accommodation, work or surviving  if  the
    appellant is returned to Bangladesh (including if she is accompanied by
    the sponsor).  I accept Mr Burrett's submission that the effect of  the
    appellant's removal might force the sponsor to return there  with  her.
    At least, that is the inescapable dilemma that he would face, given the
    genuineness of their relationship, which I entirely accept.

67. As I have already found, having regard to  all  the  circumstances,  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the sponsor to give up  his  life  in
    the UK bearing in mind that he is now a British citizen and  rooted  in
    the UK.  I have concluded that not only would it  be  unreasonable  for
    the sponsor to have to relocate to Bangladesh, there are, in the  sense
    used in  Agyarko,  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  their  family  life
    continuing there.   The  impact  upon  the  appellant  and  sponsor  of
    returning to a country which is no longer the base of their lives, both
    having integrated into life in the UK, would present "very  significant
    difficulties" and result in "serious hardship".

68. Although both gave evidence of the age limit for government  employment
    in Bangladesh (around 30), there was no evidence of this  presented  in
    any background documents and I decline to speculate on  something  that
    could have, if it is the case, been established  by  evidence  (see  GM
    (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 at [30]). However, I do  accept
    their evidence that they will be presented with difficulties, likely to
    be  considerable  and  significant,  in  establishing  themselves   and
    supporting themselves on return.  That  is  a  matter  of  common-sense
    given their 10-year absence from  Bangladesh  and  their  lack  of  any
    familial or other support on return. I  also  bear  in  mind  that  the
    reality of the couple's dilemma if the appellant is removed is that the
    sponsor may be forced to relinquish his life in the UK, formed  over  a
    period of ten years,  including  his  employment  and  his  rights  and
    entitlements as a British citizen.

69. I accept Mr Howells' submission that their family life was  established
    whilst it was known to both of them that the  appellant's  status,  and
    ability to carry  on  her  family  life  in  the  UK,  was  precarious.
    However, even in such circumstances, as the Supreme Court  acknowledged
    in Agyarko, where there are "unjustifiably harsh consequences" then the
    public interest may nevertheless be outweighed (see paras [45] and [48]
    and GM (Sri Lanka) at [38]-[40] and [46]-[49]).

70. I am satisfied on the evidence before me that the appellant and sponsor
    have, in effect,  lost  any  significant  ties  with  Bangladesh.   The
    sponsor has, self-evidently from his evidence, made the  UK  his  home.
    Whilst  they  may  retain  cultural  or  linguistic  connections   with
    Bangladesh,  in  reality  (and  that  is  the  correct  focus  of   any
    assessment) they have both relocated from Bangladesh,  integrated  into
    society in the UK and, in the absence of any family to whom they  could
    turn in Bangladesh, have no real connection  with  Bangladesh  anymore.
    Both the sponsor and appellant lead an exemplary life in the  UK.   The
    appellant has, as Judge Dorrington found  in  para  25(xxviii)  of  his
    determination,  always  remained  in  contact  with   the   immigration
    authorities.

71. For all these reasons,  and  carrying  forward  my  assessment  of  the
    evidence and my findings above, I am also satisfied that the impact  of
    the appellant's removal will have  'unjustifiably  harsh'  consequences
    for her and the sponsor - whether by separation or if he  resolves  the
    dilemma they face and returns with her to Bangladesh.  The prospect  of
    her gaining entry clearance is unlikely (as  Mr  Howells  acknowledged)
    given her previous deception  and  that,  if  the  sponsor  returns  to
    Bangladesh, she is also unlikely to be able to  satisfy  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules.  Her relocation to Bangladesh is, therefore,
    likely to be for some time.

72. Whilst I take fully into account the strong public interest relied upon
    by the Secretary of State, for the reasons I have given, I am satisfied
    that the appellant and sponsor (if  he  were  to  return  with  her  to
    Bangladesh)  would  face  very  significant  difficulties  and  serious
    hardship in Bangladesh.  The impact on  them  of  prolonged  separation
    would  also  be  unjustifiably  harsh.   Their  circumstances,  if  the
    appellant were removed, would in my judgment amount  to  "unjustifiably
    harsh consequences" of sufficient compulsion  to  outweigh  the  strong
    public interest reflected in the appellant's previous deceptive conduct
    and in the need for effective immigration control.

73. Carrying out the "fair balance" under Art 8.2, and taking into  account
    the relevant factors under s.117B,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  public
    interest is outweighed  and  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate and a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

74. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside by DUTJ Phillips'
    decision sent on 12 August 2019.

75. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             17 October 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Dorrington, in previously allowing the appeal, made a whole fee  award
of �140.  I see no reason to differ from that award which I also make.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             17 October 2019



