
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18546/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|Centre                               |On 26 March 2019                     |
|On 19 February 2019                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                              Sodiq Lanre Alafe
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms C. Jaquiss, Counsel instructed by Perera & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H. Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION and REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on the 11th March 1999.  He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    O'Hagan) to dismiss his human  rights  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    deport him from the United Kingdom.

    Background and Legal Framework

 2. The Appellant was born in Nigeria and  lived  there  with  his  parents
    until he was about seven years old. In 2006 his father left the  family
    home and in 2007 he, his mother and baby sister travelled to the United
    Kingdom. They were given leave to enter as visitors.   They  overstayed
    those  visas  and  have  never  returned  to  Nigeria.    In  2018  the
    Appellant's mother and sister were granted  discretionary  leave.   The
    Appellant's position has  never  been  regularised:  instead  he  faces
    deportation.

 3. The reason that the Appellant faces deportation is  that  he  has  been
    convicted of a serious crime. On the 19th June 2017 he was convicted at
    Aylesbury Crown Court on two counts of possessing a Class A  controlled
    substance with an intent to supply. The drugs were heroin and  cocaine.
    He was sentenced to 45 months in prison. That sentence was sufficiently
    serious to trigger automatic deportation proceedings under s32  of  the
    United Kingdom Borders Act 2007.

 4. It is also relevant to note that this was  not  the  Appellant's  first
    offence. When he was 15 he was convicted of battery; when he was 17  he
    was convicted of possession of a bladed  article  in  a  public  place.
    Neither of these convictions resulted in a custodial sentence.

 5. When the  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  the
    Secretary of State's case that the Appellant was a serious criminal and
    that any interference that might be caused to  his  family  or  private
    life by removing him to Nigeria was insufficient to displace  the  very
    substantial weight to be attached to the public interest in doing so.

 6. It was common ground that in order to avoid deportation  the  Appellant
    would have to demonstrate that one of the 'exceptions' set out in  s.33
    of the Borders Act 2007 applied in his case.   That section contains  6
    exceptions, only one of which was potentially engaged on the facts: s33
    (2)(a), that his deportation would breach his Convention  rights,  that
    is to say his rights under the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    In this regard the Appellant placed reliance on Article  8,  submitting
    that his deportation would be a disproportionate interference with  his
    long-standing private life in the United Kingdom, and  with  his  close
    and meaningful relationships with his mother and young sister.  Because
    he sought to rely on Article 8 the First-tier Tribunal was  obliged  to
    have regard to the provisions in respect of the public interest set out
    in s117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

         '(1)     The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted.'

 7. It was not contended that the Appellant could hope to  meet  'exception
    1' set out  at s117C(4). Although he has lived in  the  United  Kingdom
    since he was a little boy he has never had leave to do so. He  had  not
    therefore been lawfully resident here for most of his life.  Nor  could
    he meet 'exception 2', which relates to family members,  since  he  had
    neither a qualifying partner nor minor children in the United  Kingdom.
     By operation of sub-section (3) it would therefore seem that his claim
    was prima facie defeated: if he cannot meet those exceptions the public
    interest  required  his  deportation.   The  wording  of  the   statute
    notwithstanding the parties agreed that the dicta in  NA  (Pakistan)  &
    Another v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    662 should be applied. In that case  the  Court  of  Appeal  noted  the
    apparent lacuna in s117C in respect of persons who receive  a  sentence
    of less than 4 years, but like the Appellant, cannot  bring  themselves
    within one of the exceptions. Unlike criminals sentenced to four years,
    whose position is covered by s117C(6), the statute does not set out any
    framework for consideration of their Article 8 claims.  From  paragraph
    24 of NA Lord Justice Jackson puts it like this:

         24.      A curious feature of section 117C(3) is that it  does  not
             make any provision  for  medium  offenders  who  fall  outside
             Exceptions 1 and 2. One would have expected  that  sub-section
             to say that they too can escape deportation if "there are very
             compelling circumstances, over and above Exceptions 1 and  2".
             It would be bizarre in the extreme if the  statute  gave  this
             right to serious  offenders,  but  not  to  medium  offenders.
             Furthermore, the new rule 398 (which came into  force  on  the
             same day as section 117C) proceeds on the  basis  that  medium
             offenders do have this right.

         25.      Something has obviously gone amiss with  the  drafting  of
             section  117C(3).  In  Inco  Europe   Ltd   v   First   Choice
             Distribution [2000] 1 WLR 586, HL, at 592-593,  Lord  Nicholls
             (with whom  the  other  members  of  the  Appellate  Committee
             agreed) explained the circumstances in  which  the  courts  in
             interpreting statutes can correct obvious drafting errors.  In
             our view the lacuna in section 117C(3) is an obvious  drafting
             error. Parliament must have intended medium offenders to  have
             the same fall back protection as  serious  offenders.  Mr  Tam
             invited us so to rule.

         26.      In reaching this conclusion it is  important  to  bear  in
             mind that the new Part 5A of the 2002 Act is framed in such  a
             way as to provide a structured basis for  application  of  and
             compliance with Article 8, rather than to disapply it: see the
             title of Part 5A, the general scheme of the provisions in that
             Part and, in particular,  section  117A(1).  If  section  117C
             barred medium offenders from asserting  any  Article  8  claim
             other than provided for in subsections (4) and (5), that would
             plainly be incompatible with Article 8  rights  (either  their
             own or Convention rights of individuals in  their  family)  in
             some cases. Equally plainly, it was not Parliament's intention
             in enacting Part  5A  to  disapply  or  require  violation  of
             Article 8 in any case. We also place reliance on section  3(1)
             of the Human Rights Act 1998. That provision  requires  courts
             to construe legislation in a  way  which  is  compatible  with
             Convention rights, if it is possible to do so. It is  possible
             to do so here. In accordance with the guidance given  by  Lord
             Nicholls, the words which need to be read into section 117C(3)
             so as properly to reflect Parliament's true meaning are clear,
             namely the same words as appear  in  sub-section  (6)  and  in
             para. 398 of the 2014 rules, which came  into  effect  at  the
             same time as part  of  an  integrated  and  coherent  code  in
             primary legislation and the Immigration Rules for dealing with
             deportation cases.

         27.      For all these reasons we shall proceed on the  basis  that
             fall back protection of the kind  stated  in  section  117C(6)
             avails both (a) serious offenders and (b) medium offenders who
             fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2. On a proper  construction  of
             section 117C(3), it provides that for  medium  offenders  "the
             public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
             Exception 2  applies  or  unless  there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal was therefore to proceed on the basis that  the
    Appellant could only succeed if he could demonstrate  that  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    exceptions 1 and 2".  In NA Lord Justice Jackson  underlined  the  high
    threshold to be met when he said this:

         "33.     Although there  is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient."

 9. Before the Tribunal the Appellant argued that the following  cumulative
    factors were sufficient to meet that high threshold:

          i) The fact that he has lived in the United Kingdom since he  was
             8: Maslov v Austria (application 1638/03) applied.

         ii) As he was a minor at all relevant  times  he  cannot  be  held
             responsible for the fact that he did not have leave.   He  has
             lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  most  of  his  life,  is
             integrated here and would face very significant obstacles  re-
             integrating into Nigerian society.  Although there is no 'near
             miss principle' these  facts  were  plainly  relevant  to  the
             overall balancing exercise: Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department v JZ (Zambia) [2016] EWCA Civ 116.

        iii) The Appellant's deportation was likely to have a  very  severe
             impact upon his sister, to whom he was very close.

         iv) There  was  some  mitigation  for  the  Appellant's  offending
             behaviour. As a minor he, his mother and  sister  were  facing
             extreme poverty, homelessness and destitution.

          v) The Appellant has undertaken several courses in prison and has
             shown  genuine  remorse  and  insight   into   his   offending
             behaviour.

         vi) The fact that he was actually a minor when  he  committed  the
             index offence. He had  immediately  admitted  his  guilt  when
             apprehended, but due to delays in the criminal justice  system
             had not been sentenced until he had turned 18.  Had  the  case
             been called on before his  18th  birthday,  he  would  not  be
             facing deportation at all, since the exception at s33  (3)  of
             the Borders Act would have been applied: "Exception 2 is where
             the Secretary of State thinks that the  foreign  criminal  was
             under the age of 18 on the date of conviction".

10. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that a number of these factors weighed
    in the Appellant's favour  but  determined  that  the  public  interest
    prevailed, and dismissed the appeal.

    The Appeal

11. It is convenient if I present the First-tier Tribunal's  findings,  the
    challenge to them and my conclusions, thematically.

    Ground (i): Best Interests

12. It is submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed
    for  a  failure  to  take  into  account  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's sister, still only 13 years old at the date of the hearing.
      It had been submitted that it was strongly in her best interests  for
    her brother to remain in this country, and that such a  finding  should
    have been a primary consideration for the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Both
    she and the Appellant had suffered a prolonged period of instability in
    childhood and it  was  submitted  that  she  was  already  suffering  a
    detriment by the Appellant's absence from the family home whilst he was
    in prison.

13. Before me Ms Jaquiss argued eloquently that this young  lady  would  be
    materially and negatively affected by the deportation of  her  brother.
    Whilst it was correct to say that the  Appellant  has  never  been  her
    primary carer, the evidence was to the effect  that  the  two  share  a
    strong bond and that he has given her significant support.

14. I accept that the best interests  of  the  Appellant's  sister  were  a
    relevant factor in this case.   I further accept that the determination
    nowhere reaches a firm conclusion about whether or not it would  be  in
    this child's best interests for the Appellant to  be  deported.   I  am
    not,  however,  persuaded  that  this  omission  is   such   that   the
    determination should be set aside.  It is plain from his reasoning that
    the Judge expressly weighs in the balance the matters relied upon by Ms
    Jaquiss.  At paragraph 41 the determination notes  that  the  Appellant
    has had a "difficult life", and at paragraph 62 it says this:

         "I have considered the impact of the appellant's deportation on his
         relationship with his mother and sister.  I accept  that  prior  to
         his imprisonment, this family lived together.   Sadly,  that  is  a
         situation  which  has  already  been  fractured  because   of   the
         appellant's actions which led to his being removed from his  family
         and imprisoned.  It is said that the appellant's  sister  has  been
         adversely affected by the separation.  I have read  her  letter  in
         which she sets out her feelings about this in terms I found  to  be
         heartfelt and moving.  I recognise that the situation  cannot  have
         been easy for any of them.  The reality is that no one is to  blame
         for that other than the appellant himself whose actions brought  it
         about."

15. It is not therefore correct to say that the Tribunal ignored the wishes
    and feelings of the Appellant's little sister.    Given  the  terms  in
    which the Tribunal expresses itself, it is manifestly unlikely  that  a
    more formal 'best interests' conclusion could, in these  circumstances,
    outweigh the public interest.

    Ground (ii):  Re-offending

16. Ground (ii) is that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  have  regard  to
    material evidence in relation to the risk of reoffending,  and  further
    that the Tribunal erred in failing to make a finding as to whether  the
    Appellant would reoffend.  The grounds acknowledge  that  the  Tribunal
    did weigh some material evidence in the balance, specifically the OASYS
    report, the supporting statements from family  and  a  letter  from  Ms
    Cain,  the  headteacher  of  the  'Boxing  Academy'  in   Hackney,   an
    alternative free school previously attended by  the  Appellant.  It  is
    submitted however that the determination nowhere addresses the specific
    evidence before it relating to  the  courses  that  the  Appellant  has
    undertaken  in  prison.   These  courses  including  victim  awareness,
    'motivation to change' workshops and the study of the effects of  crack
    and cocaine on their users.

17. Although I accept that the risk of reoffending will always be  relevant
    in a deportation appeal, it is in circumstances such as these, of  only
    marginal relevance.   That  is  because  the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation turns not on what crimes he might commit in the future, but
    on the crimes that he has already committed. The Appellant  received  a
    sentence of 45 months  in  prison.   It  is  instructive  to  note  the
    circumstances of  that  conviction.  In  sentencing  His  Honour  Judge
    Sheridan described the Appellant and his  co-defendant  as  being  drug
    dealers who were "in it up to their necks".  He describes how these two
    young men from London and journeyed into Buckinghamshire  in  order  to
    sell hard drugs, seeking to take advantage of a vacuum in  supply  that
    had resulted from an operation by Thames Valley police.  When  stopped,
    the Appellant and his co-defendant  had  on  their  person  heroin  and
    cocaine worth some �4000 at street level: 272 wraps of cocaine, and  74
    wraps of heroin.  This was, by any  estimation,  an  extremely  serious
    offence, and that is a matter that the First-tier Tribunal was  plainly
    obliged to give weight to.  Nor was this the Appellant's first offence.
     At paragraph 36 the Tribunal very fairly discounts  the  relevance  of
    the Appellant's first conviction, for battery, which he received a four-
    month referral order.  It does however place rather more weight on  the
    second offence, which took place when the Appellant was  17:  this  was
    his conviction for carrying a knife in a public place.   Of  this,  the
    Tribunal says: "the dangers of knife crime are so obvious that they  do
    not need to be laboured".

18. At the time of both this offence and his arrest  for  drug  dealing  in
    Buckinghamshire, the Appellant was living at home with his  mother  and
    sister. At the age of 17 the First-tier  Tribunal  considered  that  he
    would have been perfectly  well  aware  that  what  he  was  doing  was
    illegal,  and  extremely  harmful  to  society.    Given  that,  it  is
    difficult to see what credit if any the Appellant might have  attracted
    had the Tribunal had specific regard to the fact that he  read  an  in-
    cell pack on crack and cocaine.  I am accordingly  not  satisfied  that
    the failure to mention this evidence amounted to an error of  law.  The
    Tribunal confirmed at paragraph 2 of  the  determination  that  it  had
    regard to all of the evidence before it and there  is  nothing  in  the
    reasoning to make me doubt that statement.

    Ground (iii) Maslov, Mwesezi and JZ

19. During her submissions before the First-tier Tribunal Ms Jaquiss placed
    particular reliance on three authorities: Maslov, Mwesezi  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1104 and Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v JZ (Zambia) EWCA  Civ  116.    She  now
    submits that its failure to address these  authorities,  or  apply  the
    ratios therein, means that its decision is fatally flawed in approach.

20. The principles distilled from these cases were that significant  weight
    should be attached to the fact that the Appellant has lived here  since
    he was a young child;  the  offences  were  all  committed  whilst  the
    Appellant was a minor; he left Nigeria as a young  child  and  as  such
    would face  difficulties  integrating  there  today.   It  was  further
    submitted, in reliance on JZ that reducing his family links to  'modern
    means of communication'  could  have  a  "devastating"  impact  on  the
    Appellant.

21. It is appropriate that I explore these submissions in  greater  detail.
    The facts of Maslov are well known. Maslov was a Bulgarian national who
    had gone to live in Austria when he was six years old. Between the ages
    of 14 and 16 he had committed a large number of criminal offences,  and
    the Austrians decided to deport him.  When his  case  came  before  the
    European Court of Human Rights  it held that considerable weight had to
    be attached to the finding that Maslov had committed  relatively  minor
    and non-violent offences; weight further had to be attached to the fact
    that he had lived in Austria for most of his life, and  that  the  duty
    owed by a host  state  to  such  a  child  included  an  obligation  to
    facilitate his rehabilitation. Mwesezi was a Ugandan national  who  had
    come to live in the United Kingdom when he was two years old.   He  had
    been found in possession of a gun and live ammunition and sentenced  to
    6 years imprisonment.  In his case, the Court of Appeal  accepted  that
    the considerations in Maslov remained relevant to  a  consideration  of
    Article 8, notwithstanding  the  government's  attempt  to  codify  the
    article within the Immigration Rules.  The fact that criminal  offences
    were committed whilst the  offender  was  still  a  child  was  plainly
    relevant to whether there  were  "very  compelling   circumstances"  in
    play.

22. I do not perceive that the First-tier Tribunal misunderstood this  line
    of authority.  Nor do I accept that it ignored it.  That  reliance  was
    placed on Maslov  is  expressly  recognised  at  paragraph  19  of  the
    determination; at paragraph 40 the Tribunal  states  that  it  has  had
    regard to the fact that the Appellant was a  minor  when  the  offences
    were committed.  At paragraph 48   the  Tribunal  recognises  that  the
    Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since he was eight years  old
    and that he is culturally and socially integrated in this  country.   I
    therefore reject the suggestion that the court ignored these factors.

23. The final authority relied upon was the case of JZ (Zambia).  JZ was  a
    young man who took part in the rioting of August 2011.  He was captured
    by television cameras engaging in such activities as hurling planks  of
    wood at the police.  His mother saw the images on the news and reported
    her own son to  Wood  Green  police  station.   He  was  arrested,  and
    convicted of violent disorder and two counts of arson.  He  received  a
    sentence  of  four  years  detention.   His  appeal  against  automatic
    deportation was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal; that  decision  was
    upheld by the Upper Tribunal; JZ eventually gained what I believe to be
    the unique distinction of being  the  only  foreign  criminal  who  has
    received a sentence of four years or more to succeed before  the  Court
    of Appeal.   The fact in his case were however striking.   Although  he
    had not arrived in the United Kingdom until he was nine years old,   JZ
    had never in fact lived in his native land of Zambia.  He  could  speak
    none of the languages used there, and was entirely unfamiliar with  the
    culture.  He had no relatives there and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    found that he would face great difficulty in securing  employment.   He
    was likely to face hostility in Zambian society, partly because he  was
    a convicted criminal, and partly because he  is  of  mixed  race.   His
    family are all British citizens and he was  found  to  have  roots  and
    connections to this country.  Both of his parents were unwell, and  had
    looked to JZ to undertake parental roles towards his younger  siblings.
     Crucially,  for  the  purpose  of  Ms  Jaquiss'  submissions,  JZ  was
    sentenced just weeks after his 18th birthday.

24. I fully accept that there are parallels between  the  Appellant's  case
    and that of JZ.  It cannot however be said that the First-tier Tribunal
    here erred in not replicating that decision.   These  are  always  fact
    sensitive enquiries.  Central to the ratio in JZ's case was the finding
    that he had absolutely no ties or hope of integrating  in  Zambia.   In
    the Appellant's case the First-tier Tribunal expressly rejected such  a
    submission.  Unlike JZ he had lived in the country of his  birth  until
    he was about eight  years  old.   The  Tribunal  found  that  he  would
    therefore have a familiarity with Nigerian culture and  could  continue
    to benefit from the emotional support  of  his  mother,  who  would  of
    course be able to advise him about how  best  to  make  his  way.   The
    Tribunal found that the Appellant is of an age where it  is  reasonable
    to expect that he could work to  accommodate  and  support  himself  in
    Nigeria.

25. The final point arising from these authorities is the alleged injustice
    arising from the fact that the Appellant committed  the  index  offence
    when he was 17, but  was  not  sentenced  until  he  was  18.   In  her
    submissions Ms Jaquiss said that the  Appellant  had  been  stopped  by
    police on 8 February 2017.  He had immediately admitted  his  guilt  (I
    interpolate that in respect of this admission the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was quite right to observe that he could have done little  else,  given
    the volume of Class  A  drugs  that  he  had  upon  his  person).   The
    Appellant turned 18 approximately one month later, and so it  was  that
    when he was sentenced on 19 June 2017 he was officially an adult.  As I
    have said, this is a factor which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  expressly
    recognises in its decision.   It  properly  gave  some  weight  to  the
    Appellant's young age.  I am however quite satisfied that the  Tribunal
    was also entitled to take into account the fact that the Appellant  was
    very nearly an adult when the offence was committed:  he  clearly  knew
    what he was doing and  there  can  be  no  suggestion  that  he  lacked
    capacity in any way. Ms Jaquiss submitted that but for the delay in the
    criminal justice system the Appellant would not be  facing  deportation
    at all.  I am afraid that I must reject that argument, as attractive as
    it initially seems.  First, because there is no  discernible  delay  in
    the administration of justice in this case.  There was a period of just
    one month between the Appellant's arrest and his 18th birthday.   I  am
    unable to say that the criminal justice system operated unfairly in not
    having the Appellant convicted  and  sentenced  within  that  four-week
    period.  Nor can it  be  said  that  a  conviction  as  a  minor  would
    necessarily have saved  the  Appellant  from  deportation  proceedings:
    whilst the automatic provisions in  section  32  would  not  have  been
    engaged, it would still have been open to the  Secretary  of  State  to
    pursue deportation on 'conducive' grounds.

    Ground (iv): Evidential Foundation

26. Ground (iv) is concerned with  the  finding  at  paragraph  54  of  the
    determination that the Appellant's memory of Nigeria may well have been
    kept alive, at least to some extent,  by being brought up by a Nigerian
    mother.  I accept the submission that this logic is  somewhat  tenuous.
    In the absence of any actual evidence that the Appellant's  mother  was
    particularly concerned with  preserving  Nigerian  culture  within  the
    family home it can properly be said that this  was  a  finding  without
    evidential foundation.  I am not, however, satisfied  that  this  error
    was in anyway material to the outcome of this appeal.   It  relates  to
    one very marginal element of the reasoning, and it is  clear  from  the
    determination read as a whole that the Tribunal's decision  would  have
    been the same, even absent this error.

    Decisions

27. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             18th March 2019
