
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18701/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th April 2019                            |On 15th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Mrs EMTETHAL JARABANDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Syria born on  20th  December  1967.   On
    28th May 2018 the Appellant made an application for entry clearance  to
    the UK under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules on the basis  of  her
    family life with her son Erwa Alsaddi.  That application was considered
    under the Rules with reference to Article 8 of the European  Convention
    of Human Rights.  The Appellant's application was refused by  a  Notice
    of Refusal dated 6th August 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cohen sitting at  Taylor  House  on  29th  January  2019.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  1st  March  2019  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 8th March 2019 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds contended:-

      i) that the Immigration Judge had applied the wrong legal tests;

     ii) that the judge had made findings with no proper basis in evidence;

    iii) that the judge had failed to consider relevant evidence; and

     iv) had reached irrational conclusions.

 4. On 26th March 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted permission
    to appeal.  It is on that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    her instructed legal  representative,  Mr  Moran.   Mr  Moran  is  very
    familiar with this matter.  He appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and he is also the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The  Secretary  of
    State appears by his Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Tarlow.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. Mr Moran takes me to his Grounds of Appeal.  His Grounds of Appeal  are
    quite extensive and his submissions take me through effectively all the
    relevant paragraphs therein.  He notes  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found at paragraph 18 that the Appellant's medical condition  was
    not severe or life threatening and that she had not required long  term
    hospitalisation.  He reminds me that the correct test under  the  Rules
    relates to "long term personal care with everyday tasks".   He  submits
    that the  test  includes  conditions  which  are  not  severe  or  life
    threatening or require long term hospitalisation, rather  than  looking
    to the functional ability of the Appellant to  perform  everyday  tasks
    such as washing, dressing and cooking, and that there is no  indication
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  the  Appellant's  functional
    abilities as required.  He submits that this in  itself  amounts  to  a
    material error of law.

 6. Secondly, he points out that the issue of adequate maintenance was  not
    a matter that was  challenged  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  and
    consequently the  finding  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  26  that  the
    Appellant's Sponsor is on a low income and had not provided a breakdown
    of his expenditure and income was not  a  good  reason  for  the  judge
    concluding that the Appellant's Sponsor had failed  to  demonstrate  he
    could maintain the Appellant without  recourse  to  public  funds.   He
    points out to me the correct test which is to be found in KA  (Adequacy
    of maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00065.

 7. His main thrust however relates to the contention that  the  judge  has
    failed to give full and proper consideration to  the  medical  evidence
    and to his rejection of the Appellant's medical reports  on  the  basis
    that they are from the same clinic, from different writers, are not  of
    good  quality,  and  include  emotional  commentary  and   unscientific
    references.  He submits that it is an irrational conclusion  to  reject
    the medical reports on the basis they are from the same clinic or  from
    different writers, and points out that the quality of the reports  have
    to be looked at in the context of which they are  written,  i.e.  brief
    reports requested from medical practitioners overseas.

 8. He also reminds me that there have been further reports provided  by  a
    social support worker who has set out the Appellant's circumstances and
    personal everyday care needs in some detail and explained how  and  why
    her care needs cannot be currently met.  He notes that  the  judge  has
    made no findings in respect of the reports that have been provided  and
    no reasons for rejecting them, merely finding at paragraph 18 "that  it
    is not stated that  adequate  care  is  currently  unavailable  to  the
    Appellant in Syria".  Mr Moran goes on to comment that there is clearly
    inadequate care available in Syria and that this has been  set  out  in
    some detail in the social care worker's report.

 9. Whilst admitting that the threshold is  indeed  high,  he  goes  on  to
    submit finally that the judge has  reached  irrational  conclusions  in
    finding that the Appellant's health conditions and  personal  care  are
    not as severe as indicated because her daughter left Syria in 2017, and
    submits that it is irrational to reach a finding that  the  Appellant's
    daughter would not stay with her in a war zone with a 5 year old  child
    instead of joining her refugee  husband  in  the  UK.   For  all  these
    reasons he submits that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    contain a substantial number of material errors of law and he asked  me
    to set aside the decision.

10. In brief submission, Mr Tarlow points out that whilst there may well be
    an error set out by the judge as to the exact detail of the Appellant's
    medical condition, the fact is that the judge has made a  finding  that
    her conditions are not life threatening and that the judge was entitled
    to make the findings that he has overall.  He submits that the findings
    made by the judge  are  ones  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make
    particularly bearing  in  mind  that  the  judge  heard  the  evidence,
    including the judge's finding with regard to the medical reports.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. There was before the judge evidence produced by the Appellant's Sponsor
    and a substantial bundle of documentation.  To suggest that the judge's
    findings are irrational requires an extremely high threshold.  The main
    thrust of the argument made on this point turns on the  fact  that  the
    judge considered that it was irrational for the Appellant's daughter to
    leave her mother in Syria.  That is too high  a  threshold  to  impose.
    The daughter was given the opportunity with her young child to join her
    refugee husband in the UK and from all that has happened in  Syria  and
    the living in a war zone, whilst I am sure it was painful  for  her  to
    leave her mother behind, it does not in my view create a scenario  that
    would make the decision irrational.

14. I have addressed that first because that is  only  the  most  minor  of
    issues that are raised by Mr Moran.  His main thrust is to  rely  on  a
    series of medical reports  produced  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  from
    doctors in Syria specialising  in  psychiatry,  addiction  therapy  and
    neurosurgery.  I acknowledge that those reports are written  in  letter
    format and are not set out in the manner in which a medical report  for
    a piece of litigation in the UK would normally be  expected.   However,
    they have to be looked at in the context of which they were written and
    I accept the submission made by Mr Moran that the judge has  failed  to
    consider and assess the Appellant's  particular  documented  conditions
    such as sacral nerve root pain relating to a herniated  disc,  and  the
    reports on the assessment of her mental health including  that  of  her
    psychiatric and cognitive behaviour.  As such, I am satisfied that  the
    approach adopted by the judge errs in law and that it is material.

15. Finally, Mr Moran is correct in his definition of the legal test to  be
    carried out and certainly in this matter, the  judge  appears  to  have
    given weight to the inability of the Sponsor to  produce  documentation
    relating to his  financial  circumstances  in  a  situation  where  the
    Secretary of State had previously seemingly  not  sought  to  challenge
    this.

16. For all the above reasons I am satisfied that there are errors  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge which materially taint
    his conclusions and as such, I set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the matter back to be reheard.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter.

 1) That on finding there are material errors of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision is set aside with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.


 2) The matter is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Taylor House on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    two hours.


 3) That the rehearing is to be before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    other than Immigration Judge Cohen.


 4) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of such subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
    seek to rely within at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.


 5) That the listing of the appeal be expedited.


 6) That an Arabic - Middle Eastern - interpreter do  attend  the  restored
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
