
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18090/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th November 2018                   |On 05th February 2019               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            mr Matthew Adu Lartey
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Naik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Callow, promulgated on 17th August 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on  28th  March  2018  and  on  24th  May  2018.   In  the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ghana, and was born on 6th August
    1977.  In what was described as "a long and  complex  history  to  this
    appeal" (paragraph 1) by the judge, the Appellant appealed against  the
    decision of the Respondent Secretary of State, dated  10th  June  2016,
    refusing his application for a variation of his leave to remain in  the
    UK.  The basis of the Appellant's appeal is his Article  8  rights,  on
    account of his having been in this country for over thirteen years.  He
    had arrived on 5th January 2005, in  order  to  undergo  a  diploma  in
    Christian studies at the London College  of  Business  and  Theological
    Studies, and this he completed on 28th February 2006.  It is a  feature
    of this appeal that the Appellant has remained in this country lawfully
    to a very substantial degree during the time that he has been here.

 3. However, the Appellant's present difficulty arises  when,  in  February
    2016, he made an in-time application for an extension of  stay  in  the
    UK, without a CAS letter from his college, as they were still  awaiting
    confirmation of their Sponsor's licence  from  UKBA.   In  his  witness
    statement of 2nd February 2016, the Appellant explains his  predicament
    as follows:-

         "I approached Christ Church University in Canterbury  where  I  was
         advised that I would have to wait  until  the  next  academic  year
         which commenced in September 2014 and that in order to apply I  had
         to have a minimum of six months' leave to remain as a student."

 4. The Appellant further goes on to explain that,

         "On contacting Spurgeon's College, I was advised that the BA that I
         had obtained  was  no  longer  accepted  by  the  Home  Office  for
         accreditation reasons  and  I  would  therefore  have  to  complete
         another BA course before embarking on an MA course."

 5. The Appellant then goes on to make it clear that,

         "Despite  persistent  efforts  I  was  unable   to   find   another
         institution which would accept me onto my desired  course  with  my
         current immigration status and at a cost comparable to the  fees  I
         was  paying  previously  ..."  (see  paragraph  9  of  IJ  Callow's
         determination).

The Judge's Determination

 6. In a detailed and comprehensive determination, the judge considered the
    specific issue in the appeal raised  before  him,  observing  that  the
    Appellant  was  not  alleging  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State was contrary to the Rules  or  wrong  in  law,  "but
    rather that the decision breaches rights protected under Article  8  of
    the ECHR".  In this respect,

         "The Appellant's claim is founded on his  well-established  private
         life with family and friends and the overriding claim that  he  has
         been prevented from completing his studies for reasons  beyond  his
         control.  Where the Rules have not been met, then significant facts
         of private interests must be  identified  to  outweigh  the  public
         interest reflected in the Rules" (paragraph 24).

 7. The judge went on to consider a distinctive aspect of this  appeal,  by
    way of background, namely, that there was an  earlier  decision  by  IJ
    Courtney in August 2013, which fell  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  on
    Article 8 grounds.  An attempt to challenge this decision in the  Upper
    Tribunal by the Respondent Secretary of State failed in  October  2013.
    The judge rightly pointed out that this decision by IJ Courtney "is the
    starting point in addressing the  Grounds  of  Appeal  in  the  present
    matter".

 8. The judge then properly summarised the essence of the claim before  him
    observing that,

         "His overall length of residence since 2005,  the  majority  of  it
         lawful leave as a  student  or  with  clear  explanations  for  the
         administrative failures leading to his technical overstaying  which
         was recognised by IJ Courtney, was  such  that  his  appeal  should
         succeed.  None of the public interest considerations in Section 117
         of the 2002 Act apply" (paragraph 25).

    This, as the judge explained, was the Appellant's case in summary.

 9. The judge went on to look at the Appellant's family life observing that
    it was  "uncontentious  that  the  Appellant's  parents  and  siblings,
    naturalised British citizens, are  all  resident  in  the  UK.   He  is
    accommodated by his family and is financially dependent on  them".   He
    also, however, had a son in his  home  country  "with  whom  he  is  in
    contact", but that "beyond the fact of being in  the  UK  for  eighteen
    years" the Appellant, as the judge observed, was unable  to  show  that
    there were very significant obstacles to his returning  back  to  Ghana
    (paragraph 28).

10. In undertaking the balancing exercise, which the judge was required  to
    follow, he observed that, if  the  Appellant's  claim  was  to  seek  a
    further extension of time within which to apply for a student visa,

         "It has not been established, nor has any real attempt  been  made,
         to show that the Appellant could enrol at a college  or  university
         to study for a degree in his chosen field.  He has not been able to
         obtain a CAS, a fundamental requirement to  making  an  application
         for student leave" (paragraph 29).

11. Finally, in looking at  the  question  of  proportionality,  the  judge
    observed that, "whilst he was mindful of the fact  that  the  Appellant
    had lived in the UK for eighteen years since the age of 22,

         "It has not been shown that the Appellant should be  granted  leave
         to remain to apply for a student visa and start his academic career
         all over again.  While it  is  undisputed  that  the  Appellant  is
         capable in English (117B(2)), it has not been established  that  he
         is financially independent (117B(3))."

    Ultimately,  the  judge  held  that  "the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control concerning students  would  be  undermined  if  the
    Appellant were to be granted leave outside the  Rules  ..."  (paragraph
    31).

12. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application make three points.  First,  that  the  judge
    did not engage with Article 8 right to  family  life  fully,  confining
    himself only to the Appellant's claim that he was  entitled  to  pursue
    his studies here, and this is clear from the statement that, "there  is
    no right to be educated in the  UK"  (paragraph  31),  that  the  judge
    makes.  Second, that the judge failed to give sufficient weight to  the
    decision of the previous judge, IJ Courtney,  that  the  Appellant  had
    indeed already established private life in the  UK  since  2005  (quite
    independently of his right to be educated in this country), and that he
    had been lawfully established as a genuine student.   Third,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal had accepted, in 2013 and in
    2016 respectively, that to remove the Appellant would  now  breach  his
    Article 8 rights.  There had been a failure by the Secretary  of  State
    to act upon those decisions.  Given the low threshold for interference,
    and  the  intervening  factors  which  prevented  the  Appellant   from
    enrolling on a course which  he  had  amply  set  out  in  his  witness
    statement,  the  judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  there  was   no
    interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on 20th September 2018
    on the basis that the judge had arguably erred in the consideration  of
    Article 8  rights,  by  limiting  this  to  the  Appellant's  right  to
    education, when the Appellant had already been lawfully established  in
    this country from 2005 onwards until  2010,  as  accepted  by  previous
    Tribunal decisions.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on  15th  November  2018,  Ms  Naik  made  the
    following submissions.

16.  First,  that  the  judge  below  had  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant's private life was not engaged because "there is no right  to
    be educated in the UK" (at paragraph 31).  This conclusion flew in  the
    face of the determination by a previous judge that the Appellant had an
    established private life in the UK since 2005, and that in 2013 and  in
    2016 both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  had  accepted
    that to remove the Appellant would breach his Article 8 rights.

17. Second, that in his reasons, the judge erred  in  concluding  that  the
    refusal of the Appellant's claim under  Article  8  was  necessary  and
    proportionate for the two reasons given by the judge.  First, the judge
    had stated that the Appellant's failure to obtain a  CAS  in  order  to
    make an application for leave to remain as a student was a factor to be
    counted against him in the  Article  8  balancing  exercise  undertaken
    outside the Immigration Rules.  However,  the  Appellant  had  properly
    explained that he was unable to obtain a CAS without  having  leave  to
    remain as a student and that he needed longer than 60 days in order  to
    obtain such a CAS to enrol on a course.  The second reason given by the
    judge was that the Appellant had made no attempt to show  that  he  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  and  this  too  was  wrong,
    because the judge himself set out at extensive length  the  Appellant's
    attempts to enrol at Christ  Church  University  in  Canterbury,  after
    which he approached Spurgeon's College, and then  also  approached  the
    Redeemer  Bible  College  in  Camberwell  (see  paragraph  9   of   the
    determination).  Moreover, because  of  the  delay  occasioned  to  the
    Appellant, which was not of his making, since 2010,  his  position  now
    was that he would have to  do  his  BA  course  again,  and  could  not
    commence his MA course as he had planned to do, and this  too  went  to
    the balancing exercise that had to be undertaken  in  relation  to  the
    proportionality exercise.

18. Third, Ms Naik submitted that the judge erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    accord any weight to the unlawful decisions of the Secretary  of  State
    to refuse to grant the Appellant a period of leave, which was  required
    in order to give effect to the  2013  determination,  and  the  ongoing
    Article 8 breach from 2011 to 2016.  The fact was that the  refusal  of
    the Secretary of State  to  extend  the  Appellant's  leave,  left  the
    Appellant with no effective mechanism to restore himself to study,  and
    in order to allow him the scope to resolve his  immigration  status  in
    any meaningful way, such that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    was not in accordance with the law and nor was it consistent  with  the
    previous determination which had to be given effect in order to protect
    the Appellant's Article 8 rights outside the Immigration Rules.

19. For her part, Ms Kenny helpfully began by stating that  the  chronology
    that had been extensively set out in the skeleton argument of  Ms  Naik
    was not in  dispute.   However,  she  stated  that  the  Appellant  had
    submitted his application, when he had been given a  period  of  grace,
    but it was important to look at his present situation, which  was  that
    he was unable to complete his study, as he did not  have  a  CAS.   The
    Appellant could only succeed on the basis of his private life, but this
    he could not do, because as the judge explains, the  Appellant  had  no
    college to go to, no recognition of his BA degree, and quite simply had
    to start all over again.  That was the reality of his  situation.   The
    judge is clear that, "it has not been shown that the  Appellant  should
    be granted leave to remain to apply for a student visa  and  start  his
    academic career all over again" (paragraph 31).

20. Second, the judge had been fully cognizant of the previous decision  in
    2013 in the Appellant's favour by IJ Courtney (see paragraph  25),  but
    what militated against the Appellant was Section 117B, with  regard  to
    which the judge first concluded that the Appellant was not  financially
    independent (see Section 117B(3)), and then went on to say that,

         "In the absence of showing that he could meet the  requirements  of
         the Rules for the issue of a student visa, the public  interest  in
         the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  is   engaged
         (117B(1)).   The  maintenance  of  effective  immigration   control
         concerning students would be undermined ..." (paragraph 31).

21. In reply, Ms Naik submitted that the plain fact was that the  Appellant
    could not get a CAS unless he was granted leave  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  Moreover, 60 days was not enough, in terms  of  the  length  of
    period needed, where it is noted that the Appellant had not been  given
    leave since 2010, on account of the failure of the Secretary  of  State
    to give effect to the decisions previously of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal.  The judge was  factually  wrong  to  say  that
    there was no evidence that "any real attempt has  been  made,  to  show
    that the  Appellant  could  enrol  at  a  college  or  university  ..."
    (paragraph 29). This is because as the evidence set out  by  the  judge
    itself demonstrates (at paragraph 9) the Appellant had made  enquiries,
    and  was  a  genuine  student,  such  that  there  were  in  this  case
    "exceptional circumstances", borne out of a situation of  constant  to-
    ing and fro-ing,  with  the  Secretary  of  State  procrastinating  and
    refusing to give  effect  to  previous  judicial  decisions,  and  thus
    putting the Appellant in a situation where no leave had been  given  to
    him since 2010.  There  was  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant's parents had always supported him both for his accommodation
    and for his financial needs and the judge accepts that this is the case
    (at paragraph 28), and therefore the judge was wrong to  say  that  the
    Appellant was unable to demonstrate grounds for why this appeal  should
    be allowed.

Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  it.   My
    reasons are as follows.

23. First, the judge begins his analysis with the observation that  in  the
    present appeal the Appellant is seeking a  further  extension  of  time
    within which to apply for a student visa, but that  "it  has  not  been
    established, nor has any real attempt  been  made,  to  show  that  the
    Appellant could enrol at a college ..." (paragraph 29).   This  is  not
    correct, because the Appellant has made a real attempt to  enrol  at  a
    college, and the judge provides evidence for this at paragraph 9 of the
    determination.

24. Second, in looking at the situation to remain outside  the  Immigration
    Rules (at paragraph 30), the judge goes through  the  established  case
    law, but then concludes that the denial of leave  to  remain  does  not
    amount to an interference, "where there is no right to be  educated  in
    the  UK"  (paragraph  31).   The   judge   erred   in   confining   his
    consideration, with respect to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,
    to simply the right to education in the UK.  This is  because   it  had
    already been found in 2013 and 2015 that the Appellant had  established
    Article 8 rights to remain in the UK, since his arrival in this country
    in 2005, over a period of what was  now  eighteen  years,  so  that  to
    suggest that Article 8 was not even engaged is not correct.  Insofar as
    the judge does consider the Appellant's  claim  to  continue  with  his
    desire to be educated in the UK, the judge fails,  in  looking  at  the
    situation outside the Immigration Rules, to take into account the  fact
    that the Appellant has to start all over again.  This  is  because  his
    difficulties to enrol for an MA in 2016 arose because the BA awarded to
    him by Trinity College and by Theological Seminary, was now  no  longer
    recognised, and this was the direct result of the passage of  time  for
    which he was not responsible.  The judge  had  himself  in  fact  noted
    that, "if he were to attempt to embark upon an MA, he would first  have
    to undertake another BA course of study: in order words,  start  again"
    (paragraph 27).

25. Third, even with respect to the judge's focus, on the Appellant's claim
    that he should be granted a further extension of time within  which  he
    could apply for a student visa, the judge's approach to Section 117B is
    misconceived when he states that,

         "Contrary to the submissions made by Ms Naik, it has not been shown
         that the Appellant should be granted leave to remain to apply for a
         student visa and start his academic career all over  again.   While
         it is undisputed that the Appellant is capable in English,  it  has
         not been established that he is financially  independent.   In  the
         absence of showing that he could meet the requirements of the Rules
         for the issue of  a  student  visa,  the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of effective immigration control is engaged  (117B(1)).
         The  maintenance  of  effective  immigration   control   concerning
         students would be undermined ..." (paragraph 31).

26. In Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58, the Supreme  Court  has  recently  affirmed
    that, whilst it is the case that  Section  117B  makes  it  clear  that
    "little weight should be given to  a  private  life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status  is  precarious",
    nevertheless,

         "The provisions of Section 117B cannot  put  decision-makers  in  a
         straight-jacket which constrains them  to  determine  claims  under
         Article 8 inconsistently with the Article itself.  Inbuilt into the
         concept  of  'little  weight'  itself  is   a   small   degree   of
         flexibility."

27. In fact, "Section 117A(2)(a)  necessarily  enables  their  applications
    occasionally to succeed" (paragraph 49).  The judge in the instant case
    erred  in  effectively  putting  himself  in  a  straight-jacket  which
    constrained his ability to determine Article 8 inconsistently with  the
    Article itself.  The judge went on to say that in 2013 it was just  for
    the Appellant to be given time by IJ Courtney and in November  2015  by
    UTJ Storey within which to apply for an extended visa,  "but  which  is
    now very different in that the Appellant regrettably,  must  start  all
    over again" (paragraph 31).  This fails to take  account  of  the  full
    amplitude of Article 8 itself.

Remaking the Decision

28. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.

29. First, this is a case where the Appellant had come to the UK  lawfully,
    and then lived here  continuously  for  over  ten  years  when,  whilst
    engaged in his Masters course and supported  and  accommodated  by  his
    family who are settled in the UK, his initial application for leave  to
    remain as a student was refused on technical grounds.

30. Second, in his previous successful 2013 appeal before IJ  Courtney,  it
    was established that the Appellant had a significant private life  with
    family and friends in the UK, and  that  he  had  been  prevented  from
    completing his studies in circumstances  which  outweighed  the  public
    interest of immigration control that required his removal, so  that  he
    should be granted  further  leave  to  remain.   This  means  that  the
    Appellant has established private life in this country.

31. Third, the Respondent Secretary of State's policy normally is to  grant
    up to 30 months' leave to remain after a successful  appeal  against  a
    removal decision on Article 8 human rights grounds.  However,  in  this
    case, the Appellant was not granted 30 months, and it is not clear  why
    the Respondent Secretary of  State  departed  from  this  policy.   The
    Appellant's appeal was not one involving a student appeal, but a  human
    rights appeal.  Had the Appellant been granted a full 60 days' leave to
    remain, some four years  ago  when  he  succeeded  in  his  immigration
    appeal, the present problem may well not have arisen.

32. Fourth, this means that a  proper  implementation  of  the  Appellant's
    previously successful appeal on human rights grounds,  which  would  be
    consistent with his acknowledged right to respect for his private life,
    means that a period of discretionary leave should be  granted  to  him,
    permitting him to live, and work, and study  for  a  suitable  time  to
    enable him to find a course  that  will  enable  him  to  complete  his
    masters degree.

33. Fifth, the balance of considerations in  any  proportionality  exercise
    falls in favour of the Appellant because he has lived  in  the  UK  for
    eighteen years since the age of 22.  He migrated to  the  UK  lawfully.
    He has an established private and home life in the UK with friends  and
    family.

34. There has been a "historic injustice" to the Appellant if  full  regard
    is had to his history and the administrative errors that have  impacted
    upon him.  When the Article 8(2) balancing exercise is performed, it is
    clear from established  jurisprudence  that  the  "historic  injustice"
    falls to be taken into account.  It is not irrelevant.

35. As was made clear by the Court of Appeal in Gurung (at paragraphs 36 to
    37), the "requirement to take the injustice into account in striking  a
    fair balance between Article 8.1  right  and  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining a firm immigration  policy  is  inherent  in  Article  8(2)
    itself ..."

36. The Appellant's case is not one  where  he  is  seeking  to  rely  upon
    Article 8 as a general dispensing power  because  he  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.

37. His case is that he is  able  to  demonstrate  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to exercise discretion  outside  Article  8  is  not  a
    necessary  and  proportionate  exercise  of  power   because   of   his
    established private life right.  This, together with  the  reasons  set
    out above as to why he was not able to continue with his studies  after
    his leave was originally not extended, as well as the  success  of  his
    human rights appeal, which was not appropriately  followed  through  by
    the Secretary of State, means this appeal must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is allowed.

39. No anonymity direction is made.

40. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th January 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of the amount that has been paid or is payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th January 2019











