
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/18164/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made without a hearing                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|under rule 34 (P)                               |On 21 September 2020          |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     S E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
It is appropriate to grant anonymity because  the  case  involves  potential
protection issues. Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  22  October
    2019 to refuse a human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 25 March 2020.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes granted permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in an order dated 12 June 2020.

4.    The Upper Tribunal reviewed the file following the start of the Covid-
    19 pandemic. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Frances  sent  directions  to  the
    parties on 05 August 2020 with the following indication:

                       "2.   It is difficult to decipher from  the  decision
                 of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Abebrese  which  evidence  he
                 considered and in what context. Further, the  judge  failed
                 to properly consider the evidence of the Appellant's mental
                 health difficulties and in  particular  the  high  risk  of
                 suicide if the appellant returned to Nigeria.

                            3.    I am of  the  provisional  view  that  the
                 decision promulgated on 25 March 2020 should be  set  aside
                 and remade by the  Upper  Tribunal.  None  of  the  judge's
                 findings are preserved."

5.    The directions provided for the parties to respond.  If  the  decision
    were to be set aside, Upper Tribunal Judge Frances took the  view  that
    it would be appropriate to remake the decision by way of a face to face
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal given that the appellant is a  vulnerable
    witness and was unrepresented at the time.

6.    The respondent responded to the  directions  in  email  correspondence
    dated 14  August  2020.  The  respondent  agreed  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside and that it would be  appropriate
    to remake the decision by way of a face to face hearing. The respondent
    also accepted that the appellant should  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness.

7.    The appellant responded to the directions by email on 19 August  2020.
    By this stage he had  instructed  counsel  by  Direct  Access.  Counsel
    agreed that the decision should be set aside  but  submitted  that  the
    case was suitable for remittal for a fresh hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The decision would be set  aside  in  its  entirety  and  the
    remaking would involve extensive findings of fact  that  would  require
    evidence to be given by the appellant and his  family  members.  Having
    received further legal advice, it  was  said  that  the  appellant  now
    intended to make a protection claim relating to the risks arising  from
    his sexual identity. He would be referred to a legal aid solicitor  for
    assistance as soon as possible. Given that the issue would need  to  be
    considered in this claim as well as the protection claim, it would  not
    be in accordance with the overriding objective to determine  the  issue
    before the Secretary of State  had  considered  the  protection  claim.
    Counsel suggested that the most effective course of action would be  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal, which could  then  list  the
    matter for a case management hearing in order to review the progress of
    the protection claim and to make further  directions.  Counsel  applied
    for an anonymity  order  given  that  protection  related  issues  were
    raised.

8.    Neither party objected to Upper Tribunal  Judge  Frances'  provisional
    decision finding that the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  involved  the
    making of errors of law. I am also satisfied that the grounds  disclose
    errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision. The respondent  does
    not oppose the  appellant's  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    decision is set aside.

9.    The thornier issue relates to the appropriate forum for remaking.  The
    usual course of action would be for the case to be remade in the  Upper
    Tribunal even if it involves  making  further  findings  of  fact.  The
    appeal is against a decision to refuse a human rights claim, which  was
    primarily argued with reference to Article 8  but  could  also  include
    arguments  relating  to  Article  3  of  the  European  Convention   if
    protection related issues are raised. Although it  might  be  necessary
    for the appellant and other witnesses to give evidence again, the  case
    does not turn entirely on credibility findings. The main  criticism  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision was that the judge failed to make  his
    findings in the context of the evidence taken as a whole. Although some
    aspects of the evidence are disputed, other findings are likely  to  be
    made  with  reference  to  expert  evidence  about,  for  example,  the
    appellant's health.

10.   Upper Tribunal Judge Frances was right to suggest that  the  case  was
    likely to be appropriate for remaking in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    information that was before her when she made  her  order  but  I  must
    consider the further submissions now made on behalf of the appellant.

11.   At this stage, it is unclear whether the appellant has in fact made  a
    protection claim or how long  it  might  take  for  the  respondent  to
    determine it considering that delays might occur as  a  result  of  the
    Covid-19 pandemic. The current need to take  measures  to  prevent  the
    spread of Covid-19 is  likely  to  affect  the  ability  of  government
    departments to function in the normal way. Even before the pandemic  it
    could take several months, or  even  longer,  to  decide  a  protection
    claim. I bear in mind that it is not likely to be  in  accordance  with
    the overriding objective of the Procedure Rules  for  there  to  be  an
    extensive delay in remaking the decision in this case. Nor is it likely
    to be in the appellant's interests to delay the resolution of the human
    rights claim unduly given that he is a vulnerable witness.

12.   The protection  related  issue  relating  to  the  appellant's  sexual
    identity has already been  raised  in  this  appeal  and  evidence  was
    produced to support the claim. However, the evidence contained  in  the
    respondent's bundle indicates that the issue  was  not  raised  in  the
    original human rights claim and was not considered by the respondent in
    the decision letter. Because the respondent agreed that the  First-tier
    Tribunal  decision  was  unsustainable,  no  issues  have  been  raised
    relating to section 85(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") in response to the appellant's appeal before the
    Upper Tribunal. It is unclear from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    whether the respondent gave consent for the tribunal to  consider  what
    appeared to be a significant 'new  matter'.  The  result  is  that  the
    respondent has not expressed any clear view on the issue.

13.   This is a finely balanced decision because it would  be  possible  for
    the  Upper  Tribunal  to  deal  with  all  the  matters  that   require
    determination in this appeal, but in light of (i)  the  extent  of  the
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal to consider relevant  matters;  (ii)
    the fact that the protection related issues were not considered by  the
    respondent previously; (iii) that section 85(5) NIAA 2002 may  need  to
    be considered; and (iv) it is said that the appellant  now  intends  to
    make a protection claim in which the  respondent  will  consider  those
    issues, I find that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

14.    It  is  a  matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider  what
    directions to make thereafter, but  counsel's  suggestion  for  a  case
    management hearing seems sensible. The parties are expected to be ready
    to update the First-tier Tribunal as to whether the appellant has  made
    a protection claim, and if so, when it is likely to be decided. It is a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal to consider whether it would  be  in
    the interests of justice to delay the remaking of this  decision  until
    after a decision has been made in relation to any protection  claim  or
    whether  those  issues  could  be  determined  in  this   appeal   with
    appropriate consent under section 85(5) NIAA 2002.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   M. Canavan          Date 16 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
