
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18830/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle House, Glasgow                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2018                             |On 23 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                 MOHSIN [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Criggie, Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Telford promulgated on 25 September 2017 dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 21 July  2016
    to refuse him leave to remain and to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2012 when he arrived with leave to remain as  a  student.
    His first application for leave to remain on the basis  of  family  and
    private life was refused on 24 April 2014; three  further  applications
    were unsuccessful. The application giving rise to  the  decision  under
    appeal was made on 26 May 2016.

 3. The appellant is married to a British Citizen. He married his wife at a
    mosque in the United Kingdom on 19 March 2015  and  subsequently  at  a
    Registry Office in a civil ceremony on 22 February 2016. The couple had
    since then had their first child, also a British Citizen, born on  [  ]
    2017.

 4. The  respondent  refused  the  application  on  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for consideration  under  the  5  year  route
    under Appendix FM as, having overstayed for more than 28 days,  he  did
    not meet the relevant suitability requirements. She noted also that the
    financial requirements were not met.  The application was also  refused
    under the 10 year route, the respondent concluding  that  although  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting, the requirements of EX.1  were
    not met. The application was also refused on private lifer grounds, the
    respondent concluding that the appellant did not meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules

 5. The respondent was not present at the appeal before Judge  Telford  who
    dismissed the appeal, concluding:

   i) That this was an appeal against refusal of entry clearance [2];

  ii) That section 85(5) of the 2002 Act permitted him to consider  evidence
      of the appellant's current circumstances as he was in the country [3];

 iii) That the requirements of EX.1 were not met [13] - [16];

  iv) That the appellant and sponsor did not have a child who has lived  for
      7 years or more in the United Kingdom [15];

   v) That proven income was not sufficient to meet the  relevant  threshold
      [17 ] - [18] and that third party support was not  sufficient  [19]  -
      [23];

  vi) That there was no claim to be made outside the Immigration Rules [25]

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal, challenging Judge  Telford's
    assessment of the finances,  his  failure  to  take  into  account  the
    position of the appellant's British born child, or indeed consider  him
    at all including a failure to consider his best  interests  or  section
    117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 7. Both parties agreed that the decision of  Judge  Telford  involved  the
    making of multiple errors of law, not the least of which was a  failure
    to take any account of the appellant's  British  Citizen  child.  Judge
    Telford appears to have been unaware that the requirement to have lived
    in the United Kingdom for 7 years is a requirement applicable  only  to
    non-British Citizen children. He appears also to have been unaware that
    this a human rights appeal and not  an  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. Even had that been the case, his self-direction  at  [25]  noted
    above was simply wrong in law.

 8. Further, Judge Telford erred in not even considering whether the  birth
    of the child was a "new matter"  and  then  properly  to  have  applied
    either sections 85(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act.

 9. For these reasons the decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    and I set it aside.  In the circumstances the  only  course  of  action
    which I consider is open is for me to remit the decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  issues,  the  matter  to  be
    considered by a judge other than Judge Telford.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues.


Signed                                  Date  19 January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




