
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18055/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                           |On 5 February 2019            |




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                              KASSAM ALARAKHIA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mian of Counsel instructed by Jasvir Jutla &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett promulgated on 19 June 2017 in which he dismissed  the  appeal
    of the Appellant against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  11  July
    2016 refusing leave to remain in the UK.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Tanzania  born  on  3  August  1935.  He
    entered the UK on 12 June 2000 pursuant to a visit visa and was granted
    leave to enter until 12 December 2000. He overstayed  the  duration  of
    his leave to enter. On 3 July 2001 the Appellant applied for  leave  to
    remain for medical treatment: his application was refused on  26  April
    2002. The Appellant continued to remain in the UK without leave.  On  3
    October 2007 the Appellant purported to make a claim based on ancestry,
    but the appropriate fee was  not  received.  On  11  October  2007  the
    Appellant applied for leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The application  was  refused  on  20  September  2008.  The  Appellant
    appealed to the IAC (ref IA/16897/2008): his appeal was dismissed under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for reasons  set  out
    in the Decision of Immigration Judge Freer promulgated on  24  November
    2008. Thereafter, again the Appellant remained in the UK without leave.


3.   I pause to note that Judge Freer also considered on the  same  occasion
    a linked appeal brought by  the  Appellant's  daughter  Ms  [MKA]  (ref
    IA/16900/2008), which was also dismissed. Judge Freer found  "that  the
    Appellant's daughter is willing and able to take care of the  Appellant
    no matter which country they live in" (paragraph 51).


4.   On 17 June 2014 the Appellant made a further application for  leave  to
    remain pleading Article 8 of the ECHR. The application was  refused  on
    18  August  2014.  In  due  course  judicial  review  proceedings  were
    commenced: documents on file show an 'issue' date of 18  November  2014
    (ref JR/14086/2014). The judicial review was eventually settled by  way
    of a Consent Order with the Respondent undertaking  to  reconsider  the
    Appellant's application. The application of  17  June  2014  was  again
    refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter  ('RFRL')
    dated 11 July 2016. It is this latter decision that is the  subject  of
    the present proceedings.


5.   In the decision of 11  July  2016  the  Respondent  considered  'family
    life' with reference to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, but found
    that in the absence of any claim to have a  partner  or  any  dependent
    children under the age of 18 in the UK the Appellant did not  meet  the
    requirements of either the so-called 10 year  'partner  route'  or  the
    'parent route'. The Respondent gave  consideration  to  'private  life'
    with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules: the  Appellant  did
    not satisfy the 'age' and  'time'  requirements  of  the  subparagraphs
    (iii), (iv),  and  (v);  in  respect  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  the
    Respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's  integration  into  Tanzania  if  he  were
    required to leave the UK "because you had spent 64 years of  your  life
    living in your home country prior to entering the UK in 2000".


6.   The Respondent also gave  consideration  to  private  and  family  life
    under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the  Immigration  Rules,  and  also
    Article 3 of the ECHR. In this context it was noted that the  Appellant
    had stated in his application that he was  "suffering  from  disability
    due to the stroke which you had in 1999. It is further claimed that you
    are  suffering  from  cerebrovascular  disease,   non-insulin-dependent
    diabetes,  peripheral  neuropathy  due  to  diabetes,  bladder  outflow
    obstruction, iron deficiency anaemia, and impaired vision and CKD stage
    3".


7.   The Respondent did not consider that such matters engaged Article 3  of
    the ECHR. The RFRL states:

         "None of the conditions you claim  to  be  suffering  from  are  in
         themselves life-threatening. ...

         You also state that you have no ties to your home country, with  no
         family support, and would not have anybody to look after your  day-
         to-day needs. In support of your application you  have  provided  a
         letter dated 16 May 2014 from Dr Arolker which states that you  are
         "not in a good state to stay  independently  outside  of  the  UK".
         However, it is noted that your daughter [MKA] is currently  in  the
         UK unlawfully and therefore it is expected she will be returning to
         Tanzania where she will be able to help care for you.

         You have  not  provided  any  evidence  to  suggest  that  you  are
         currently receiving treatment for an end-of-life illness, and  that
         you will be deprived of care you are currently  receiving  or  that
         you will be sent home to  an  early  death.  Therefore  it  is  not
         considered  returning  you   to   Tanzania   with   these   medical
         circumstances will deprive you of your rights under Article 3.

         Whilst treatment and support for your conditions may not be at  the
         same level as found in the UK, the Secretary of State is  satisfied
         that you  will  not  be  disadvantage  more  than  other  Tanzanian
         nationals  in  a  similar  position  medically  and  age-wise.  Our
         previous correspondence has outlined the medical help available  to
         you in Tanzania."


8.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


9.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of Judge Grimmett.


10.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Peart  on  28
    November 2017. In material part the grant of permission to appeal is in
    the following terms:

         "The grounds claim the Judge failed to consider the  evidence  with
         regard to the appellant's medical and care needs. In particular the
         Judge failed to consider various medical reports.

         The  appellant's  bundle  included  copies   of   judicial   review
         proceedings which included various medical reports which the  Judge
         appeared to overlook. He says at [8] that the only evidence  before
         him with regard to medical matters was the letter from  Manor  Park
         Medical Practice dated 5 June 2017.

         It is arguable that the  Judge  failed  to  carry  out  a  complete
         analysis of the appellant's circumstances against  the  appropriate
         case law Paposhvili (Application No.41738/10) and  its  application
         bearing in mind EA  (Article  3  medical  cases  -  Paposhvili  not
         applicable) [2017] UKUT 45 (IAC) and the earlier Article  3  health
         cases such as N and D."


11.  It does indeed appear to be  the  case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge overlooked the medical evidence that was included in the judicial
    review bundle. The judicial review bundle  was  incorporated  into  the
    Appellant's appeal bundle before the First-tier Tribunal. At  paragraph
    8 the Judge states "The only evidence before me was a letter from Manor
    Park Medical Practice dated 5 June 2017". There was additional  medical
    evidence in the judicial review documents - see further below.


12.  Ms Aboni on behalf of  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Judge  had
    seemingly overlooked these documents. However, the  Respondent  submits
    that such oversight was immaterial.


13.  In the circumstances I explored with  Mr  Mian  the  medical  documents
    that had been included in the judicial  review  bundle,  in  particular
    inviting him to comment on what  might  have  been  gleaned  from  such
    documents by the Judge that was not evident in the  letter  of  5  June
    2017.


14.  The letter of  5  June  2017  is  a  matter  of  record  on  file,  and
    accordingly I do not reproduce its contents here. It is in  two  parts:
    it initially reproduces information provided in August 2016,  and  then
    provides an update as of 5 June 2017.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    referred to the contents of  the  letter  at  paragraphs  8-10  in  the
    following terms:

         "8. ... It says that the letter provides information given  to  the
         appellant in August 2016 when it was said that he  suffered/suffers
         from CVA, subsequent weakness and tremor, impaired vision,  chronic
         kidney disease, pain and  balance  problems  and  subsequent  falls
         resulting in a fractured hip, memory loss, speech difficulties as a
         result of CVA, diabetes type 2 and hypertension. He needed constant
         24-hour care. He was unable to walk needed to be  mobilised  in  an
         attended  wheelchair.  He  suffered   with   urinary   and   faecal
         incontinence and needed assisting  with  all  toileting  needs  and
         hygiene. All bathing and toileting needs were carried  out  by  his
         daughter-in-law. He had  difficulty  feeding  himself  due  to  his
         tremor and vision impairment. Memory loss  and  loss  of  cognitive
         functions resulted in him not being able to  function  on  a  daily
         basis. He is a weak and frail and elderly man  requiring  the  full
         input of his family to address his care needs. If he were  required
         to leave the UK it would have a catastrophic impact on his  health.
         The catastrophic effect was not explained.

         9. The updated information dated 5 June 2017 was that the appellant
         is now suffering a severe deterioration of his physical and  mental
         health. He suffered from severe depression and was not  eating  and
         drinking and was showing signs of dehydration. An  urgent  referral
         to elderly mental health services had been made and antidepressants
         recommended. He was being treated for a UTI. Blood tests  indicated
         heart failure and an urgent echocardiogram had  been  requested  he
         was not considered physically fit to travel and  his  mental  state
         was causing him an inability to communicate.

         10. The letter does not appear to have been signed by  any  of  the
         doctors in the practice. There was no information as  to  when  the
         appellant was last seen by the  practice,  what  treatment  he  was
         receiving or what if any needs there were apart from the care needs
         referred to. No reason was  given  for  his  inability  to  travel.
         Whilst it is clear that he has many  medical  problems  the  letter
         does not indicate that he is near to the end of his life or that if
         he were to return to Tanzania it would reduce his  life  expectancy
         or that he is at the end of his life. ..."


15.  I invited Mr Mian to address me  on  whether  or  not  there  were  any
    inaccuracies in the Judge's summary of the letter of 5 June  2017.  The
    only matter that he raised was to criticise the Judge's observation "No
    reason was given for his inability to travel". Mr Mian  suggested  that
    the reason was readily apparent from the various diagnoses and symptoms
    described, even if no particular factor was articulated in the  letter.
    In my judgement it does not follow as a matter of course that a  person
    with the conditions and symptoms described would be unable  to  travel,
    depending on the journey and/or any particular arrangements that  might
    be made to make the journey more  comfortable.  In  any  event  such  a
    suggested criticism does not in reality undermine  what  is  plainly  a
    full and accurate paraphrasing by the Judge  of  the  contents  of  the
    letter.


16.  For completeness  in  this  context,  with  reference  to  the  Judge's
    observation that the letter did not appear to have been signed  by  any
    of the doctors in the practice, I note that the signatory to the letter
    is not one of the named practitioners on the letterhead, and  does  not
    identify him or herself as a doctor. The letters 'ANP' and 'BSc (Hons)'
    appear after the name; the latter is  a  degree  award,  the  former  -
    although not explained in terms - may possibly be an  abbreviation  for
    'adult nurse practitioner'.


17.  Accordingly, in the premises, it seems to me that it cannot  be  -  and
    is not  with  any  real  substance  -  suggested  that  the  Judge  has
    misunderstood or misrepresented the letter of 5  June  2017  either  in
    respect of the references to the Appellant's diagnoses and symptoms  at
    the date of the letter, or the history summarised by reference  to  the
    information provided in August 2016.


18.  I invited Mr Mian to take me through the medical evidence contained  in
    the judicial review bundle overlooked by the First-tier Tribunal with a
    view to exploring what might be different in such  materials  from  the
    background and information given in the letter of 5 June 2017.


19.  The relevant documents are at pages 87-91  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal. They comprise a GPs letter dated 16 May
    2014, an accompanying patient record, a Discharge Summary in respect of
    an eye operation in April 2014, and a follow-up  letter  from  a  locum
    consultant in ophthalmology based on a clinic date of 29 April 2014.


20.  Mr Mian fairly acknowledged - albeit it seems to me inevitably  he  had
    to - that there  was  not  anything  of  substance  contained  in  such
    documents that was different in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  medical
    conditions. However, he emphasised that the letter of 16 May  2014  was
    clearly signed by a GP at the practice, and to this extent any  concern
    that the letter of 5 June 2017 had not been signed by  a  GP  could  be
    disregarded. I note, however, that although the Judge has commented  at
    paragraph 10 that the letter did not appear to be signed by any of  the
    doctors at the practice, it is  not  apparent  from  the  rest  of  the
    Judge's decision that this factor made any material difference  to  the
    overall evaluation of the contents of  the  letter.  For  example,  the
    Judge does not in the event  doubt  the  underlying  diagnoses  or  the
    symptoms described. The only possible issues of areas of departure from
    the  contents  of  the  letter  are  in  respect  of  opinions  as   to
    consequences of the diagnoses and  symptoms  when  the  writer  of  the
    letter has not offered any supporting explanation.


21.  Mr Mian also identified that the patient  record  included  information
    as to the various medications that the  Appellant  has  received  (page
    89). However, the date of the document is 14  May  2014  and  does  not
    refer to any medication/prescription issued after May 2014. Necessarily
    this is of only very limited value in  addressing  the  fact  that  the
    letter of 5 June 2017 did  not  provide  information  as  to  treatment
    current at the time of the letter. In any event it  seems  to  me  that
    this matter is ultimately immaterial in circumstances where  the  Judge
    went on to find that "there  would  be  treatment  available  for  [the
    Appellant] in Tanzania" (paragraph 10); see also  "The  documents  show
    that there is treatment available for very many conditions in  Tanzania
    and it appears that the appellant would be able to access treatment for
    the illnesses and conditions that he suffers" (paragraph 14).


22.  Mr Mian also directed my attention to the document at page  92  of  the
    Appellant's  bundle,  which  is  headed  'Daily  routine'.  However  he
    accepted that this was part of the testimony of the Appellant  and  his
    witnesses and did not form any part of the available medical evidence.


23.  For her part Ms Aboni emphasised the respective dates of the  evidence.
    She argued that the letter of 5 June 2017 represented the  most  up-to-
    date medical evidence in the documents, post-dating the materials  from
    the judicial review by more than 3 years,  and  as  such  provided  the
    current picture irrespective of the contents of the  earlier  evidence.
    Moreover the letter of 5 June  2017  encompassed  a  rehearsal  of  the
    previous history.


24.  In all such circumstances I agree with Ms Aboni's submission.  Although
    the Judge seemingly overlooked the earlier medical evidence, there  was
    nothing in such evidence that could have made any  material  difference
    to the Judge's considerations. The evidence was comparatively old,  and
    was in any event encompassed by the evidence that the  Judge  did  look
    at. Indeed  ultimately  Mr  Mian  struggled  to  identify  anything  of
    material significance that was omitted from the  Judge's  consideration
    by a  failure  to  refer  to  the  documents  at  pages  87-91  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.


25.  I also bear in mind, and have given consideration to,  the  context  of
    the challenge in respect of  consideration  of  all  available  medical
    evidence. As identified in the grant of permission  to  appeal  it  was
    primarily against the framework of the case law relating to  Article  3
    medical cases, and in particular any  'development'  of  the  scope  of
    Article 3 further to Paposhvili.


26.  Currently the most authoritative dictum in the domestic  courts  as  to
    the impact of Paposhvili on Article 3 medical cases  is  that  of  Lord
    Justice Sales giving the judgement of the court in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018]
    EWCA Civ 64 (which post-dates the hearing before, and decision of,  the
    First-tier Tribunal herein). I note in particular the following:

         "37. I turn, therefore, to consider the extent of the change in the
         law applicable under  the  Convention  which  is  produced  by  the
         judgment in Paposhvili, as compared  with  the  judgments  in  D  v
         United Kingdom and N v United Kingdom. In my view, it is clear both
         that para. [183] of Paposhvili, set out above, relaxes the test for
         violation of Article 3 in the case of removal of a foreign national
         with a medical condition and also that it does so only  to  a  very
         modest extent.

         38. So far as the ECtHR and the Convention are concerned, the
         protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
         confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
         applicant is in the removing country. It extends to cases where
         "substantial grounds have been shown for believing that [the
         applicant], although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a
         real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
         the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant
         reduction in life expectancy" (para. [183]). This means cases where
         the applicant faces a real risk of rapidly experiencing intense
         suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the receiving state
         because of their illness and the non-availability there of
         treatment which is available to them in the removing state or faces
         a real risk of death within a short time in the receiving state for
         the same reason. In other words, the boundary of Article 3
         protection has been shifted from being defined by imminence of
         death in the removing state (even with the treatment available
         there) to being defined by the imminence (i.e. likely "rapid"
         experience) of intense suffering or death in the receiving state,
         which may only occur because of the non-availability in that state
         of the treatment which had previously been available in the
         removing state."


27.  Mr Mian submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to
    mention the cases of D and N, and had not otherwise  set  out  a  self-
    direction in respect of Article 3.  However,  when  asked  directly  he
    accepted that nothing  in  the  concluding  passages  of  paragraph  10
    offended against the guidance and principles in D and N:

         "... Whilst it is clear that  he  has  many  medical  problems  the
         letter does not indicate that he is near to the end of his life  or
         that if he were to return to Tanzania  it  would  reduce  his  life
         expectancy or that  he  is  at  the  end  of  his  life.  In  those
         circumstances, I was not satisfied he had shown that he would be at
         risk under article 3  on  return  of  imminent  death  I  was  also
         satisfied that there  would  be  treatment  available  for  him  in
         Tanzania, to which I refer below, and, therefore, he would  not  be
         returning to a country where he could receive no treatment for  his
         various ailments".


28.  As regards the  development  in  the  jurisprudence  identified  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) it seems to me that there was nothing in the evidence before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal,  or  the  Judge's  findings  based  on  that
    evidence, that meant the Appellant could avail himself of the  'modest'
    relaxation of the test for violation of Article 3.  Not  only  was  the
    state  of  the  available  medical  evidence  such  that  nothing   was
    articulated as to the nature or extent  of  the  claimed  'catastrophic
    impact'  of  leaving  the  UK,  the  Judge  found  -  sustainably   and
    unchallenged -  that  treatment  was  available  to  the  Appellant  in
    Tanzania. In this context certain of the Judge's findings in respect of
    Article 8 are also pertinent. The Judge found that there was no medical
    evidence to suggest that the  Appellant  needed  more  than  one  carer
    (paragraph 13); found that he would have access to  housing  (paragraph
    16); and was "satisfied that he depends upon his daughter for practical
    support and that appears to have been the position since he arrived  in
    the United Kingdom [which] can continue in Tanzania as his daughter can
    return with him, she having no right to be in the UK" (paragraph 17).


29.  In all such circumstances I find that the  submissions  to  the  effect
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not direct himself in accordance
    with domestic jurisprudence as it stood at the time of the hearing  and
    decision, and that otherwise the Judge  did  not  have  regard  to  the
    development in Article 3 jurisprudence  in  light  of  Paposhvili,  are
    essentially empty submissions when considered in  the  context  of  the
    particular facts of this case.


30.  Even now the latest medical evidence - which is not  formally  admitted
    in to evidence in the context of error of law, but to which I now refer
    for completeness - does not raise  relevant  issues  or  concerns  that
    might avail the Appellant pursuant to Paposhvili and AM (Zimbabwe). The
    latest evidence is in the form of a further letter from the Appellant's
    GP dated 25 September  2018  (signed  by  a  doctor):  it  repeats  the
    substance of the medical history, and additionally refers  to  a  femur
    fracture and hip replacement in September 2016 (to which the Judge made
    reference at paragraph 21), and refers to poor mobility, the appearance
    of frailty, distress over the pending immigration proceedings, and  low
    mood and depression (in respect of which a low dose  of  antidepressant
    had  been  started).  An  opinion  is  again  expressed   as   to   the
    "catastrophic impact on his health if he is deported"  without  further
    identification or explanation. This letter does not establish a  likely
    level of suffering such as to engage Article 3 in accordance  with  the
    dictum set out above from AM (Zimbabwe).


31.  The Appellant's grounds of appeal  and  Skeleton  Argument  also  raise
    challenge in respect of Article 8. The grant of  permission  to  appeal
    focussed on the challenge in respect of Article 3; no  particular  view
    was expressed in respect of Article 8, but the grant of permission  did
    not limit  the  grounds  that  could  be  argued  -  "All  grounds  are
    arguable".


32.  In my  judgement  the  challenge  to  Article  8  is  in  substance  an
    expression of disagreement  with  the  decision.  For  example,  it  is
    emphasised that the test for  family  life  involves  a  low  threshold
    (Grounds at paragraph 9), and in his submissions Mr Mian urged that the
    appeal  "could  have  been  allowed  on  compassionate  grounds"   (see
    similarly paragraph 7.1 of the Skeleton Argument).


33.   It  is  manifest  that   the   Judge   gave   consideration   to   the
    interrelationships between the Appellant and his  adult  children  (and
    their families), the level of support provided to  the  Appellant,  and
    the nature of the interference inherent in the Appellant's removal.  In
    this latter regard the Judge considered and made  findings  as  to  the
    Appellant's probable circumstances if returned  to  Tanzania,  and  the
    availability  of  continuing  support  from  his  daughter.  The  Judge
    considered the proportionality of the interference with the Appellant's
    family  and  private  life  in  such  circumstances,  having  due   and
    appropriate regard to the public interest.


34.  A significant aspect of the complaint in the Grounds is the  submission
    that the Judge failed to  characterise  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his adult children as amounting to family life: e.g.  see
    Grounds at paragraphs 10 and 11; this is echoed at paragraph 6.2 of the
    Skeleton Argument where it is pleaded "The Judge did not  consider  the
    family life between appellant and his sons [and their families]".  This
    line of argument is not  reconcilable  with  the  Judge's  analysis  at
    paragraph 20 which starts with a reference to the family  life  between
    the Appellant and his daughter, and includes "The interference with the
    family life between the appellant and his sons is in my  view  entirely
    proportionate".


35.  In all such circumstances I  can  identify  no  error  of  law  in  the
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect  of  Article
    8, but only disagreement.


Notice of Decision

36.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and accordingly stands.


37.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Signed:                                 Date: 17 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
