
                                  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18028/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 March 2021                              |On 10 May 2021                 |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                           ADEGOKE EMMANUEL ALABI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, counsel, instructed by Farani
Taylor Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Raikes ("the judge") promulgated on  21  January  2020  in
         which she dismissed the human rights appeal of Mr Adegoke  Emmanuel
         Alabi ("the appellant") against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department ("the respondent") dated  24  October
         2019 refusing the appellant's human rights claim.

      2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who was born on 9 July 1975.
         He entered the UK as a visitor on 15 July 2004. He  overstayed.  On
         24 April 2008 he applied for an EEA Residence  Card  but  this  was
         refused on 29 April 2009. On 26 March 2012 he again applied for  an
         EEA Residence Card but this was refused on 4 September 2012. On  15
         November 2012 he applied for an EEA Residence Permit but  this  was
         refused on 20 July 2013.

      3. The appellant's next application was a human rights claim  made  on
         24 October 2019 and based on his length of residence in the UK  and
         his relationship with Olubunmi Racheal Mokuolu ("the  sponsor"),  a
         Nigerian national with an EU right of permanent  residence  in  the
         UK.

      4. In her decision refusing the  human  rights  claim  the  respondent
         accepted:

                i) That the appellant did not fall for refusal under the
                   Suitability requirements of Appendix FM;


               ii) That the appellant met the Eligibility Relationship
                   requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.1.1. to 1.12. of
                   Appendix FM;

              iii) That the appellant met the Eligibility Financial
                   requirements of Appendix FM;

               iv) That the appellant met the Eligibility English Language
                   requirements of Appendix FM;

                v) That the appellant did NOT meet the Eligibility
                   Immigration Status Requirements at paragraphs E-LTRP.2.1.
                   to 2.2. of Appendix FM because his previous leave as a
                   visitor in 2004 was only valid for 6 months and he had
                   therefore been without lawful leave for over 14 years.

      5. The respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
         requirements of EX.1 of Appendix FM as there were considered to  be
         no 'insurmountable obstacles',  as  understood  with  reference  to
         EX.2,  preventing  the  couple  continuing  their  relationship  in
         Nigeria. Nor was the respondent satisfied  that  there  were  'very
         significant obstacles' to the appellant integrating in Nigeria,  as
         required by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules.  The
         respondent  was  not   satisfied   there   were   any   exceptional
         circumstances such that a refusal of the human rights  claim  would
         result in a disproportionate interference with Article 8 ECHR.

      6. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision to the  First-tier
         Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge had before her a 401-page bundle of documents prepared on
         the appellant's behalf and which contained, inter alia,  statements
         from the appellant and his sponsor, and a  letter  from  the  Trent
         Vale Medical Practice dated 17 December 2019. The judge heard  oral
         evidence from the appellant and his sponsor.


      8. At [4] of her decision the judge summarised the Reasons for Refusal
         Letter with reference to the points contained in paragraph 4 (i) to
         (v) above. At [13] to [21] the judge set  out  the  relevant  legal
         framework and applicable legal principles derived from caselaw.

      9. The judge set out her 'Findings of Facts on the Evidence'  at  [26]
         to [40]. The judge found that the appellant had  been  inconsistent
         in his evidence relating to his family in Nigeria and that he had a
         mother and brother in Nigeria with  whom  he  remained  in  contact
         [28]. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that, if removed  to
         Nigeria, he would be left on his own with no help or support and no-
         one he could rely on [29]. The judge found that the  appellant  had
         obtained a senior school certificate in Nigeria and that he  worked
         in the Nigerian construction industry for 4 to 5  years  before  he
         left the country, and that there was no independent evidence  that,
         as a result of his  age,  the  appellant  would  struggle  to  find
         employment [30]. The judge found that  the  appellant  could  speak
         Yoruba and English [31]. The  judge  found  that  the  sponsor  had
         family in Nigeria with whom she maintained contact [34]. The  judge
         noted the absence  of  any  evidence  that,  as  a  Christian,  the
         appellant would face any difficulties as a result of the  political
         situation in Nigeria [35]. No challenge has been  made  to  any  of
         these findings.

     10. At [32] the judge stated:

             "In addition to this  and  when  considering  the  Appellant's
             claim, I note that much has been made of  the  fact  that  the
             Respondent accepted that he is in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with his partner,  a  Nigerian  citizen  who  has
             permanent residence in the UK, as well as  the  fact  that  he
             also satisfies the financial and English language requirements
             of the Rules. It has been stated that were the Appellant to be
             making an application from outside  of  the  UK  he  would  be
             granted one. However, I am satisfied that notwithstanding  the
             fact that he has met some of the Rules by fulfilling  some  of
             the requirements, I also note that this is  an  Appellant  who
             entered the UK on a six-month visit visa and did not return to
             Nigeria when he should have done so."

     11.  At [33] the judge noted that the appellant had resided in  the  UK
         for 11 years without valid leave when he entered  his  relationship
         with his sponsor and  that  the  resultant  family  life  had  been
         developed in the full knowledge that the appellant  had  no  lawful
         status in the UK and that his position was entirely precarious.


     12. At [37] the judge found that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
         requirements of Appendix FM because of his immigration status,  and
         at [38] and [39] the judge found that there were no  insurmountable
         obstacles to the relationship continuing in Nigeria. There has been
         no challenge to this finding. Nor has there been any  challenge  to
         the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  did   not   meet   the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The judge noted  that  the
         appellant had spent the formative years of  his  life  in  Nigeria,
         that he speaks the language, and that he has close  family  members
         who would be able to assist in providing  him  with  emotional  and
         moral support [40].

     13. The judge then considered whether the decision to refuse the  human
         rights claim was proportionate  under  Article  8  outside  of  the
         Immigration Rules. The judge satisfied herself, by reference to the
         appellant's length of  residence  and  his  relationship  with  his
         partner and extended family in the UK, that  his  proposed  removal
         would constitute an interference with Article 8, both in respect of
         his private and family life [44]. Having found  that  the  proposed
         interference was in accordance with the  law  and  necessary  in  a
         democratic society, the judge then considered whether the  decision
         was proportionate. At [50] the judge reiterated that there were  no
         significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria and
         that his sponsor would be able  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  him,
         should she choose to do so, and re-establish herself  with  him  in
         that country. The judge stated:

             "The Appellant and his partner are well qualified  and  whilst
             they are seeking medical assistance with their wish to start a
             family, there is  nothing  to  suggest  that  this  could  not
             continue in Nigeria were  they  to  choose  to  live  together
             there. I am therefore not satisfied  that  in  the  particular
             circumstances of this case, there are compelling reasons as to
             why family and private life as is cannot continue outside  the
             United Kingdom."

     14.  At [51] the judge indicated that she had taken  into  account  the
         factors in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002, and in particular  s.117B(6),  and  concluded  that,  on  the
         evidence before her, it would not be unreasonable for the appellant
         to leave the UK and return to Nigeria.


     15. At [52] the judge stated:

             "I am satisfied that he [the appellant] was unable to meet the
             eligibility immigration status rules and given  his  partner's
             status has not been able to meet  the  exceptions  within  the
             Rules. Further, in my view, he has  provided  no  credible  or
             plausible reason as to why he  remained  in  the  UK  for  the
             length of time he did. Whilst he appears to have  taken  steps
             to regularise his status on 3 previous occasions, he has  been
             unsuccessful and has not, in  my  view,  provided  a  credible
             reason as to why he remained either following  the  expiry  of
             his  visit  visa  at  the  outset  or  indeed  following   the
             unsuccessful outcomes of previous applications  all  of  which
             were several years prior to moving  in  with  his  partner.  I
             consider these points did not put the Appellant  in  a  strong
             position  in  terms  of  proportionality  when  in  particular
             considering  the  statutory  factors  in  the  maintenance  of
             effective immigration controls."

     16. At [53] the judge concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
         proportionate.


             "Given the circumstances of the matter, I am satisfied that if
             the Appellant was required to leave the United Kingdom and  in
             fact either remain in Nigeria or  regularise  his  immigration
             status from there, this would be a proportionate  approach  to
             his right to a private or family life. For the reasons set out
             above I find that the removal of the Appellant from the United
             Kingdom would be proportionate in respect of both his  Article
             8 rights and also the Article 8  rights  of  his  partner  and
             other family."

     17. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     18. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge failed to consider the
         implications of a submission made to her that  an  application  for
         entry clearance as a partner would be successful. The fact that the
         appellant entered the UK as a visitor  and  had  not  returned  was
         "entirely irrelevant to the point being made." The judge failed  to
         consider paragraph 51 of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 where it  was  made
         clear that there may  be  no  public  interest  in  an  applicant's
         removal if the applicant was certain to be granted entry clearance.
         The judge failed to consider adequately or at all the  significance
         of the submission that an application  for  entry  clearance  would
         succeed. The judge failed to consider  the  correct  weight  to  be
         given to the public interest in requiring the appellant to make  an
         entry clearance application and her proportionality assessment  was
         therefore unsound. I note by way of observation  that  the  pleaded
         grounds made no specific reference to fertility treatment.


     19. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
         stated:

             "1. I just [sic] about persuaded that it is arguable that  the
             judge erred in failing to engage with  the   Chikwamba  [2008]
             UKHL 40 point which  appears  to  have  been  put  forward  in
             argument at the hearing (if not in advance).


               2. The grant of permission should certainly not be taken  as
             an indication that the arguable error will ultimately be  made
             out, or, if it is, that it will result in the judge's decision
             being set aside. The submission that the putative  application
             for entry clearance "would" succeed is  always  to  be  viewed
             with a degree of caution.  The  requirement  of  the  relevant
             Rules include those under Appendix FM-SE, for example.  It  is
             certainly not clear that the judge was  referred  to  specific
             evidence which would have gone to support the contention  that
             an entry clearance application  would  have  been  certain  or
             extremely likely to succeed. Further, the appellant will  need
             to consider the recent  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
             Younas  (section  117B(6)(b);  Chikwamba   [2008]   UKHL   40;
             Zambrano) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC)."

     20. In the skeleton argument produced on behalf of  the  appellant  and
         dated 15 September 2020 the appellant's representative raised,  for
         the 1st  time  in  respect  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  (although
         mentioned by the sponsor in her statement), that the appellant  and
         his partner were undergoing IVF treatment in the UK and  that  this
         was heavily dependent on the appellant being in the UK in order  to
         achieve this. It was submitted that both the appellant and  sponsor
         would  be  required  for  the  IVF  process  and  there  would   be
         significant hardship if they were expected to conduct IVF treatment
         apart from each other. The skeleton argument referred to  Chikwamba
         [2008] UKHL 40 and paragraphs 51 and 52 of Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11
         and submitted that the judge failed to consider  adequately  or  at
         all the significance of the submission made  by  counsel  that  the
         entry clearance application would succeed.  The  skeleton  argument
         then argued that the respondent's  delay  ("the  delay  point")  in
         removing the appellant should have been taken into account  by  the
         judge in her proportionality assessment on the basis of  the  House
         of Lords decision in EB(Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41. This was the
         first time that this particular ground had been raised.  Permission
         had not been granted  in  respect  of  this  new  argument  and  no
         application to amend the grounds had been made.


     21. At the error of law hearing Mr Semega-Janneh sought to rely on  the
         delay point and when it was pointed  out  that  no  application  to
         amend the grounds had been made he sought to make  an  application.
         This was refused for the reasons given later in this  decision.  Mr
         Semega-Janneh relied on the pleaded grounds and submitted that,  in
         light of the duration of the appellant's residence in  the  UK  and
         the life he has established here, coupled with the fact that he met
         all the other  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  bar  that
         relating to his immigration status, it would be disproportionate to
         expect him to return to Nigeria just to  make  an  entry  clearance
         application. Mr Semega-Janneh accepted  there  was  no  independent
         evidence that the appellant and sponsor  were  receiving  fertility
         treatment,  and  that,  assuming  they  were  undergoing  fertility
         treatment, there was no independent evidence on the impact on  such
         treatment were the appellant to have to return to Nigeria in  order
         to make an entry clearance application. He submitted  however  that
         the judge failed to consider the Chikwamba principles, and that  if
         she had done so she would have allowed the appeal. I  was  referred
         to paragraphs 91 to 99 of Younas in  respect  of  the  questions  a
         tribunal should ask itself when facing a Chikwamba situation and in
         respect of the section 117B factors in the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002. Mr  Semega-Janneh  submitted  that  the  judge
         failed to consider these factors and wrongly referred to  s.117B(6)
         which had no application in the absence  of  a  child.  Mr  Semega-
         Janneh argued that the decision  was  material  because  the  judge
         failed to consider or engage at all with the Chikwamba  principles.
         If the judge properly considered Chikwamba then  the  appeal  would
         have been allowed.


     22. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had considered the possibility of
         the appellant returning to Nigeria and making  an  entry  clearance
         application from there  at  [53].  Even  if  the  judge  failed  to
         properly consider Chikwamba, this could not have made any  material
         difference  to  the  decision  given  the  appellant's  immigration
         history and the absence of any evidence that  there  would  be  any
         substantial impact on the appellant's Article 8 relationships as  a
         result of requiring him to temporarily leave the UK. I was reminded
         that Chikwamba was not  authority  for  the  proposition  that  any
         temporary separation  between  an  applicant  and  his  partner  in
         circumstances where the applicant was certain to be  granted  entry
         clearance would constitute a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

Discussion

     23. I deal first with the application to amend the  grounds  so  as  to
         argue the delay point. The grounds of appeal as originally pleaded,
         in respect of both the application for permission to appeal made to
         the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  3  February  2020  and  the  renewed
         application for permission to appeal made  directly  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal on 18 August 2020, did not include the delay  point.  When
         permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor on  28
         August 2020 no reference was made to any delay  point.  This  point
         was first raised in the skeleton argument dated 15 September  2020,
         but there was no formal application to amend the grounds until  the
         day of the 'error of law' hearing on 30 March 2021.  The  delay  is
         very  significant  and  is  without  any   good   explanation.   In
         considering whether to allow the amendment I  have  considered  and
         applied the guidance identified in R(Hysaj) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ
         1633 and SSHD v SS(Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, and remind myself of
         the overarching principle to deal with cases fairly and  justly.  I
         note that no argument appears to  have  been  advanced  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal relating to the delay point.  The  judge  could
         not be said to have erred in law by failing to take account  of  an
         argument never advanced. In any event, I consider the  delay  point
         to be unarguable given that EB(Kosovo) was concerned with delays by
         the SSHD in making decisions in respect of applications, and  there
         was no appreciable delay by the respondent in deciding any  of  the
         appellant's applications. For these reasons I refuse to  allow  the
         appellant to amend his grounds of appeal.


     24. The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  following  the
         respondent's decision were general in nature and did not  expressly
         refer to any legal argument based on the authority of Chikwamba. No
         skeleton argument appears to have been provided to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. I am however satisfied that brief arguments based on  the
         Chikwamba principles were advanced in oral submissions  before  the
         judge.

     25. The judge did not mention Chikwamba by name (and any  such  failure
         would not of itself  constitute  an  error  of  law)  but  she  did
         acknowledge, at least to a  limited  degree,  that  arguments  were
         advanced based on the respondent's acceptance  that  the  appellant
         met all but the  Eligibility  immigration  status  requirements  of
         Appendix FM (see  [53]).  It  is  not  however  apparent  from  the
         decision, read as a whole, that the judge fully 'got to grips' with
         the consequences of such compliance or the arguments being advanced
         on behalf of the appellant. The appellant was essentially  arguing,
         by reference to Chikwamba, that  there  was  little  or  no  public
         interest in removing him in circumstances where he would be granted
         entry clearance  to  re-enter  the  UK  should  he  make  an  entry
         clearance application from Nigeria. Although the respondent did not
         expressly acknowledge that an entry clearance application would  be
         successful, her acceptance of all the requirements for a  grant  of
         leave to remain under Appendix FM other than the immigration status
         requirement strongly indicated  that,  had  the  appellant  made  a
         notional entry clearance application, the  application  would  have
         succeeded. The judge does not however  engage  with  the  Chikwamba
         based argument and she has failed to explain how this was  factored
         into her Article 8 proportionality  assessment.  Whilst  the  judge
         does conclude, at [53], that requiring the appellant to  return  to
         Nigeria to "regularise his immigration status from there" would not
         constitute a disproportionate interference with Article 8, she does
         not explain how she reached this conclusion or  why  any  temporary
         separation, in light of the  appellant's  particular  circumstances
         and  the  likelihood  of  an  entry  clearance  application   being
         successful, would not be disproportionate.

     26. The Upper Tribunal does not however have to set aside a  First-tier
         Tribunal decision merely because it involved the making of an error
         on a point of law. If the error of law was  not  material,  in  the
         sense that it could not, on any rational view,  have  affected  the
         judge's ultimate conclusion, then the decision will not need to  be
         set aside. I now consider whether the  judge's  failure  to  engage
         with  the  Chikwamba  principles  could  have  made  any   material
         difference to her decision based on  the  evidence  before  her  or
         whether the decision would inevitably have been the same.

     27. Mr Semega-Janneh's argument in respect of the  materiality  of  the
         error of law was that the mere fact that the judge failed to engage
         with the Chikwamba principles was material as, had she done so, she
         would have allowed  the  appeal.  Mr  Semega-Janneh's  approach  to
         Chikwamba appeared to be based on the  understanding  that,  if  an
         applicant was certain to be granted entry clearance, then it  would
         always be disproportionate to require him or  her  to  have  to  go
         through the expense and inconvenience of having  to  leave  the  UK
         merely to make an application that was  bound  to  be  granted.  Mr
         Semega-Janneh  later  clarified  that  the  disproportionality   of
         requiring the  appellant  to  be  temporarily  separated  from  his
         sponsor stemmed also from his long residence in the UK  (around  15
         years at the date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision), the  fact
         that the sponsor was undergoing fertility treatment and the "delay"
         by the respondent in not removing the appellant.

     28. In order to determine the issue  of  materiality  I  will  consider
         various decisions relating to  the  Chikwamba  principle,  starting
         with Chikwamba  itself.  Mrs  Chikwamba  was  Zimbabwean,  and  her
         husband was a recognised refugee from Zimbabwe and could not return
         there. They had young child. Her asylum claim had been rejected  on
         the basis of her credibility. At the time  of  their  marriage  her
         husband was aware of her immigration status. The issue in the  case
         was whether it was appropriate to dismiss an appeal  on  the  basis
         that the appellant should be required to  leave  the  UK  and  seek
         leave to enter from abroad. Of  relevance  was  an  API  policy  on
         Article 8 requiring persons seeking to remain on the basis of their
         relationship with a partner present and settled in the UK to  leave
         the UK and make an entry clearance application.

     29. At [42] Lord Brown, giving the judgment of the Court, stated,

             "In an article 8 family case the prospective length and degree
             of family disruption involved in going  abroad  for  an  entry
             clearance certificate will always be highly relevant."

     30. At [44] Lord Brown stated,

             "I am far from suggesting that the Secretary of  State  should
             routinely apply this policy  in  all  but  exceptional  cases.
             Rather  it  seems  to  me  that  only  comparatively   rarely,
             certainly  in  family  cases  involving  children,  should  an
             article 8 appeal be dismissed on the basis that  it  would  be
             proportionate and more appropriate for the appellant to  apply
             for leave from abroad."

     31. At [46] his Lordship stated,


             "No one apparently doubts  that,  in  the  longer  term,  this
             family will have to be allowed to live together  here.  Is  it
             really to be said that effective immigration control  requires
             that the appellant  and  her  child  must  first  travel  back
             (perhaps at the taxpayer's expense) to Zimbabwe, a country  to
             which the enforced return of  failed  asylum-seekers  remained
             suspended for  more  than  two  years  after  the  appellant's
             marriage and where conditions are "harsh and unpalatable", and
             remain there for some months obtaining entry clearance, before
             finally she can return (at her  own  expense)  to  the  UK  to
             resume her family life which meantime will have  been  gravely
             disrupted?  Surely  one  has  only  to  ask  the  question  to
             recognise the right answer."

     32. In SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 the appellant could
         not satisfy the immigration rules in an application  for  leave  to
         remain as the partner of a PBS migrant because of  his  immigration
         status in a different category. The appellant had no relatives  but
         had a home in Pakistan. He supported his student  wife  by  picking
         her up from college, doing shopping and  providing  moral  support.
         His wife had no other relatives in UK and they claimed to depend on
         each other. In summarising the applicable legal principles  derived
         from the various authorities,  including  Chikwamba,  Lord  Justice
         Elias stated at [30]


             "In  my  judgment,  the  effect  of  these  decisions  can  be
         summarised as follows:


             a) Where an applicant who does not have lawful entry clearance
             pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal of the  claim  on  the
             procedural ground that the policy requires that the  applicant
             should have made the application from his home state may  (but
             not necessarily will) constitute a  disruption  of  family  or
             private life sufficient  to  engage  Article  8,  particularly
             where children are adversely affected.


             b) Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be  a  disproportionate
             interference with family or private life  to  enforce  such  a
             policy unless, to use the language of Sullivan LJ, there is  a
             sensible reason for doing so.


             c)  Whether  it  is  sensible  to  enforce  that  policy  will
             necessarily be fact sensitive; Lord Brown  identified  certain
             potentially relevant factors in Chikwamba. They  will  include
             the prospective length and degree of disruption of family life
             and whether other members of the family are settled in the UK.


             d) Where Article 8 is engaged and there is no sensible  reason
             for enforcing the policy, the decision maker should  determine
             the Article 8 claim on its substantive merits,  having  regard
             to all material factors, notwithstanding  that  the  applicant
             has no lawful entry clearance.


             e) It will be a very rare case where it is appropriate for the
             Court of Appeal, having concluded that a  lower  tribunal  has
             disproportionately  interfered  with  Article  8   rights   in
             enforcing the  policy,  to  make  the  substantive  Article  8
             decision for itself. Chikwamba was such an  exceptional  case.
             Logically the court would have to be satisfied that  there  is
             only one proper  answer  to  the  Article  8  question  before
             substituting its own finding on this factual question.


             f) Nothing in Chikwamba was intended  to  alter  the  way  the
             courts should approach substantive Article 8  issues  as  laid
             down in such well known cases as Razgar and Huang.


             g) Although the cases do not say this in terms, in my judgment
             if the Secretary of State has no sensible reason for requiring
             the application to be made from the home state, the fact  that
             he has failed to do so should not thereafter carry any  weight
             in the substantive Article 8 balancing exercise."



     33. R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department) (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
         proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)  concerned  a  Chinese
         national (student) who overstayed and married  a  British  citizen.
         The Upper Tribunal accepted, in the context of Appendix FM  of  the
         Immigration  Rules,  that,  in  some  circumstances,  it   may   be
         disproportionate to expect a person to return to their  country  of
         origin and make an entry clearance application even if  there  were
         no insurmountable obstacles to the couple relocating to country  of
         origin [24(ii)]. Headnote (ii) reads,


             "(ii) Lord Brown was not laying down  a  legal  test  when  he
             suggested in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant  to  make  an
             application for  entry  clearance  would  only  "comparatively
             rarely" be proportionate in a  case  involving  children  (per
             Burnett J, as he then was, in R (Kotecha and Das v SSHD [2011]
             EWHC 2070 (Admin)).

     34. Headnote (iii) reads,


             "(iii) In an application for leave on the basis of an  Article
             8 claim, the Secretary of State is  not  obliged  to  consider
             whether an application for entry clearance (if one were to  be
             made) will be successful. Accordingly,  her  silence  on  this
             issue does not mean that it is accepted that the  requirements
             for entry clearance to be granted are satisfied."


     35. At [36] Upper Tribunal Judge Gill stated,


             "Mr Palmer relied upon para 30 c) and d) of Hayat  to  suggest
             that  there  must  be  a  "sensible  reason"  to  require   an
             individual to make an application  for  entry  clearance  from
             abroad. I reject the submission. I  do  not  accept  that,  in
             using the phrase "sensible reason", Elias LJ was  setting  out
             the test for applying the guidance in Chikwamba, nor  that  he
             reversed the burden of proof.  The  burden  remains  upon  the
             applicant to place before the Secretary of State all  material
             that he or she relies upon to suggest that removal pursuant to
             the refusal of leave would breach Article 8 (Kotecha, at  para
             56)."

     36. And at [39] Judge Gill stated,


             "In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual (the  burden
             being upon him or her) that an application for entry clearance
             from  abroad  would  be  granted  and  that  there  would   be
             significant  interference  with  family  life   by   temporary
             removal, the weight to be accorded to the  formal  requirement
             of obtaining entry clearance is reduced.  In  cases  involving
             children, where  removal  would  interfere  with  the  child's
             enjoyment of family life with one  or  other  of  his  or  her
             parents whilst entry clearance is obtained, it will be  easier
             to show that the balance on proportionality falls in favour of
             the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children  but
             where removal interferes with family life between parties  who
             knowingly entered into the relationship in the knowledge  that
             family life  was  being  established  whilst  the  immigration
             status of one party was "precarious". In other words,  in  the
             former case, it would be easier to show that the  individual's
             circumstances fall within the minority envisaged by the  House
             of Lords in Huang or the exceptions referred to  in  judgments
             of the ECtHR than in the latter case. However, it all  depends
             on the facts."

     37. Chen is a decision followed in JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave"
         UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC), a presidential panel.


     38. Reliance has also been placed by the appellant  on  Agyarko  [2017]
         UKSC 11, at [51], where Lord Reed stated,


            "Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled
            to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance
            of  this  consideration  depends  on  what   the   outcome   of
            immigration control might otherwise  be.  For  example,  if  an
            applicant  would  otherwise  be  automatically  deported  as  a
            foreign criminal, then the weight of the public interest in his
            or her removal will generally be very considerable. If, on  the
            other  hand,  an  applicant  -  even  if  residing  in  the  UK
            unlawfully - was otherwise  certain  to  be  granted  leave  to
            enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside  the
            UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
            removal. The point is illustrated by the decision in  Chikwamba
            v Secretary of State for the Home Department."

     39. In Kaur, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1423 Lord
         Justice Holroyde observed,  at  [45],  with  reference  to  Agyarko
         [2017] UKSC 11, that Lord Reed ...


             "... spoke of an applicant who  was  "certain  to  be  granted
             leave to enter" if an application were made from  outside  the
             UK, and said that in such a case  there  might  be  no  public
             interest in removing the applicant. That, in  my  view,  is  a
             clear indication that the Chikwamba principle will  require  a
             fact-specific assessment in each case, will only  apply  in  a
             very clear case, and even then will not necessarily result  in
             a grant of leave to remain."

     40. Most recently, in Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano)
         [2020] UKUT 00129 (IAC), a Presidential panel considered the above
         authorities and decisions and concluded, at [90], that:


             "..an appellant in an Article 8 human rights appeal who argues
             that there is no public  interest  in  removal  because  after
             leaving the UK he or she will be granted entry clearance must,
             in all cases, address the relevant considerations in  Part  5A
             of the 2002 Act including section  117B(1),  which  stipulates
             that "the maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in
             the public interest".

     41. At [91] to [99] the panel asked itself four questions when applying
         the Chikwamba  principle,  which  are  (i)  whether  the  temporary
         removal is a sufficient interference to even engage  Article  8(1);
         (ii) whether an application for entry clearance from  abroad  would
         be granted; (iii)  whether  there  is  a  public  interest  in  the
         appellant being required to leave the UK in order to undertake  the
         step of applying for entry clearance and, if so,  how  much  weight
         should be  attached  to  the  public  interest;  (iv)  whether  the
         interference with the  appellant's  (and  his  family's)  right  to
         respect for their private and family life arising  from  him  being
         required to leave the UK for a temporary period is justified  under
         article 8(2).


     42. I have considered and applied the principles that emerge  from  the
         above-mentioned authorities and decisions. In  determining  whether
         the judge's mistake on a point of law is material I have considered
         the particular facts and evidence advanced by the appellant at  his
         appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


     43. Mr Semega-Janneh accepted that there was  no  independent  evidence
         before the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant and  his  partner
         were undergoing fertility treatment at the time of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal appeal hearing. There was  very  brief  reference  in  the
         sponsor's statement to her undergoing gynaecological and  fertility
         treatment, but the only  medical  evidence  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was a letter from the sponsor's GP dated 17 December  2019
         relating to the treatment of fibroids and noting that  the  sponsor
         had recently developed some new  gynaecological  symptoms  and  had
         been referred to a gynaecologist to consider treatment options. The
         letter additionally stated, "She is trying  to  conceive  with  her
         partner."  No  reference  was  made  to  any  fertility  treatment.
         Assuming however that the appellant and his sponsor were undergoing
         fertility treatment, no details of any such treatment were provided
         and, in particular, there was no evidence  of  the  impact  on  the
         fertility treatment should the appellant be  required  to  make  an
         entry clearance application  from  Nigeria.  There  was  simply  no
         evidence that requiring the appellant to leave the UK in  order  to
         make an entry clearance application would have any  adverse  impact
         on any fertility treatment.


     44. Although the burden was upon the  appellant  to  place  before  the
         Tribunal all material that he relies upon to support his claim that
         removal would breach Article 8 there was  no  evidence  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal  as  to  how  long  an  application  for  entry
         clearance by the appellant was likely to take (in Chikwamba it  was
         acknowledged that return to Zimbabwe would  be  for  a  "relatively
         short period" [16], and the period of any separation was considered
         to be a relevant factor - [42]). The judge found that the appellant
         (and indeed the sponsor) had family members in Nigeria who would be
         able to help and support him  and  upon  whom  he  could  rely  for
         assistance. The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  spent  his
         formative years in Nigeria and that he spoke  English  and  Yoruba.
         There was no suggestion that there was  any  impediment  preventing
         the sponsor and the appellant from maintaining  contact  throughout
         any temporary period of separation. There were no children affected
         by the decision. There was no evidence that either the appellant or
         the sponsor were vulnerable or had welfare issues  or  that,  other
         than the sponsor's  undisclosed  new  gynaecological  symptoms  (in
         respect of which there were no details) and the sponsor's claim  to
         be undertaking fertility treatment, either of them had any material
         medical  or  mental  health  problems.  The  judge   rejected   the
         appellant's claim that he would face ill-treatment  in  Nigeria  on
         account of being a Christian.

     45. Neither the appellant's statement nor that of the sponsor contained
         any evidence relating to the degree of  family  disruption  that  a
         temporary separation to enable  the  appellant  to  make  an  entry
         clearance application would entail (see [42] of Chikwamba). Nor  is
         any such evidence contained in  the  judge's  record  of  the  oral
         evidence given at the hearing or in her decision. There was  little
         or no evidence before the judge that there would be any significant
         interference with family life between the appellant and his sponsor
         by reason of his temporary removal (see Chen, at [39]).

     46. Applying the approach adopted by the Tribunal in Younas at [91]  to
         [99], I am prepared to proceed on the basis  that  the  appellant's
         temporary removal is a sufficient interference  to  engage  Article
         8(1), and that, were he to make an entry clearance application from
         Nigeria, it would be  granted.  In  assessing  the  third  question
         (whether there is a public interest in the appellant being required
         to leave the UK in order to undertake  the  step  of  applying  for
         entry clearance and, if so, how much weight should be  attached  to
         the public interest?) the appellant's overall  immigration  history
         is relevant, including the nature and  extent  of  his  overstaying
         (see [42] of Chikwamba; see also TG (Central  African  Republic)  v
         SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 997, at [16]). The appellant's overstaying  is
         very significant  (14  years,  although  I  note  his  unsuccessful
         attempts to regularise his lawful status) and his relationship with
         the sponsor was established when he was unlawfully present  in  the
         UK  (relevant  in  respect  of  s.117B(4)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  not  s.117B(6)  as  the  judge
         mistakenly stated at [51]). The appellant entered as a  visitor,  a
         category that did not lead to  settlement,  and  overstayed  for  a
         significant period of time after he was required to leave  the  UK.
         For reasons I have already given there has been no 'delay'  in  the
         EB (Kosovo) sense in removing the appellant such as to  reduce  the
         weight to be accorded to the maintenance of  effective  immigration
         controls. Although the strength  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of effective immigration controls may, on the one hand,
         be diminished if someone was certain to be granted entry  clearance
         on  an  application,  in  circumstances  where   there   has   been
         significant overstaying in circumstances  where  a  person  clearly
         should have returned to their country of origin removal serves  the
         important  public  interest  of  the   maintenance   of   effective
         immigration controls.


     47. The fourth question in Younas is whether the interference with  the
         appellant's and the sponsor's right to respect  for  their  private
         and family life arising from him being required to leave the UK for
         a  temporary  period  is  justified  under   Article   8(2).   This
         proportionality evaluation must apply the public  interest  factors
         in s.117B. I have already considered above s.117B(1) and  s.117B(4)
         (for the reasons given  above  both  factors  weigh  in  favour  of
         removal). S.117B(2) and (3) are neutral factors on  the  particular
         facts of this case, and s.117B(6) does not  apply.  S.117B(5)  goes
         against the appellant given that  for  all  but  6  months  of  his
         residence in the UK his immigration status was precarious.

     48. I again remind myself of the high test in determining  whether  the
         judge's decision would inevitably have been the same  even  if  she
         had lawfully considered the Chikwamba point. Different  judges  can
         legitimately reach different conclusions on the same facts  and  an
         error of law would only  be  immaterial  if  no  reasonable  judge,
         properly directing themselves on  the  facts  and  the  law,  could
         rationally have allowed an appeal on  the  basis  advanced  by  the
         appellant. Having regard to the evidence before the judge  and  for
         the various reasons given at [43] to [47] above, I am compelled  to
         conclude that the error of law was immaterial.  The  appellant  did
         not show, and did not come close to showing how there would be  any
         significant interference with his or his sponsor's family  life  by
         reason of temporary removal, as per Chen. There was no evidence  of
         the impact of a temporary separation  on  any  fertility  treatment
         that the sponsor may have been undergoing,  and  there  was  little
         evidence of any significant or serious  health  or  welfare  issues
         relating to the appellant and the sponsor. The appellant overstayed
         after entering as a visitor for 14 years, he failed to produce  any
         evidence of the length of likely separation  based  to  application
         processing times, and he would be returned to the country in  which
         he grew up and with which he was familiar and where he  could  make
         his entry clearance application whilst being supported by  his  own
         family. In the absence of clear evidence  that  there  would  be  a
         significant impact on the Article 8 rights of the appellant or  the
         sponsor caused by their temporary separation, no judge  would  have
         been entitled to allow an appeal on Chikwamba grounds.


     49. The appeal is consequently dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The human rights appeal is dismissed.



D.Blum                              22 April 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



