
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18726/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2019                   |On 31 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                               MR RAJU GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Trumpington, counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  SL
    Farmer, promulgated on 10 July 2019. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 13 September 2019.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. On 4 May 2018, the appellant applied for  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as the dependent son of his father, a former Gurkha soldier. In
    that application he stated that he was aged 34, unemployed,  unmarried,
    financially dependent upon the sponsor and emotionally  dependent  upon
    both his parents.

 4. In refusing  that  application,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO),
    decided that the appellant did not come within several aspects  of  the
    respondent's  policy  as  outlined  in  Annex  K  of  the   Immigration
    Directorate  Instructions  Chapter  15,  section  2A.  The   ECO   also
    considered EC-DR 1.1 of Appendix FM but noted that  the  appellant  had
    not declared any medical conditions or disability and was able to  care
    for himself. Consideration was given to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and
    relevant  case  law  however,  the  refusal  of  the  application   was
    considered to be justified and proportionate.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it was accepted that the
    appellant could not meet the requirement of the Rules or Annex  K.  The
    judge found that while the appellant enjoyed a  family  life  with  the
    sponsor, it was not at the level of dependency required and did not  go
    beyond that of normal adult to parent ties. The decision was found  not
    to breach the appellant's Article 8 rights.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    misdirected herself in her assessment  of  the  appeal  and  failed  to
    adequately apply the principles in Kugathas [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  Rai
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and Ghising [2013] UKUT 567.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  "following  the
    judge's finding of family life with the sponsor it may well be that the
    dismissal of the appeal was unsustainable."

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. Mr Tarlow's view, indicated from the outset, that there  was  certainly
    an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision  and  little  doubt
    that it was material. He invited me to dispose of the appeal myself.

10. Mr Trumpington made short submissions  regarding  the  judge's  muddled
    findings as to the existence of family life.




11. At the end of the hearing, I found that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    made a material error of law owing to the contradictory findings as  to
    whether the appellant enjoyed family life with the sponsor. I set aside
    those findings, preserving the judge's positive credibility findings in
    relation to the sponsor's evidence.

12. Mr Trumpington made brief further submissions. Mr Tarlow wished to  add
    nothing further.

13. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

14. As Mr Tarlow accepted  that  the  judge's  findings  were  muddled,  it
    suffices to say the following.  At  [24],  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant continued to enjoy family life with his father but discounted
    this because there was not a "relationship of dependency akin  to  that
    of a minor child." That was not the correct test for  assessing  family
    life between adult relatives,  applying  Kugathas.  The  judge  further
    erred in noting  at  [26]  that  the  appellant  could  be  financially
    independent and find work in the future. She was  obliged  to  consider
    the facts before her, which were that the appellant was unemployed  and
    financially dependent on the sponsor, which  she  accepted  to  varying
    extents. The absence of clear findings on the existence of family  life
    and dependency amount to material errors of law.

Remaking

15. In remaking this appeal,  I  have  taken  into  consideration  all  the
    evidence before me, including that contained in the appellant's  bundle
    of evidence sent under cover of a letter dated 20 June 2019.

16. It is common ground that the appellant did not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules at the date of decision and did not  fall  within
    applicable  Home  Office  policy  on  adult  dependants  of  ex-Ghurkha
    soldiers found in Annex K.

17. The previous judge found the sponsor to be largely credible  and  noted
    that  his  evidence  went  unchallenged  to  a  large  extent  by   the
    respondent's representative.  Mr Tarlow did not seek to  challenge  any
    aspect of the sponsor's evidence during the remaking  of  this  appeal.
    Briefly, the sponsor's evidence  is  that  he  supports  the  appellant
    financially by giving the latter a debit card in order  to  access  the
    sponsor's army pension. From time to time, additional funds are sent to
    the appellant in Nepal. The appellant  is  also  accommodated  free  of
    charge in the family home which he now occupies  alone.  The  appellant
    lived with his parents before they left for  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    sponsor travels to Nepal with the appellant's mother in order to  visit
    the appellant and there is regular weekly telephone contact between the
    appellant and both of his parents. The appellant is unemployed and,  as
    attempts to find  him  a  wife  failed,  he  remains  single.  Reliable
    supporting documentary evidence was  provided  in  the  form  of  money
    transfer receipts, pension documents, bank statements, travel  details,
    passport copies, photographs and telephone records.

18. The sponsor also informed the previous judge  that  his  only  daughter
    applied for leave to enter at the same time as the  appellant  and  her
    application was granted. She moved to the United Kingdom at the end  of
    2018. Mr Trumpington informed me that the appellant's sister could  not
    meet the requirements of Annex K owing to being aged over  30  and  the
    length of time which had passed since the sponsor left Nepal.

19. I have considered what was said in Gurung, at  [45]:  "Ultimately,  the
    question whether an individual enjoys family life is one  of  fact  and
    depends on a careful consideration of all the  relevant  facts  of  the
    particular case."

20. The relevant question was whether there existed a degree of  dependency
    over and above that which would be  expected  in  a  normal  family.  I
    accept that the appellant is and was wholly  financially  supported  by
    the sponsor, that this  support  is  effective  to  take  care  of  the
    appellant's financial needs, that there is frequent  telephone  contact
    and visits. In view of the appellant's age, I further accept that  this
    amounts to evidence of a level  of  dependency  beyond  what  could  be
    expected in a normal loving family.

21. In considering the issue of proportionality,  I  am  required  to  have
    regard to the matters set out in section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  as
    amended.  Those  matters  being  that  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control is in  the  public  interest.  In  this  case,  the
    appellant does not speak English however he  is  currently  financially
    and accommodated by the sponsor.

22. I acknowledge the issue of historic injustice and have  considered  the
    findings in Ghising. In particular, I accept  that  the  fact  that  an
    adult child has been prevented from following their parents due  to  an
    historic  injustice  is  a  relevant  factor  in  the   proportionality
    exercise. I am also bound by what was said in Pun [2017] EWCA Civ 2016;

         "20. The critical feature for the right to  rely  on  the  historic
             injustice  is  dependency.  ..Both  the  FTT  and  the   Upper
             Tribunal...have found that there is no dependency and that, to
             our mind, prevents the historic injustice from having the same
             considerable weight it must have for adults dependent on their
             parents at the time when the application is made."

23. In  the  appellant's  case,  the  unchallenged  evidence  is  that  the
    appellant is emotionally and  financially  dependent  on  the  sponsor.
    Documentary evidence of that dependency has been provided along with  a
    consistent, coherent account provided by the sponsor. Furthermore,  the
    respondent accepted that the sponsor would have settled in  the  United
    Kingdom earlier  were  it  not  for  the  historic  injustice  and  the
    appellant would have been born here and been a British  citizen.  Given
    the foregoing findings, I have  attached  considerable  weight  to  the
    historic injustice issue. I  conclude  that  considering  all  matters,
    including the appellant's emotional and  financial  dependency  on  the
    sponsor and that his sister was granted entry  clearance  in  virtually
    identical  circumstances,  that  the  appellant's   circumstances   are
    sufficiently compelling to outweigh the public interest  considerations
    applicable in this case.

24. In conclusion, the respondent's decision to refuse the appellant  entry
    clearance was disproportionate given the circumstances.



Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

I substitute a decision allowing the appeal on the basis that the  Secretary
of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.

No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason  to  make  such  a
direction.



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be  payable  for  the  following
reason. The appeal was allowed on the basis of the same evidence  which  was
before the respondent.


Signed   Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

