
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/18992/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham              |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                 |Promulgated                           |
|On 30 July 2019                  |              On 08 August 2019       |
|                                           |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                MAQBOOL BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr A Zeb, of Invictus Lawyers
For the Respondent:         Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Law promulgated on  22  January  2019,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1938 and is a national  of  Pakistan.
The appellant last entered the UK on 30 November 2017  using  a  multi-entry
visa valid until 3  December  2017.  On  2  September  2018  the  respondent
refused the appellant's application for further leave to remain  on  article
8 ECHR grounds.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Law ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  15  February  2019  Judge  J
Grant- Hutchison granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law by failing to take into
      account that the appellant's daughter  with  Down's  Syndrome  in  the
      United Kingdom is not a British Citizen and that she was looked  after
      by the appellant in Pakistan for most of her life. In actual fact  the
      reference is an error on the part of the respondent in the reasons for
      refusal letter who describes her said daughter as a  British  citizen.
      Nevertheless, this arguably could be a material error which  could  be
      capable of making a material difference  to  the  outcome  or  to  the
      fairness of the proceedings

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Zeb moved the grounds of  appeal.  He  told  me
that the Judge did not carry  out  an  adequate  article  8  assessment.  He
reminded me that at [29] of the decision the  Judge  finds  that  article  8
family life exists. He told me that  the  Judge's  error  was  to  focus  on
medical care and treatment rather than carrying  out  a  balancing  exercise
weighing the nature of the  family  relationships  in  the  UK  against  the
respondent's decision.

(b) Mr Zeb emphasised that the appellant did not overstay the limit  of  the
visa. He told me that the Judge's error  in  finding  that  the  appellant's
daughter (who had accompanied her to the UK) is a British citizen is  merely
one example of  the  Judge's  flawed  fact-finding.  He  told  me  that  the
appellant's  daughter,  who  suffers  from  Down's  syndrome,  submitted   a
separate application for leave to remain; although  the  respondent  refused
that application, the appellant's daughter  has  successfully  appealed  the
respondent's decision on article 8 grounds and now awaits a grant  of  leave
to remain.

(c) Mr Zeb urged me to set the decision  aside  and  to  substitute  my  own
decision allowing the appeal.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr Mills told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain a material error of law. He told me that  the  Judge's  belief  that
the appellant's daughter is a British citizen is an error of fact which  has
no impact on the decision. Mr  Mills  told  me  that,  now  the  appellant's
daughter's position is known, it is clear that the appellant will return  to
Pakistan alone so that  consideration  of  her  daughter's  nationality  and
needs is no longer relevant.

(b) Mr Mills reminded me that is not in dispute that  the  appellant  cannot
meet the requirements of the immigration rules. He told me  that  the  Judge
took account of section 117B of the 2002 Act. Mr  Mills  told  me  that  the
Judge made findings well within the range of reasonable  findings  available
to the Judge. He urged me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

7. The grant of permission to appeal focuses on the  Judge's  mistake  about
the nationality of the appellant's daughter. Since the grant  of  permission
to appeal, the appellant's daughter has  successfully  appealed  a  separate
decision on article 8  ECHR  grounds.  The  appellant's  solicitor  candidly
accepts that the nationality and  needs  of  the  appellant's  daughter  are
irrelevant.

8. It is accepted that what was thought to be arguably a material  error  of
law when permission to appeal was granted on  15  February  2019  is  not  a
material error of law.

9. There is no challenge to the Judge's findings that the  appellant  cannot
succeed under the immigration rules.  At  [29]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant establishes article 8 family life. At [33] the  Judge  finds  that
article 8 private life is established. At [31] the Judge,  correctly,  finds
that proportionality is the determinative question,  and  between  [31]  and
[36] carries out a proportionality assessment.

10. The Judge's proportionality  assessment  is  brief,  but  the  essential
elements are there. The Judge finds  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
immigration rules, but still finds that the  appellant's  article  8  rights
require to be considered out-with the rules. Having found that  family  life
and private life within the meaning of article 8  exists,  the  Judge  takes
guidance from section 117B of the 2002 Act. The  Judge  then  considers  the
impact of the respondent's decision.

11. At [36] the judge makes it clear finding  that  it  is  the  appellant's
personal care needs and  emotional  well-being  which  merits  consideration
outside the immigration rules. The judge makes it  clear  finding  that  she
balances those factors against the public interest in  immigration  control.
The Judge finds that the appellant can be cared for by  her  other  daughter
in Pakistan or, in the alternative, can pay for  personal  care.  The  Judge
makes a clear finding that it is still open to  the  appellant  to  make  an
application under paragraph 317 of the rules from Pakistan if her  condition
deteriorates.

12.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

13. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the evidence. There is nothing unfair in the procedure adopted  nor  in  the
manner in which the evidence was considered. There  is  nothing  wrong  with
the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  The  appellant  might  not  like  the
conclusion that the Judge arrived at, but that conclusion is the  result  of
the correctly applied legal equation. The  correct  test  in  law  has  been
applied. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

14.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

15.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 22 January 2019, stands.

Signed
                   Date 2 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle







