
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18592/2019(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th June 2021                             |On 1st September 2021         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                             Min bahadur gurung
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja of Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using  Teams.  There
    were no audio or visual difficulties during the course of the  hearing.
    A face to face hearing was not held to  take  precautions  against  the
    spread of Covid-19 and as all issues  could  be  determined  by  remote
    means.  The file contained the papers in hard copy.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough promulgated on 27 January 2021, in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  application
    for entry clearance as  the  dependent  of  a  Gurkha  widow  dated  27
    September 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 5 April 1993, who applied
    on 2 July 2019 for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a dependent
    of his mother,  a  Gurkha  widow.   The  Appellant's  mother  had  also
    previously applied for entry clearance which was  granted  on  27  July
    2012 and she arrived in the United Kingdom  on  12  August  2012.   The
    Appellant's brother made a similar  application  which  was  successful
    following an appeal and he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2018.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  Appellant
    did not  meet  the  eligibility  requirements  for  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance either under the Immigration Rules or the relevant policy  in
    relation to Gurkha dependents.  It was not accepted that Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights was engaged as there  was  only
    limited evidence available which did not establish that  the  Appellant
    was either financially or emotionally  dependent  on  his  mother.   An
    Entry Clearance Manager reviewed and  maintained  the  decision  on  28
    January 2020, noting that no further evidence  had  been  provided  and
    that the Appellant was now aged 30 and had lived apart from his  mother
    for over six years such that family life had not been established.

 5. Judge Hembrough dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  27
    January 2021 on human rights grounds.   In  summary,  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his mother did not engage Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights as  the  relationship  did  not  go
    beyond normal emotional ties and  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  of
    financial or emotional dependency.  The First-tier Tribunal found  that
    there was a lack of candour from the Appellant  about  his  history  of
    working abroad  in  Saudi  Arabia  and  there  had  only  been  limited
    financial support to the Appellant since 2018.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on two grounds as follows.  First, that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in applying the wrong test as  to
    whether Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  was
    engaged; considering only whether the Appellant  is  dependent  on  his
    mother and not  whether  there  was  evidence  of  real,  committed  or
    effective support between them.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal
    materially erred in by  failing  to  assess  whether  there  was  real,
    committed or effective support to the Appellant from his mother.

 7. At the oral hearing, Ms Jaja  accepted  that  both  grounds  of  appeal
    raised essentially the same issue, which  was  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal properly applied the test for engagement of Article 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights as set out in Rai v Entry Clearance
    Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320.  The Respondent acknowledged  the  correct
    test to be applied in the reasons for refusal letter and  although  the
    First-tier Tribunal purported to direct itself to the correct test,  it
    was not properly applied to the facts of this case.

 8. In particular,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  assess  all
    relevant periods from when the Appellant's mother moved to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2012 as he was not working abroad  for  the  entire  period.
    There was evidence from the Appellant's passport as  to  his  dates  of
    travel, showing he was working abroad in 2011 with a visa for  90  days
    and returning to Nepal in 2012 prior  to  his  mother's  departure  and
    during which time they lived together in the family home; followed by a
    second period of working abroad  for  two  years  from  2015.   It  was
    submitted that whether  or  not  there  was  a  lack  of  candour,  the
    information was  clear  from  the  documentary  evidence  as  to  these
    periods.  Further, it was submitted that even if family life could  not
    be established for a particular period, it does not mean  that  it  had
    been extinguished and family life can be re-established even  following
    a period where a person is independent.

 9. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the  Appellant
    remained in Nepal between 2012 and 2015 living with  his  brother,  who
    came to the United Kingdom in 2018.  Shortly after, there was  evidence
    of financial remittances to the Appellant from his mother in the United
    Kingdom, showing that she was the one providing for him financially and
    in his sole name from 2018.  Counsel suggested that prior to 2018,  the
    Appellant's mother provided financial support to both the Appellant and
    his brother; albeit there was no evidence of this before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  In any event, the Appellant and  his  mother  both  asserted
    that the Appellant was financially dependent on her.

10. Overall, on behalf of the Appellant it was submitted that the error was
    material as the Appellant was entitled to a correct decision on the law
    and evidence; but he had not received a properly  reasoned  refusal  of
    his appeal as the First-tier Tribunal had only  considered  the  period
    when the Appellant was working abroad.

11. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Melvin relied on his skeleton argument.
     He submitted that the onus was on the Appellant to establish his  case
    on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and in this case, he had
    not.  Counsel for the Appellant repeatedly sought to rely  on  evidence
    which was not before the First-tier Tribunal and on the  evidence  that
    was available, a different outcome to the  appeal  could  not  lawfully
    have been reached.

Findings and reasons

 1. The First-tier Tribunal sets out  the  key  issue  in  this  appeal  in
    paragraphs 24 and 25 which is  as  to  whether  there  is  family  life
    between the Appellant and his mother capable  of  engaging  Article  8;
    given that if there is, the weight to be attributed  to  the  'historic
    injustice' in Gurkha cases is likely to exceed the public  interest  in
    immigration control.  In paragraphs 26  to  31  there  follows  express
    reference to a number of Gurkha cases in the Upper Tribunal  and  Court
    of Appeal, including Patel & ors v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (Mumbai)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 17; Ghising (family life - adults -  Gurkha  -  policy)
    [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) as approved in R (Gurung) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  8;  PT  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer (Chennai) [2016] EWCA Civ 612; Singh v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630; and Pun v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2106.   From  these
    cases, the First-tier Tribunal notes the fact sensitive nature  of  the
    assessment of family life and that for  family  life  to  be  found  to
    continue, a child must not have  established  an  independent  life  or
    family of their own.  Later, there is express reference to the case  of
    Rai in paragraph 36 of the decision and  reference  to  a  family  life
    which existed at the time of the  family  member's  departure  and  had
    endured beyond it.

 2. In paragraph 37 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal refers to  the
    evidence of the Appellant working in  Saudi  Arabia,  with  a  passport
    stamp showing a two year employment permit from 2015 and evidence  from
    the Appellant's mother that he worked there for four or six years.   On
    either basis, the Appellant was found  to  have  worked  in  a  foreign
    country for a considerable period of time during which  he  fended  for
    himself; there being no evidence of the  Appellant's  mother  providing
    him with 'real, committed or effective  support'  during  this  period.
    There was a lack of evidence  of  financial  support  either  from  the
    Appellant when he was working after 2012 or to the Appellant  prior  to
    2018.  The First-tier Tribunal also rejected the  Appellant's  mother's
    evidence that she provided continued emotional support to the Appellant
    given her inability to give any evidence as to the Appellant's attempts
    to gain employment in Nepal or abroad as he had done in the past.

 3. In paragraph 43 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal concludes that
    the Appellant has  not  continued  to  be  emotionally  or  financially
    dependent on his mother and that he  had  formed  an  independent  life
    whilst living and working in Saudi Arabia.  In the following paragraph,
    the First-tier Tribunal rejected the Appellant's claim to  have  become
    dependent on his mother on return to Nepal in 2016.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal then returns in  paragraph  48  to  quote  from
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31; that there is no presumption of family  life  between  parents  and
    adult children and what is required is dependency going  beyond  normal
    emotional ties, adding "What is required is support which is "real"  or
    "committed" or "effective"."

 5. Whilst there are repeated references to the requirement  of  dependency
    in the decision to establish family life;  there  are  also  clear  and
    express references to the qualification of the  same  set  out  in  the
    later authorities, specifically in the context of Gurkha cases to  show
    support which is real, committed or effective.  Further,  whilst  there
    are findings that the Appellant had not established either financial or
    emotional dependency on his mother; there  are  also  express  findings
    that he had formed an independent life and  had  not  established  that
    during the period the Appellant was working abroad in particular, there
    was real, committed or effective support  to  the  Appellant  from  his
    mother.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal may  have  been  clearer  in  the  decision  by
    focusing solely on the case of Rai and the guidance  contained  therein
    as to the applicable test for establishing family life for the purposes
    of engaging Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights in  an
    appeal such as this; but the broader references do not detract from the
    clear findings in accordance with the test in Rai  that  the  Appellant
    had simply failed to establish family life on the evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The  dual  references  to  dependency  and  real,
    committed or effective support are not necessarily helpful, but do  not
    amount to a material error of law in circumstances where dependency was
    an alternative way of demonstrating family life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8; where there were clear findings applying  the  correct  test
    and where in any event, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was
    not capable of leading to any other conclusion.

 7. Counsel for the Appellant was asked repeatedly during oral  submissions
    what evidence there was before the First-tier Tribunal which could have
    led to a different outcome on the appeal, namely, what  evidence  there
    was of real, committed or effective support for the period 2012 to 2019
    when the application for entry clearance was made.  Ms Jaja was  unable
    to identify any such evidence beyond the  financial  remittances  which
    started only in March 2018 and  explanations  or  assertions  of  other
    evidence which were  not  contained  in  either  the  written  or  oral
    evidence, or any documentary evidence that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8.  In  these  circumstances,  even  if  the   First-tier   Tribunal   had
    consistently only referred to whether  there  was  real,  committed  or
    effective support between the Appellant and his  mother;  the  evidence
    fell very far short of demonstrating that for any part of  an  extended
    period of time between 2012 and 2019; let alone all of it, that for the
    purposes of Article 8 family life existed in 2012 when the  Appellant's
    mother left Nepal (after the Appellant had already spent  a  period  of
    time working in Saudi Arabia) and continued to exist up to the date  of
    application or decision.   This is not a case  in  which  it  was  even
    arguable that family life had resumed after the Appellant  returned  to
    Nepal having lived independently in Saudi Arabia due  to  the  lack  of
    evidence.  There was no error in the  First-tier  Tribunal  not  making
    express findings on every  part  of  the  period  from  2012  to  2019;
    particularly when there was no clear or consistent evidence  before  it
    as to the precise periods when  the  Appellant  was  working  in  Saudi
    Arabia.

 9. In this appeal, whilst the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  unhelpfully
    refers to requirements of dependency and  of  whether  there  is  real,
    committee or effective support for the purposes of  whether  Article  8
    was engaged; there are sufficiently clear findings applying the correct
    test such that there is no material error of law in the  decision  read
    as a whole.   On  the  very  limited  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Appellant  fell  very  far  short  of  establishing  that
    Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights was engaged.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   G Jackson                           Date         28th August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

