
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18659/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 April 2021                     |On 6 May 2021                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                             AGNES RITAH MUBIRU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda. She appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  dated  18
    October 2019 refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom on  the
    basis of her marriage to the sponsor (Mr Patrick  Mubiru).  The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 30 November 2020, dismissed
    the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The judge found (contrary  to  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer) that the appellant and sponsor enjoy a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship. However, she  found  that  the  evidence  concerning  the
    couple's financial circumstances was insufficient  to  prove  that  the
    appellant met the income requirements of Appendix  FM  of  HC  395  (as
    amended). Having failed to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge
    found that the appellant was also unable to establish that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of entry clearance

 3. At  the  remote  initial  hearing,  Mr  Jafar,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, was able to participate by sound only.  Notwithstanding  the
    problems, I was able to consider all his  submissions.  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 4. The argument advanced at [8] of the grounds of appeal was  not  pursued
    at the initial hearing.  The sponsor had secured the  offer  of  a  job
    between the First-tier Tribunal hearing and  the  promulgation  of  the
    decision and had communicated this fact  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, he no longer has that job and Mr Jafar told me  that,  in  the
    circumstances, the appellant does not argue that the judge erred in law
    by failing to consider the job offer.  Both  parties  accept  that  the
    judge was correct to finding that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    income requirements of Appendix FM.

 5. The remaining grounds are without merit. Whilst it is the case that the
    judge at [59-60], having identified the need to determine whether there
    are exceptional circumstances in the appeal to determine it on  Article
    8 ECHR grounds outside the Rules, raises the  question  of  whether  it
    would be reasonable for the United Kingdom sponsor and his 14 year  old
    son (for whom he is sole carer) to live in Uganda with  the  appellant,
    she has not reached a clear finding on that issue.  However,  it  seems
    reasonably clear that the  judge  found  that  the  relocation  of  the
    sponsor and his son  could not reasonably  be  expected  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and that the family will need to  remain  separated  for
    the time  being  for,  at  [63],  she  concludes  that  'the  continued
    interruption  of  the  appellant's  established  family  life  is  both
    reasonable and justified.' That conclusion was open to the judge on the
    evidence and the challenge in the grounds at [4], which complains  that
    the child's best interests, in the event that he may need  to  live  in
    Uganda, have not been properly considered, falls away.

 6. The remaining ground arises from a typographical error of the judge  at
    [3]. The judge states that the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  was
    made on 18 October 2020. The argument in the grounds that the delay  in
    making the decision was excessive is rather robbed of  its  force  when
    one notes that the decision was in fact taken on 18 October 2019,  that
    is only 2 months after the appellant made her application.

 7. It was open to the judge, for the reasons she has  given,  to  conclude
    that, having failed to show that she met the requirements of HC 395 (as
    amended), there exist no exceptional circumstances justifying  a  grant
    of entry clearance and consequently there was no breach  of  Article  8
    ECHR. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

     The appeal is dismissed.


         Signed                              Date   28 April 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

