
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18510/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 30 October 2019                   |On 18 November 2019                  |
|Extempore                            |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                       mrs fatimah ali salih khaleefah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lawson, Cohesion Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 5 June 2019 dismissing her  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse her entry clearance to
    the United Kingdom to join her husband whom I refer as the sponsor.

 2. The ground of refusal of the application is relatively narrow.   It  is
    that the respondent, whilst not apparently disputing  the  authenticity
    of the  wage  slips  and  the  bank  statements  showing  corresponding
    deposits of the relevant wages that this was not a genuine relationship
    of employment.  The reasons given for that are relatively thin and  are
    in effect value judgments about the nature of  the  relationship  which
    followed from interview.  I note in passing that  that  interview  does
    not appear to be in the bundle nor does it appear to have  been  served
    or taken into account by the judge.

 3. The matter proceeded before the judge, the appellant  maintaining  that
    the relationship between the sponsor and his employer was a proper  one
    and that therefore the requirements of the Immigration Rules were  met.
    The appellant did not call evidence from the employer.  The judge heard
    evidence from the sponsor alone, the sponsor was cross-examined.

 4. The judge's findings are somewhat terse, bearing in mind that what  was
    being alleged here is that, despite what the documents appear to  show,
    there  was  in  fact  no  real  employment  and  that   therefore   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were not  met.   The  judge  said
    that there were no credible explanation for the absence of the employer
    and that the sponsor was a wholly unbelievable witness, describing  his
    employment as incredible and  that  he  was  unable  to  give  detailed
    evidence of the exact nature of his duties,  the  judge  concluding  "I
    have no doubt whatsoever that the sponsor is not  employed  as  claimed
    taking that into account it is clearly a serious matter  the  documents
    have been produced in the form of wage slips and bank statements  which
    do not generally represent the true situation.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to give reasons for his conclusions in particular failing to
    explain  why  he  found  evidence  to  be  implausible,  incredible  or
    unreliable.  It is also averred at [11] that the claimed employment  is
    not a genuine reflection of the truth is tantamount to an allegation of
    forgery which had not been a submission made by the Secretary of State.

 6. Permission was made after a renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge
    McWilliam on 26 September 2019 and she stated whilst the judge may have
    raised legitimate  concerns  about  the  appellant's  evidence  it  was
    arguable he had not considered the evidence from the  employer  in  the
    round see [8].

 7. This is as I explained during submissions a reasons challenge but there
    is also the fact that the judge simply does not say what he found about
    the evidence from the employer at all.  There was a  witness  statement
    from the employer but the judge  says  nothing  about  what  weight  he
    attached to that.  Whilst that is not in itself a sufficient reason  to
    conclude  that  the  decision  was  flawed,  I  consider  that  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case there is simply an  almost  total
    inadequacy of  reasons.   What  the  judge  does  is  simply  to  state
    conclusions; he does not explain how he came to  those  conclusions  on
    the basis of the evidence which  in  this  context  is  in  my  view  a
    material error.

 8. In taking these matters together I am satisfied that  the  decision  is
    unsafe and cannot be sustained.  I conclude that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making an error of law and  I  set  it
    aside to be remade.



Remaking the decision

 9. Having found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
    making of an error of law and having concluded it would be necessary to
    remake it in its entirety I adjourned the matter so that I  could  hear
    evidence from the sponsor and also from the sponsor's  employer.   Both
    of them adopted their witness statements explaining how  the  need  for
    the role that the sponsor fulfils arose.  In brief Mr Haddad  explained
    that he is a consulting engineer who runs his own consultancy  business
    and owing to a lack of business in the United Kingdom decided it  would
    be sensible to seek work in Libya.   He  was  aware  of  the  appellant
    through his brother and concluded it was sensible to employ him  as  he
    would be able to provide leads for him in Libya and also Algeria  where
    there was a significant degree of work.

10. Having heard this and in the absence of any submissions to the contrary
    from the respondent, I am satisfied that the evidence I have been given
    by the sponsor and the sponsor's employer is reliable.  I am  satisfied
    accordingly that the sponsor is genuinely and properly employed by  his
    employer Mr Haddad  who  operates  as  Pipe  Stress  Services  Ltd  and
    accordingly in the absence of any  other  reasons  for  refusing  entry
    clearance I am satisfied that the appellant did fulfil the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

11. As I am satisfied that  she  has  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and whilst this is an appeal technically under  human
    rights grounds it follows that there is, of course, no public  interest
    in refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom  given  that  she
    meets the requirements  of  the  Rules  and  for  these  reasons  I  am
    satisfied that it would be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations
    pursuant to the Human  Rights  Convention  specifically  Article  8  to
    refuse her entry clearance to the United Kingdom and I allow the appeal
    on that basis.

12. I would however add that although this has been allowed on human rights
    basis given the finding that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    were met it would be appropriate in the circumstances for the Secretary
    of State to issue entry clearance  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements of the Rules.

    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human  rights  grounds,
    having concluded that the appellant did meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Signed   Date 11 November 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
