
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18452/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2020                            |On 30 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  miss SWA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                        Respondent/ Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Pettersen (Home Office presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Thornhill, Thornhills Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.      This is an appeal on behalf of the SSHD who is the appellant in
       this matter. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 19 August 2019
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Siddiqi (FTJ)  allowed  the  Claimant's
       appeal on human rights  grounds.  The  Claimant  applied  for  entry
       clearance as the child of a parent (her father) present and  settled
       in the UK on the grounds of sole responsibility.  The  Claimant  was
       aged 18 years at the date of the application.


    2.      In grounds of appeal the SSHD argued that  the  FTJ  failed  to
       give adequate reasons with reference to the ECO's concerns that  the
       Claimant's mother had not been mentioned  or  her  role  considered.
       There was no evidence from the mother as to consent.


    3.     The SSHD was granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Saffer on 11 November 2019.  FTJ Saffer considered that it was
       arguable that the FTJ had given inadequate  findings  regarding  the
       Claimant's mother's position or failed to explain  what  consequence
       of gravity may have befallen  the  appellant  in  the  fifteen  days
       between her application and her  18th  birthday  given  the  ongoing
       support she had.  All grounds were arguable.


    4.       The  Claimant  produced  a  Rule  24  response  opposing   the
       application.

       Discussion and decision

    5.      I have read the grounds of appeal, Rule  24  response  and  the
       decision and reasons.  I heard submissions from Miss  Pettersen  and
       from Mr Thornhill.  I decided that there was no  material  error  of
       law in the FTJ's Decision and Reasons and  it  shall  stand.   In  a
       thorough and well-reasoned decision the  FTJ  fully  considered  the
       evidence in terms of sole responsibility  and  applied  the  correct
       law.  The FTJ accepted the explanation as to the gap of some  twelve
       years when there  was  no  contact  between  the  Claimant  and  the
       sponsor, her father, but she found  that  there  had  been  frequent
       recent contact as evidenced in the sponsor's passport. The FTJ  also
       found there was evidence of financial support.  The FTJ also had  in
       mind the duties performed by the Claimant's grandmother,  but  found
       evidence to show that there was sole responsibility on the  part  of
       the sponsor.  In addition the FTJ had before her  a  medical  report
       setting out the grandmother's difficulties.


    6.     Whilst the decision  does  not  raise  any  concerns  about  the
       Claimant's 's mother, I do not consider to be a major  issue  having
       regard to the determination as a whole.  It is clear to me that some
       explanation was provided with  the  original  application  detailing
       information about the Claimant's mother.  It is not clear  that  the
       ECO  had  considered  all  of  the  documents  submitted  with   the
       application and the sponsor's  witness  statement  which  in  effect
       address the concerns raised. I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal accepted and found the evidence before her to  be  reliable
       and that included  the  sponsor's  witness  statement,  the  written
       consent from the mother, the written consent  from  the  grandmother
       and the Claimant's own witness statement.  It appears,  although  no
       finding was made in the decision, that  it  was  accepted  that  the
       Claimant's mother lived in Erbil  and  that  she  had  provided  her
       written consent to the Claimant coming to join her father in the UK.




    7.     There is no material error in law and the decision shall stand.

    8.     The appeal is dismissed.  The decision shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 24.1.2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal was allowed but the FTT made no fee award as there  was  evidence
considered at the hearing.


Signed                                  Date 24.1.2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

