
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/18027/2018
                                                               HU/18035/2018
                                                               HU/18032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th November 2019              |On 12th December 2019              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                        Anatoly [K] (first Appellant)
                       Gisselle [S] (second Appellant)
                           [C F] (third Appellant)
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Bexson, counsel instructed by GBS UK Immigration
For the Respondent:    Miss Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss their appeals in a determination promulgated on 17th June 2019.
     The underlying decision for that appeal was that of the  Secretary  of
    State's dated 16th August 2018  which  refused  their  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  their  private  life.   The
    first appellant is a national of the Ukraine born on 5th January 1987,
    the second and third were wife and child, both Chilean  nationals  born
    on 5th January 1987 and 25th May 2010.

 2. The focus of the grounds of appeal was as follows.

Ground 1

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to give adequate consideration  to
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the
    UN Convention on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  1990  which  embody  the
    principle that the best interests of the children should be  a  primary
    consideration.  The judge erred to  agree  that  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the third appellant to  return  to  Chile.   The  starting
    point was Azimi-Moayed and Others [2013] UKUT 197.  The judge  did  not
    appreciate that should the appeal not be successful the third appellant
    would not be brought up with both his parents.  The first appellant was
    from the Ukraine and the second  was  from  Chile  and  they  would  be
    removed to their respective countries  of  origin.   Respectively  they
    would not be accepted by the other's national authorities and therefore
    could not remove them.

Ground 2

 4.  The  judge  erred  in  using  the  strict  interpretation  of  the  UK
    immigration laws when finding that the Chilean legislation referred  to
    deportation.  The distinction between deportation and  removal  existed
    only in the  UK  immigration  enforcement  system.   The  international
    definition of deportation included any forced removal  of  a  foreigner
    from the territory of which he was not a national.  The appellants  had
    provided a copy of the entire Chilean immigration provision  which  did
    not refer to removal.

Ground 3

 5. The judge was in error when agreeing with the Secretary of  State  that
    the first appellant could at any point prior to  removal  apply  for  a
    Chilean spouse  visa  as  the  respondent's  policy  was  to  keep  the
    passports of failed applicants.  His Ukrainian passport  was  currently
    with the respondent and he would require his original passport to apply
    for a visa.  They could not leave voluntarily owing  to  their  limited
    funds and would have to use the Voluntary Returns Scheme.

Ground 4

 6. The appellants could not leave to reside in their respective  countries
    because they believed their lives would be in danger in the Ukraine and
    it was not in the best interests of their son.  The  first  appellant's
    account of his fear of persecution in the Ukraine was credible  and  he
    presented original documents from an Argentinian court to  confirm  his
    extradition made back in 2002.   The  appeal  determination  failed  to
    mention  the  respondent's  own  country  guidance  presented  by   the
    respondent at the hearing and the  report  confirmed  the  Ukraine  was
    still a corrupt country and adequate protection from  the  state  would
    not be forthcoming.

Ground 5

 7.  It  was  submitted  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to the first appellant's reintegration  into  the
    Ukraine.  At paragraph 50 the judge stated  the  first  appellant  left
    when he was 26 and had worked in the flooring industry.   In  fact,  he
    was only 17 and had never worked in the Ukraine and  had  not  returned
    for over twenty years.

Ground 6

 8. Paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iv) and Section 117B (6) of the Immigration  Rules
    were amalgamated into one.   The  reference  to  an  interpretation  of
    "continuous residence" was more  relevant  to  long  lawful  continuous
    residence.   There  was  provision  under  UKVI  guidance,  such   that
    discretion  could  be  exercised  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  an
    exceptional basis in relation to the third appellant's absence from the
    UK  which  was  a  good  reason  and  should  not  affect  the  child's
    continuation of residence.  The  definition  of  qualifying  child  was
    contained  in  Section  117D  and  should  not  be  confused  with  the
    definition of qualifying child under the UK Immigration Rules.  For the
    purposes of Article 8  considerations  that  the  third  appellant  was
    absent from the UK did not break the continuity of his residence.

 9. It would not be reasonable for the third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK
    because his life would be at risk should he go to the Ukraine.

10. In the case of MT and ET [2018] UKUT 88 the  Tribunal  reiterated  that
    powerful reasons were needed to remove a child after seven years.   The
    third appellant had been in the UK  for  nine  years  and  that  was  a
    lifetime and the only home he knew.  He should not be  blamed  for  the
    matters for which he was not responsible.  He left the UK when he was 2
    years and 3 months and was 2 years and 11 months when he  returned  and
    had now established his own private life.  He had been born in  the  UK
    and would be entitled to register as a British  citizen  under  Section
    1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1981 in May of next year.

11. In sum the family life of the appellants could not be preserved outside
    the UK and it was submitted that  the  determination  was  unsafe,  and
    permission was sought to appeal it.

Permission to Appeal

12. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PM
    Hollingworth on the basis that deracination (uprooting)  of  the  child
    had not been assessed sufficiently.  Permission  was  not  limited  and
    thus I conclude permission was granted on all grounds.

The First-tier Tribunal determination

13. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal recorded  the  following  evidence
    and made relevant findings: -

      i. The first appellant entered the UK on 21st November 2008  with  the
         second appellant and both were granted 24  hours  leave  whilst  in
         transit to the Ukraine.  Since that date the first appellant had no
         right to remain within the United Kingdom.  The  second  appellant,
         however, departed the UK on 20th May 2013 and re-entered the United
         Kingdom with six months' leave to enter on 20th May 2013.  Prior to
         their arrival in the UK the first and second appellants both  lived
         in Argentina.

     ii. The third appellant was born in the UK and was almost  9  years  of
         age as at the date of hearing; he attended school and was  educated
         through the medium of English.  The second appellant's evidence was
         that the third appellant could not read or write Spanish and it was
         submitted that he could not speak Russian,  Ukrainian  or  Spanish.
         They had been supported in the UK by the first appellant's  family.



    iii. The first appellant asserted he could not  return  to  the  Ukraine
         owing to an incident in 1998 when he had a fight with someone  said
         to have an affiliation with the police.  Criminal proceedings  were
         pursued, and he fled the Ukraine in  1999  and  reunited  with  his
         mother in Argentina.  He was subject  to  an  international  arrest
         warrant but that was revoked on 26th February 2002 and  extradition
         not pursued.  He states that in 2008 he sought  to  return  to  the
         Ukraine but whilst in transit called a friend who told him that the
         alleged victim was looking for him.  The judge found,  however,  at
         paragraph  29  that  the  first  appellant's  claimed  account   of
         continuing risk to be incredible and that "in 2002 the  extradition
         was not pursued as on the first appellant's evidence the  Ukrainian
         authorities did not have sufficient evidence".  The judge found the
         appellant's account of continued risk in the Ukraine was devoid  of
         a reasonable objective belief and in particular

           "It is so implausible as  to  be  incapable  of  any  reasonable
           belief that after a period  of  ten  years  the  appellant  only
           became aware of the continued risk of a precise  point  that  he
           was in transit in the UK.  It is  inconsistent  with  the  risks
           that the appellant claims that he would face within the  Ukraine
           upon return that he did not make inquiries of this friend as  to
           whether there was any continuing risk when  making  arrangements
           for his return. " [30]




     iv. The judge noted that the return to the Ukraine specifically was for
         the purpose of settlement.  As such he found no continued risk from
         the authorities in the Ukraine.

      v. The judge found the first appellant was not being deported to Chile
         and, importantly found, he could make his own way to Chile  at  any
         time.  The Secretary of State noted that Section 51 of the  Chilean
         legislation "allows the spouse of a Chilean national to apply to be
         treated as a temporary resident" and the respondent  "has  produced
         an article from Refworld which confirms the  spouse  of  a  Chilean
         national can apply for a  temporary  visa  based  on  their  family
         relationship which  after  twelve  months  can  lead  to  permanent
         residence in Chile",  [33];

     vi. The judge found the first and second appellant had lived  in  their
         countries of origin until their early 20s and would understand  the
         societal expectations of  their  country  on  return.   The  second
         appellant had family in Chile which included her mother, father and
         siblings and  the  first  appellant  had  work  experience  in  the
         flooring industry.

    vii. At least one member of the family would speak the language  of  the
         country of return and the second appellant's parents  had  property
         in Chile. Indeed,  it  was  noted  by  the  Judge  that  the  first
         appellant had lived and  worked  in  Argentina,  which  is  Spanish
         speaking.

Analysis

14. At the hearing before me Ms Bexson's  primary  argument  was  that  the
    judge had not analysed the impact on the child of removal.   The  child
    was five days off being 9 years of age and well settled in school.  The
    judge had concentrated on the  parents'  immigration  history  and  the
    reference to Article 8 was cursory.  The judge had not considered  that
    the parents would be separated.  Deportation and removal existed in the
    UK and although there was no direct evidence on  the  voluntary  return
    according to Chilean legislation, if someone had to leave,  they  would
    be considered to have been deported.  There was  a  possibility  of  an
    indefinite period of separation.

15. The first appellant still believed he was at risk in the  Ukraine  but,
    when asked, she accepted had not claimed asylum.  There was an error in
    relation to the continuous residence of the  third  appellant  who  had
    returned to Chile for eight months to secure a Chilean passport  and  a
    failure to consider that they had to apply  to  the  Family  Court  for
    various documents which prolonged  this  period.   There  had  been  no
    proper analysis as to whether it was reasonable for the child to return
    and the judge had not considered integration in the UK.  There  was  no
    consideration of how the third appellant could adapt, bearing  in  mind
    it was in his interests to be with both parents.  Next year in  May  he
    would be entitled to make an application  under  Section  1(4)  of  the
    British Nationality Act for British nationality.

16. Miss Bassi submitted that there was only one definition  of  continuous
    residence and that came from paragraph 276A.  The judge had  adequately
    considered the best interests  of  the  child,  who  was  found  to  be
    adaptable and could learn with the assistance of his parents.

17. There was no expert evidence of what deportation meant (see section  B,
    page 58 of the Appellant's bundle which was an  unofficial  translation
    of the extracts of the Legal and Regulatory Texts from the Republica de
    Chile Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores).  The judge  considered  the
    Sections as to removal and even if it did  include  removal  the  first
    appellant could apply for a visa as he held  a  passport  which  was  a
    practical,  rather  than  a   technical   problem   preventing   family
    unification.  There had been no communication to the Secretary of State
    to inquire if a passport would be released and the respondent relied on
    a Refworld report that only a photocopy was required for a  visa.   The
    findings were open to  the  judge  regarding  fear  of  return  to  the
    Ukraine.  The grounds were nothing more than a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's finding.

Analysis

18. Taking each point in turn the judge appropriately directed  himself  in
    relation to the approach to the best interests of the  child.   He  set
    out at paragraph 17 the requirements in relation to the best  interests
    of the child directing himself appropriately that they were  a  primary
    consideration although they would not always  determine  the  decision,
    but no other factor should be given more  weight.   In  particular  the
    judge identified ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4) and Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC
    74.  Indeed, that direction was acknowledged by the grounds of  appeal.
    Bearing in mind the later findings of the judge it is not arguable that
    the third appellant would not be brought up with both of  his  parents.
    At paragraph 38 the judge accepted that there would be an  interruption
    to the third appellant's education but noted that his schooling was not
    at a "critical stage, he was at primary school at the age of  9  years,
    and as recorded above would be  able  to  learn  the  language  of  the
    country of return with the assistance of his parents".

19. Although there was a specific section on  the  best  interests  of  the
    child,  the  findings  on  his  interests  were  woven  throughout  the
    determination and it was accepted that other than  a  period  of  eight
    months the third appellant had always lived  within  the  UK.   It  was
    accepted that the child was a Chilean  national  and  that  he  had  an
    extended family within  Chile  which  included  maternal  grandparents,
    uncles, aunts and cousins.  He was found to be of an adaptable age  and
    he would be able to learn the cultural and societal expectations of him
    of the country of return with the assistance of his  parents  within  a
    reasonably short period of his return and further he would be  able  to
    learn the language.   The  judge  specifically  noted  that  the  child
    appellant could not be said to be at a critical stage of his  education
    and that his primary focus was on his  parents  and  himself.   It  was
    accepted that he may have made friends within school, but he would have
    the benefit of

         "Being brought up and educated  in  Chile  being  the  culture  and
         society to which he belongs as a Chilean citizen.  There  are  also
         benefits in the third appellant being brought up in Chile given the
         familial relations that he has within that country.  I accept  that
         there will be an interruption in the continuity of the  appellant's
         education.  However, the third appellant is of an adaptable age and
         will be able to learn the language of the country of return".

20. That was an adequate assessment of the best interests of the child  and
    appropriate weight has been given to the welfare and interests of D, as
    a primary consideration. The judge was aware of the length of time that
    the child had spent in the United Kingdom and that is since  May  2013.
    He was not a qualifying child.  The child had not spent seven years  in
    the UK.

21. The term of continuous residence derives  from  the  Immigration  Rules
    under paragraph 276A

    276A.  For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE(1).

           (a)   "continuous  residence"  means  residence  in  the  United
                Kingdom for an unbroken period, and  for  these  purposes  a
                period shall not be considered to have been broken where  an
                applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for a period  of
                6 months  or  less  at  any  one  time,  provided  that  the
                applicant in question has existing limited leave to enter or
                remain  upon  their  departure  and  return,  but  shall  be
                considered to have been broken if the applicant:

                (i)    has been removed under Schedule 2 of  the  1971  Act,
                    section 10 of the 1999 Act, has  been  deported  or  has
                    left the United Kingdom having  been  refused  leave  to
                    enter or remain here; or

                (ii)   has  left  the  United  Kingdom  and,  on  doing  so,
                    evidenced a clear intention not to return; or

                (iii)  left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which  he
                    could have had no reasonable expectation at the time  of
                    leaving that he would lawfully be able to return; or

                (iv)   has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced to
                    a period of imprisonment or was directed to be  detained
                    in an institution other than  a  prison  (including,  in
                    particular, a  hospital  or  an  institution  for  young
                    offenders), provided that the sentence in  question  was
                    not a suspended sentence; or

                (v)    has spent a total of more than 18 months absent  from
                    the United Kingdom during the period in question.

22. Even within that definition any continuous residence for  the  purposes
    of lawful residence would not have been broken where the  applicant  is
    absent from the UK for a period of six months or less at any one  time.
    There is no similar provision under Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act but any rights that the child would have had
    would have been extinguished on his departure from the UK in 2012.   It
    appears that the family was remaining in the UK unlawfully  until  2012
    and indeed the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  recognise
    that the couple sought legal advice about regularising  their  stay  in
    the UK.  At best they had precarious leave, if that.  Thus, albeit that
    the child was born in the United Kingdom his residence for the purposes
    of being a qualified child recommenced only on 20th May 2013.   He  had
    not by the date of the application (for purposes  of  276ADE(1)(iv)  or
    for the purposes of Section 117) as at the date of the hearing been  in
    the United Kingdom for seven years.  Indeed, as the judge  acknowledged
    the second appellant had no lawful right to remain within the UK  since
    her expiry of leave to enter for a period  of  six  months  and  it  is
    inconceivable that the child would have  any  lawful  right  to  remain
    either.

23. Crucially the judge identified the  focus  of  the  child  was  on  his
    parents, rather than his peers and the judge found on cogent  reasoning
    that the best interests of the child were to be in  Chile.   (Paragraph
    46).

24. I pointed out at the hearing that an application in relation to Section
    1(4) of the British Nationality Act will not apply where the child  has
    been outside the country, as it is acknowledged, for more than 90  days
    as regard each of the first ten years of his life.

25. Section 1(4) of the British Nationality Act confirms: -

             'A person born in the United Kingdom after commencement who is
             not a British citizen by virtue of subsection (1), (1A) or (2)
             shall be entitled, on an application for his registration as a
             British citizen made at any time after he has attained the age
             of ten years, to be  registered  as  such  a  citizen  if,  as
             regards each of the first ten years of that person's life, the
             number of days on which he was absent from the United  Kingdom
             in that year does not exceed 90'.

26. For that reason I find that the contention  that  the  child  would  be
    entitled to register as a British citizen was ill founded and there was
    no supporting reason that the child should be treated differently  from
    a child who had arrived in the UK in 2013.  Simply he would not be able
    to apply for citizenship until 2023.

27. As the child was not a qualifying child for  the  purposes  of  Section
    117D and Section 117B (6), MA Pakistan and the  Upper  Tribunal  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 has no bite.  Even MA survives KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53
    there is no requirement in these circumstances because  the  child  has
    not been in the UK for seven years that "powerful reasons are needed to
    justify removal of the  child".   As  I  have  pointed  out  the  judge
    specifically found that it was in the best interests of the child to go
    to Chile.

28. The argument put forward was that the child  could  not  relocate  with
    both of his parents.  Putting aside for one  moment  the  arguments  in
    relation to the Ukraine it was open to the judge to find that the first
    appellant could relocate to Chile.  There was no  argument  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant would be unable  to  obtain  his
    original passport and as Miss Bassi  pointed  out  there  had  been  no
    application for his passport from the Home Office and that  a  Refworld
    Report confirmed that only a photocopy of his passport was required  in
    order to make an application for a visa for Chile.

29. At paragraph 33 it  was  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    interpret  the  Sections  in  relation  to  Chilean  law  as  he   did,
    particularly bearing in mind  the  absence  of  any  expert  report  on
    Chilean law and the unofficial translation to which  he  was  referred.
    Moreover,  the  judge  identified  the  article  from  Refworld   which
    confirmed that the spouse of a  Chilean  national  could  apply  for  a
    temporary visa based upon their family relationship which after  twelve
    months could lead to a permanent  residence  in  Chile.   There  is  no
    requirement for the family to wait until removal and the mere assertion
    by the appellants that they did  not  have  the  funds  to  voluntarily
    return did not meet the exacting standard and threshold  to  show  very
    significant obstacles to return, and a bare assertion that there is  no
    one to support will not meet the evidential standard R (Parveen) [2018]
    EWCA Civ 932. The judge  had  noted  that  the  appellants  were  being
    supported by family.

30. The judge made a detailed analysis of  Section  27(3)  of  the  Chilean
    legislation  and  notwithstanding  the  judge  found  that  "the  first
    appellant could at any time prior to such removal  apply  for  a  Chile
    spousal visa and return to Chile with the second  and  third  appellant
    who are Chilean nationals", the judge specifically found

         "I do not accept that the family could not afford flights to  Chile
         on the basis that the second and  third  appellants  have  returned
         previously.  For these reasons I find against the appellants' claim
         that the Chilean immigration legislation would  prevent  the  first
         appellant returning to Chile with the second and  third  appellant"
         (paragraph 34).

    Those adequately reasoned findings were entirely open to the judge  and
    not characterised by any error of law.

31. The judge also noted that there had been no asylum claim in relation to
    return Ukraine but moreover found  the  first  appellant's  account  in
    relation to his return to the Ukraine inherently unbelievable.  It  was
    not only that the first appellant failed to make an  asylum  claim  but
    additionally, the judge considered his claim in relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE  and  concluded  that  there  was  no  risk  because  the  first
    appellant's account was not  credible,  having  related  that  he  only
    became aware of the continued risk of  the  precise  point  he  was  in
    transit in the UK.  Once again that conclusion  was  entirely  open  to
    him.

32. The judge when considering very significant obstacles did err, but  not
    materially, when he concluded that the first appellant was  26,  rather
    than 17 when he left the Ukraine, but was correct in stating  that  the
    appellant had worked  in  the  flooring  industry  and  did  not  refer
    specifically to the Ukraine.  I note that the first appellant lived  in
    Argentina where they speak Spanish.

33. With all three appellants the judge considered whether there  were  any
    very significant obstacles  to  their  return,  identifying  none.   He
    acknowledged that the conduct of the parents should not be  visited  on
    the child and there is no evidence in the decision that he did so.   He
    did however consider the circumstances of  the  appellant  against  the
    background of KO Nigeria (albeit that Section 117B (6) does not  appear
    to apply here).  Even if it did, as set out at paragraph 19 of KO

    '19.   He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar  point  in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

             "58.      In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the
                  best interests of the children must be made on  the  basis
                  that the facts are as they are in the real world.  If  one
                  parent has no right to remain, but the other parent  does,
                  that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then
                  that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted. Thus, the ultimate  question  will  be:  is  it
                  reasonable to expect the child to follow the  parent  with
                  no right to remain to the country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves.

34. Overall it is not even arguable that the  impact  of  "deracination  or
    uprooting has not been  sufficiently  assessed  against  the  level  of
    integration attained in the United Kingdom".

35. The judge  made  a  proper  assessment  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    paragraph 53, finding no very significant obstacles to their return  to
    Chile and the Ukraine and there is no indication that he failed to take
    a broad and evaluative approach to their  integration.   He  found  the
    appellants financially self-sufficient, no evidence to suggest that the
    first appellant spoke English and it was open to the judge to  find  as
    he did at paragraph  62  that  private  life  was  developed  when  the
    appellants' status in the UK was either precarious or unlawful and  for
    those reasons little weight was to be attached to their  private  life.
    Not least they would be able to work in Chile on return and be able  to
    support  themselves.   As  such  he  applied  Section   117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and approached the  appeal
    without material error and  it  was  open  to  him  to  find  that  the
    "balancing exercise that must be conducted in  relation  to  Article  8
    weighs  in  favour  of  the  respondent's  policy  aim  of   legitimate
    immigration control".  The only finding of the  judge  which  may  have
    erred was in relation to Section 117B (6) in determining that the child
    was a qualifying child.  That however  was  to  the  advantage  of  the
    appellants and  the  judge  made  the  specific  finding  that  it  was
    reasonable for the third appellant to leave the UK.

36. I find no material error in the decision and it will stand.

37. The appeal remains dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 9th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

