
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18108/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 March 2021                            |On 24 March 2021               |
|                                            |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Ikram Ul-Haq
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 31 October 2019 to maintain her decision to deport him  and  not  to
    revoke her deportation order on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He came to the United  Kingdom
    lawfully in 2012, to join his wife, bringing with him their  baby  son.
    The couple have  another  child  born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Both
    children, and the appellant's wife, are  British  citizens  now.    The
    elder child has been diagnosed with autistic spectrum disorder.

 3. The appellant is a foreign criminal, having  been  convicted  in  April
    2019 of a sexual grooming offence involving what he thought was a  girl
    younger than 13 years old.   He  is  required  to  meet  the  reporting
    obligations of the Sexual Offences Register indefinitely,  and  is  the
    subject of a Sexual Harm Prevention Order, again indefinite.  He is not
    permitted to work  with  children  or  to  reside  with  his  wife  and
    children.

 4. Service.  The appellant did not attend the hearing today,  nor  has  he
    arranged for representation.  I  am  satisfied  that  he  was  properly
    served with notice of hearing at his last known address and that it  is
    appropriate to proceed with the hearing in his absence.

 5. Mode of hearing.  This hearing took place by Skype for  Business,  with
    the  consent  of  both  parties  given  in  their  response  to  triage
    directions by Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt.  A  Punjabi  interpreter  was
    available for the hearing, as for the First-tier Tribunal hearing,  but
    was not used as the appellant did not attend.

 6. Evidence before the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant  has  filed  no  new
    evidence or skeleton argument for the Upper Tribunal hearing.   I  have
    considered all the material in the First-tier Tribunal bundle  (whether
    referred to in this decision or not), but in  particular,  the  witness
    statements  of  the  appellant  and  his  wife,  supporting   character
    references prepared for the criminal  sentence  but  included  in  this
    bundle, the sentencing remarks of Miss Recorder Mustafa, a January 2020
    OASys  report,  and  evidence  regarding  the  circumstances   of   the
    appellant's son's autistic  spectrum  disorder  and  associated  vision
    problems.  I have also had regard to the evidence recorded in the First-
    tier Tribunal decision, but not to the conclusions drawn therefrom.

Background

 7. The appellant and his wife met in  Pakistan  and  married  there  on  9
    August 2009. Their first child, a son, was born to them on 2  September
    2011.  The wife was granted entry clearance as a Tier 1 General Migrant
    and came to the United Kingdom on 24 December 2011.  The appellant  and
    his four month old son were refused entry  clearance  and  remained  in
    Pakistan. They were not able to join  her  until  6  May  2012.   Their
    second child, a daughter, was born on 13 August 2014.

 8. The wife later became settled, and in due course,  a  British  citizen.
    The appellant became settled in the United Kingdom on 15  August  2017.
    The wife has studied for social work qualifications.  Her final  course
    of study was for a Master's Degree in Social Work, which was due to  be
    completed in September 2020.

 9. On 18 April 2019, the  appellant  was  convicted  of  attempted  sexual
    grooming of a child under 13 contrary  to  section  15  of  the  Sexual
    Offences Act 2003, the offence being committed between 18 and 26 August
    2018.  The child in question was a decoy profile and the person was  an
    adult. The appellant pleaded not guilty, but when convicted he did  not
    appeal either the conviction or the sentence.

10. The sentence imposed was 20 months' imprisonment, with credit for  time
    spent on an electronic tag.  The appellant was granted bail in December
    2019 but remains under licence and cannot live with his  own  children.
    He is permitted supervised contact only.

11. On 15 May 2019, the appellant was served with a decision to deport  him
    to Pakistan, which he challenged on human rights  grounds.   The  human
    rights claim was refused on 31 October 2019.

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. In August 2020, the appellant refused an offer of voluntary  return  to
    Pakistan.  As far as the respondent knows, he  remains  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

First-tier Tribunal decision

14. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

15. On 6 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission to appeal
    on the basis that the son's autistic spectrum disorder arguably had not
    been considered properly in the First-tier Judge's  decision  and  that
    there was  no  finding  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's son, or his wife, to join him in Pakistan, after  the  wife
    completed her degree studies in the United Kingdom.

16. On 15 September 2020 the respondent filed a Rule  24  Reply,  conceding
    that the First-tier Judge had failed to consider expressly  whether  it
    would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife   and   children,
    particularly his autistic 9 year old son, to join him in Pakistan if he
    were returned there, or to make a finding  as  to  whether  there  were
    'very  compelling  circumstances'  engaging  section  117C(6)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended),  which
    outweighed the public interest in deportation.

Upper Tribunal proceedings

17. By a decision dated 19  November  2020,  I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision in this appeal, to be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal.
    I did so without an oral hearing:   my decision preceded  the  judgment
    of Mr Justice Fordham in Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants  v
    The President of UTIAC [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) which was  handed  down
    the following day.

18. Neither party has applied to reopen the error of law decision:  it  was
    common ground that the First-tier Judge had erred in law in failing  to
    consider 'very  compelling  circumstances'  as  an  issue  or  to  make
    findings on whether it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant's  wife
    and children to join him in Pakistan.

19. I gave directions that either party could, if so advised, file  updated
    witness statements or further evidence.  Neither  party  has  done  so.
    There was also a direction for skeleton arguments, but  none  has  been
    received.

20. A Punjabi interpreter was  booked  for  the  resumed  hearing  and  was
    available.  The appellant did not appear.

21. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal
    for remaking today.

Sentencing remarks

22. The appellant was assisted by an interpreter at the sentencing hearing,
    and was allowed to remain seated  during  the  sentencing  remarks,  to
    enable the interpreter to translate, standing  only  for  the  sentence
    itself.  In her  sentencing  remarks,  Miss  Recorder  Mustafa  took  a
    serious view of the offence, although it was uncompleted:

         "The difficulty, Mr Malik, with this type of offending is that  had
         this not been a decoy [profile], that the text messaging  seems  to
         indicate  that  you  would  have  been  willing  to   have   sexual
         relationships with someone under 13.   And   I  accept  that  I  am
         sentencing you for an attempted matter, and I take account of that,
         rather than the full offence."

23. The judge noted that when  arrested,  the  appellant  had  four  mobile
    phones in his car, two of which could not be examined.   There  was  no
    other person in the car.  She took into account that the appellant  was
    a 42-year old man who had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  seven  years
    earlier and had two very young children.  He had worked hard, with  two
    jobs, as a taxi  driver  and  a  care  worker.   There  were  character
    references.  The judge concluded:

         "The sentencing guidelines for meeting  a  child  following  sexual
         grooming, maximum sentence is 10 years' custody, and I have to look
         at seriousness and in determining seriousness, I consider that this
         is a category  2  offence  because  there  is  raised  culpability.
         Because throughout the communication that you made with the [decoy]
         person  called  Chloe,  you  indicated  that,  from    your   side,
         penetrative sexual activity is intended. And  for  category  2  the
         starting point is 2 years'  custody.   There  are  no  ...statutory
         aggravating features but you did try and lay the  blame  elsewhere.
         I do take on board that you have  no  previous  convictions.   That
         people speak highly about you and I reduce the sentence to  reflect
         that and also to reflect the fact that a  custodial  sentence  will
         have a  significant  effect  on  your  family  circumstances,  your
         ability to work, and your immigration  status."

24. In addition to the  20  months'  imprisonment  imposed,  the  appellant
    became  subject  indefinitely  both  to  the  Sex  Offenders   Register
    notification requirements and to a Sexual Harm Prevention Order imposed
    pursuant to  section  103A  of  the  Sexual  Offences  Act  2003.   The
    appellant was disqualified from working with children for life.



Appellant's evidence

Appellant's witness statement

25. In his witness statement dated 30 January 2020, the appellant said that
    his son was now in year 3 at the local primary school, and his daughter
    was in Reception.  His son remained diagnosed  with  autistic  spectrum
    disorder, which affected his vision as well as  his  daily  life.   The
    appellant's wife had been fully responsible for the children's  welfare
    while  he  was  in  prison,  including  taking  the  boy  to  opticians
    appointments and speech and language therapy sessions,  to  assist  his
    development.

26. Although the appellant had been released on bail in December  2019,  he
    was not working and, as his wife was studying, he had  previously  been
    the main breadwinner.  They were fully  reliant  on  benefits  and  the
    appellant's wife found it very difficult to cope with the  boy  in  his
    absence.  He was not living in the same house as his wife and  children
    and was not permitted unsupervised contact with the children, which had
    a significant impact on their family  life  together.   There  were  no
    family members in  the  United  Kingdom  to  assist  them,  except  the
    appellant's brother,  who  was  a  British  citizen  with  two  British
    children.  His brother had his own financial commitments but  was  able
    to provide the appellant's wife with emotional support.

27. The appellant expressed regret for the index offence but did  not  seek
    to suggest that he had not committed it, in contrast to what is said in
    the OASys report.   He said that his wife had invested a  lot  of  time
    and money in pursuing her career, to qualify as a social worker.   Such
    employment opportunities were not available for her  in  Pakistan.   It
    was in the best interests of the  children  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her and for the family to be together.

28. The witness statement is signed, but contains no  explanation  how  the
    appellant understood it, as his English is said to  be  poor.   In  his
    absence, I give it such weight as I can.

Wife's witness statement

29. The appellant's wife made a witness  statement  on  the  same  day,  30
    January 2020.  She was not working: she had her studies  and  was  also
    the primary carer of the children.  She said it was difficult  for  her
    to manage their son's needs alone, without the practical and  emotional
    support of her husband.

30. Her husband had become involved in  the  wrong  circles,  hence  'these
    unfortunate circumstances'.  He had deep regrets about his  involvement
    in the offence which was an isolated event.  Mrs  Bibi  said  that  the
    appellant had been travelling with another friend, who asked for a lift
    to Newcastle, 4 hours away, and borrowed the appellant's mobile  phone,
    inserting his own SIM card into that phone.   When  the  appellant  was
    arrested, he was alone and the SIM from the other person was  still  in
    his phone.  Ms Bibi considered that the appellant had  been  wrongfully
    convicted.

31. The family's lives had been turned upside down.  They  were  living  on
    universal credit and the medical condition of their son placed enormous
    pressure on the appellant's wife, without the help of  family  members.
    The family had lost their home  and  were  in  temporary  accommodation
    provided by Slough Council from 10 December 2018.

32. Mrs Bibi said that she was happy to accept supervised  contact  between
    her husband and the children until he was  'fully  recovered'  and  was
    considered safe around the children.  Since his release on licence, the
    appellant was having supervised contact with  the  children,  but  also
    helping her by dropping the children off to school with her,  attending
    hospital appointments, grocery shopping and domestic chores.  It is not
    clear whether this fits within the concept of 'supervised  contact'  or
    whether the probation service, or social services, are  aware  of  this
    additional involvement.

33. Mrs Bibi asserted that it would breach the family's human rights if her
    husband were removed to the United Kingdom as he had a stable job  (she
    did not say whether she meant as a carer or taxi driver) which was  the
    family's main source of income: such employment opportunities were  not
    easily accessible in Pakistan.

34. It would be unduly harsh for the family to relocate to  Pakistan  given
    that they had developed a strong United  Kingdom  private  life.    Mrs
    Bibi asked that the appeal be allowed.

Other evidence

35. I am entitled to have regard to the evidence which the parties gave  in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal,  although  not  to  the  conclusions   drawn
    therefrom.   There  is  not  much  evidence  recorded,  save  that  the
    appellant's wife had  some  help  from  her  brother-in-law  while  the
    appellant was in prison.

36. There are also some character references.

          i) Appellant's elder brother.  On 23 May  2019,  the  appellant's
             elder brother Ihsan Ul-Haq said that he was a British citizen,
             living in the United Kingdom for over 19 years, and  a  single
             father of two children born in  2013  and  2015,  following  a
             divorce.  The appellant had  been  'a  massive  emotional  and
             financial support' during a  traumatic  period  and  played  a
             vital role in his well being, helping with the children.   The
             appellant often did shopping for  his  brother's  family,  and
             bought them gifts.




             The two families went out together and  the  appellant's  wife
             cooked for the brother's family.  The appellant was  the  only
             family member his brother had in the United  Kingdom,  and  he
             shared his problems.   If  the  appellant  were  removed,  his
             brother would  be  left  alone,  and  his  mental  health  and
             emotional well being would suffer.  He would be unable to look
             after his children.  It would  be  another  emotional  trauma,
             affecting the brother's family badly.



         ii) Former client (caring work).  An undated email from Mr Jeffrey
             Day stated that the appellant was his late father's  principal
             carer from 2015-2016.  His father declined rapidly  after  the
             appellant left and died in 2017.  The appellant  attended  the
             funeral.


        iii) Local acquaintance.  Ms Sarah Green says  on  18  March  2019,
             that she had known the  appellant  for  about  a  year  as  an
             acquaintance in the local community.  She found  him  'polite,
             trustworthy and honest'.




         iv) Friend from Pakistan.  On 6 March 2019, Mr Muhammad Wasim said
             that he  was  a  friend  from  Pakistan,  and  had  known  the
             appellant for nearly 10 years.  He considered the appellant to
             be a person of  strong  character  and  did  not  believe  the
             allegations.  The appellant was a caring man, who  would  help
             anyone, whether he knew them or not.  He was happy to give the
             appellant any kind of reference.

37. These are the references considered by the sentencing  judge,  who  was
    unable to give them much weight.   The judge also mentioned  two  other
    references, one from a Ms Dix, who had got into the appellant's taxi in
    a distressed state and been unable to pay her fare.  The appellant  did
    not charge her: she paid him later, and spoke highly of him.   Finally,
    Mr Tony Johnston, a managing partner at 'one of your employers'  valued
    his services and would be happy to offer him work when he was released.



Evidence concerning the appellant's son

38. The appellant's  bundle  contains  a  number  of  documents  concerning
    appointments with Berkshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust for  speech
    and language therapy.  An initial appointment was offered in July 2015,
    and a further appointment was missed in January 2016.  An ophthalmology
    appointment was offered for July 2018.

39. In October 2016, just after the boy had started primary school  in  the
    Reception Class, Slough Borough  Council  commissioned  an  Educational
    Psychologist  report,  prepared  by  Ms  Hannah   Brooks,   under   the
    supervision of  a  Supervising  Educational  Psychologist,  Ms  Chelsea
    Barnes.  Ms Brooks was awaiting Health  and  Care  Professions  Council
    registration, which was the reason  she  had  supervision.   Ms  Barnes
    countersigned the report.

40. Ms Brooks saw the appellant's son, his class teacher, and  his  Special
    Educational Needs coordinator on 5 October 2016.  The child was just  5
    years old: his birthday is in early September and it  would  have  been
    about a month into his first term at  school.    He  was  in  Reception
    Class.  Ms Brooks recorded that the appellant's son had a diagnosis  of
    autistic spectrum disorder and the purpose of the report was to  ensure
    that he was being appropriately supported within  the  Reception  Class
    setting at his school.

41. The boy was reported to have difficulty following routines and engaging
    appropriately with others, but had  settled  well  into  the  Reception
    Class setting and his class teacher had 'no specific concerns regarding
    [his] progress and development within his reception class'.  Ms Brooks'
    report concluded:

         "[He] is a much loved member of  [the]  Reception  Class.   He  has
         settled in well;  confidently  navigating  the  Reception  learning
         environment, responding to adult  led  instructions  and  appearing
         happy.  He has been observed to  play  and  interact  appropriately
         with his peers and is currently achieving at the expected level for
         his age.  [He] makes best use of the Reception learning environment
         and responds well to visuals, praise and modelled examples.   [His]
         use of language should be  monitored  and  he  would  benefit  from
         participating in a small speech and language group with a focus  on
         expressive language skills.  He seems to have  some  sensory  needs
         with regard to oral stimulation  and  is  likely  to  benefit  from
         access to a chewy key ring.  Overall, [he] is making good  progress
         in his Reception class and  will  benefit  from  continued  support
         through the use of quality teaching approaches within a whole class
         setting."

    The Educational Psychologist report  was  to  be  shared  with  parents
    through a copy Record of Involvement.

42. There is no more recent information  regarding  the  boy's  educational
    development, although he will be 10  years  old  in  September  and  is
    approaching the age where he would move into  secondary  education.   I
    take account of the assertion, in both the witness statements, that  he
    continues to have difficulties.  However, neither the appellant nor Mrs
    Bibi gives much detail and there is no updated professional  assessment
    of the child's needs.

OASys Report 29 January 2020

43. An OASys report was finalised the day before the witness statements  of
    the appellant and his wife.  The writer presented a  different  picture
    of the couple from that depicted in their witness statements signed the
    next day: the appellant  continued  to  deny  his  offending  behaviour
    during the assessment, and said that he intended to  appeal,  which  in
    the event, it seems he did not.  The  writer  also  expressed  concerns
    that the appellant's wife maintained that  he  had  not  committed  the
    offence and might,  therefore,  present  a  safeguarding  risk  to  the
    children.

44. The appellant had complained of language  barriers  during  the  police
    interview, and false information about incriminating information on his
    phone.   He was engaging positively with Probation  and  had  confirmed
    that the would comply with his licence requirements when released,  and
    any programmes or intervention work which his sentence  plan  required.
    It was not possible to understand his motivation for  offending,  given
    that he still denied the offence. His mental health was good and he was
    not experiencing any emotional issues in prison.

45. The appellant was  assessed  to  present  a  medium  risk  to  his  own
    children:

         "Whilst there is no current evidence to  suggest  that  [he]  would
         target his own children to fulfil  his  sexual  desires,  there  is
         enough of a concern at this  stage  to  suggest  that  [he]  has  a
         possible  preference  for  children  and  in   particular,   female
         children.  The nature of the risk towards his children is  assessed
         to be that of physical harm, whereby it is possible  and  plausible
         for a situation to unfold whereby his sexual desires and urges  are
         needed to be met and takes the advantage of his young  children  to
         meet those needs.  Emotional harm would also be likely to occur ...
         "

46. The OASys  report  records  that  the  appellant  was  prohibited  from
    contacting any child under the  age  of  16.    His  former  care  work
    employment was no longer considered suitable and he would  be  assisted
    to explore different areas of work and to obtain  qualifications  which
    would make him more employable.

47. The appellant's wife did not accept that he had committed  the  offence
    of which he was convicted,  which  was  considered  to  be  'likely  to
    distort  her  judgment  of  being  able  to  safeguard   her   children
    effectively'.   Probation, the police and  children's  social  services
    were involved. A social worker was meeting the appellant's  wife  every
    four weeks to ensure the safeguarding of the children.

48. The appellant's wife's  address  was  not  suitable  for  him,  as  the
    children lived there, and because of  the  concerns  about  the  wife's
    ability to safeguard the children, given that she did not  believe  the
    offence had been committed.   In this context, the  evidence  that  the
    wife gives in her witness statement about the  appellant  dropping  the
    children off at school with her, attending hospital appointments, doing
    grocery shopping and domestic chores for  her  is  relevant.    If  the
    appellant or his wife had appeared at the hearing, I would  have  asked
    them more about this.

49. The writer of the OASys report noted that  Slough  Children's  Services
    would manage and monitor the safeguarding of the  appellant's  children
    and the appellant's supervision with his children.  A Children in  Need
    review had been set for Wednesday 15 January 2020 at the primary school
    attended by the children.   No copy of that is in the bundle.

Appellant's arguments.

50. For the respondent, Ms Everett relied on the Rule 24 Reply.

51. Absent any appearance by or on behalf of the appellant,  I  have  taken
    his arguments to be those in his Upper Tribunal grounds of appeal.  The
    appellant notes that the respondent has accepted that he has a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with his children, and  also  that
    the relationship with his wife is genuine and subsisting. He  is  truly
    remorseful for his offence.   This is a first and only offence  by  the
    appellant and he seeks a second chance.

52. The appellant says that evidence will be provided 'closer to the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing' which I take to mean the  remaking  hearing,  to
    confirm why it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  British
    children to move to Pakistan with him.    He asserts  that  the  United
    Kingdom is the only place where family life can be enjoyed as a  close-
    knit family.

53. The appellant's case is that his removal would both  breach  Article  8
    ECHR by breaking up his family, and not be in the best interests of his
    children pursuant  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.   He asserts that he plays 'a pinnacle  role'  in
    the lives of both children.

Analysis

54. I accept that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with his wife, and with both his children.  He has  not  been  able  to
    live in the same family unit with them since he was  imprisoned  almost
    two years ago now and, at least in the United Kingdom, he  is  unlikely
    to be able to do so  during  the  rest  of  their  childhood.   He  was
    released on licence in December 2019 and the most recent statements are
    dated 30 January 2020.  There is nothing before the Tribunal to say how
    things have progressed since then.

55. There is no up to date evidence about the autistic spectrum disorder of
    the appellant's son, who is now  9�  years  old.    The  last  external
    evidence about him dates from just after  his  5th  birthday.   Despite
    their protestations,  the  appellant's  wife  and  his  divorced  elder
    brother, who have two daughters and two sons between them, were able to
    support each other while the appellant  was  in  prison.   His  brother
    seems to have managed with his own children also.

56. I remind myself that the structured approach  to  be  undertaken  by  a
    Tribunal considering an  Article  8  ECHR  appeal  in  the  context  of
    deportation begins and ends with part 5A of the 2002 Act:   see  Binaku
    (s.11 TCEA; s.117C NIAA; para. 399D) [2021] UKUT 34 (IAC) at [9] in the
    judicial headnote.

57. Section 117B is not applicable here.  The appellant  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom legally throughout until the making of  the  deportation
    order.  Section 117B(6) does not apply to deportation cases.

58. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) applies to this  appeal.   Section  117C(1)  states  that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the  public  interest.   Section
    117C(2) says that the more serious the offence, the greater the  public
    interest in deportation.   Section 117C(3) establishes that  the  pubic
    interest requires deportation unless either Exception 1 or Exception  2
    applies.

59. At section 117C(6), there is a further consideration: where  a  foreign
    criminal has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of more than  4
    years, 'the public interest requires deportation unless there are  very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions
    1 and 2'.  NA (Pakistan) & Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 held that the purpose of section 117C(6)
    was to ensure that in every foreign criminal  case,  not  merely  'four
    years or more' cases, Part 5A of the 2002 Act did not operate in such a
    way as to cause a violation of Article 8 ECHR.

60. Exception 1 is not  applicable  here.    The  appellant  has  not  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life.  When  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 May 2012, he was  already  34  years
    old and he has been here now for just under 9 years.

61. Exception 2 applies: it is accepted that the appellant  has  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with both a qualifying partner and his  two
    qualifying children.  The question for  the  Tribunal  is  whether  the
    effect of his deportation on his  partner  or  his  children  would  be
    unduly harsh.  I remind myself that the appellant said he would  supply
    further evidence before the remaking hearing on this point, but he  has
    chosen not to do so.  I also take account that the appellant's wife and
    children, who are all British citizens, cannot be expected or  required
    to go to Pakistan if he is deported: if they do choose to do  so,  that
    would be a matter for them all as a family.

62. The evidence before me does not establish that it would be unduly harsh
    for the appellant's wife and two  children  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  They are all British  citizens  and  she  has  completed  her
    Masters'  degree  course  in  Social  Work.   She  is  an  intelligent,
    qualified woman who would be able to obtain employment and support  the
    family, with the help of  her  brother-in-law.   The  children  are  in
    school and support for the autistic spectrum disorder of the older  boy
    has been in place since he began primary school.

63. The quality of family life is reduced  because  the  appellant  is  not
    currently permitted while in the United Kingdom to  live  in  the  same
    house as his wife and children, and has only supervised access  to  the
    children, a  situation  which  is  not  likely  to  change,  given  his
    conviction.  The support he provided to his brother and  his  brother's
    children will also have been affected as the appellant is not permitted
    to  be  in  unsupervised  contact  with  any  child  under  16.     The
    appellant's children are therefore in the sole care  of  their  mother,
    and that would not change if the appellant were to be  removed  without
    them.  That would not, I find, be 'unduly harsh' on the facts.

64. If the appellant's wife and children were willing and able to accompany
    him to Pakistan, the proscription on his living with the  rest  of  his
    family would presumably be  inoperative  there.   It  is  difficult  to
    assess whether that would be in the children's best interests, but that
    would be a matter for the appellant and his wife to consider.  It would
    certainly be no worse than the  wife  and  children  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom without him.  There is no evidence before me, apart from
    assertions by the appellant and his wife,  that  the  relatively  minor
    difficulties which the appellant's son has could not be treated  there.
    I do not find that this option would be unduly harsh for the appellant,
    his wife or the children.

65. I consider next whether the appellant has shown that  there  are  'very
    compelling circumstances' engaging section 117C(6), which outweigh  the
    public interest  in  deporting  the  appellant  after  such  a  serious
    offence.   The  assertion  that  there  are   such   circumstances   is
    unparticularised  but  presumably  refers  to  the  autistic   spectrum
    disorder of the appellant's son.  Given the paucity of  evidence  about
    any difficulties he has, I find that  'very  compelling  circumstances'
    are not made out in this appeal.

66. The appeal cannot succeed and I dismiss it.


DECISION

67. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.


    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     13 March
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



