
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18494/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2019                 |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                             Mrs ambreen rasool
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Abbas, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. She appealed a decision of  the
    Respondent to refuse, on 23 August 2018, her application for  leave  to
    remain on family and private life grounds.

 2. Her appeal was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Phull,
    sitting in the First-Tier Tribunal, and in a decision promulgated on 16
    May 2019.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought. It was granted by Judge of the  First-
    Tier Tribunal Gibb in a decision dated 5 August 2019. His  reasons  for
    granting permission were:-

         "1. The appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan,  was  refused  leave  on
         20.08.2018, and her appeal against removal was dismissed  by  Judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal Phull (promulgated on  16.05.2019).  The
         appellant's appeal was heard with that of her  husband,  which  was
         also  dismissed,  but  it  is  only  for  this  appellant  that  an
         application has been made.

         2. The grounds were in time, complain that the judge erred in:  (1)
         in view of the evidence  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
         informed in writing of the completion of 10 years  lawful residence
         by the appellant's husband, the absence of a representative for the
         Secretary of State should not have been allowed to disadvantage the
         appellant; (2) the completion of 10 years lawful residence was  not
         a new matter as it was known to the Secretary of State; (3) even if
         it was a new matter the length of lawful residence should have been
         considered in the proportionality  assessment;  and  (4)  the  best
         interests of the appellant's child should have been  considered  in
         the proportionality assessment and was not.

         3. The grounds are arguable.

         4. In relation to the 1st ground it is unclear whether  the  option
         of adjourning was raised, but there may  be  an  arguable  fairness
         point in proceeding without  clarity  as  to  whether  consent  was
         given.

         5. The 3rd and 4th grounds are arguable. The legal consequences  of
         proceeding where consent to consideration of a new matter  has  not
         been given were not considered in OA and others [2019] UKUT  00065.
         It is arguable that the fact of length of lawful residence at  date
         of  hearing  still  needed  consideration  in  the  proportionality
         assessment, even if direct  consideration  of  paragraph  276B  was
         excluded.

         6. The 2nd ground appears to run counter to the  2nd  part  of  the
         headnote in OA, but it is unclear whether in OA the matter had been
         drawn to the Secretary of State's attention in writing as here."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. This appeal was heard as a linked appeal with the  Appellant's  husband
    at Birmingham on 29 March 2019. The Appellant's husband has not  sought
    permission to appeal and I was informed at today's hearing that he  has
    now been granted indefinite leave to remain. Mr Abbas confirmed  to  me
    today that it was he  who  represented  both  this  Appellant  and  her
    husband at the First-tier Tribunal hearing. He also  acknowledged  that
    at that hearing, no application was made to the Judge  to  adjourn.  It
    was an appeal at which the Respondent was not represented. I will  come
    back to that issue in a moment.

 6. He relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  In  short  that
    having been provided with evidence that the Respondent  had  previously
    been informed that the Appellant's  husband  had  completed  ten  years
    lawful residence at the hearing the Judge should not have proceeded  in
    the  way  that  she  did.  Having   recognised   the   Respondent   was
    unrepresented  at  the  hearing  she  could  not  confirm  whether  the
    Respondent was agreeable to giving consent for this new  matter  to  be
    considered.  The  Respondent  was  on  notice  that  ten  years  lawful
    residence had been completed and that the appeal had  been  listed  for
    hearing. The absence of the Respondent  being  represented  should  not
    have weighed against the Appellant.

 7. Further, he submitted that ten years lawful  residence  is  not  a  new
    matter despite the decision of Judge Phull. The Respondent  would  have
    been on notice of the Appellant and her husband's history and the  fact
    that the Appellant's husband would have been in the United Kingdom  for
    ten years or more.

 8. Beyond that even if the Judge was correct that the Appellant's reliance
    on paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules is new it was wrong  not  to
    consider the length of lawful residence as part of the  proportionality
    exercise. Further the Judge gave no  consideration  whatsoever  to  the
    issue of the best interest of the Appellant's child. The  interests  of
    the child is an important and paramount consideration in the appeal. He
    was not an Appellant in the proceedings because he was born during  the
    consideration of the Appellant's case and the Respondent did not  issue
    an appropriate refusal/appealable decision in relation to him.

 9. Ms Fijiwala handed up  two  authorities  which  I  was  asked  to  give
    consideration to. The first  is  OA  and  others  (human  rights;  'new
    matter'; s.120) Nigeria [2019] UKUT 65 IAC and  the  second  is  Mahmud
    (S.85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters') [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC). In particular
    she relied on paragraph 2 of the headnote in OA which states: -

         "(2)  The  fact  that  P  completes  ten  years  continuous  lawful
         residence during  the  course  of  P's  human  rights  appeal  will
         generally constitute a "new matter" within the meaning  of  section
         85 of the 2002 Act. The completion  of  ten  years  residence  will
         normally have a material bearing on the sole ground of appeal  that
         can be  advanced  in  human  rights  appeal;  namely,  whether  the
         deicision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  P's  human  rights
         claim is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.
         This is because paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules  provides
         that a person with such  a  period  of  residence  is  entitled  to
         indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, so  long  as  the
         other requirments of that paragraph are met."

10. And paragraph 3 of the headnote of Mahmud which states:-

         "3. In practice, a new matter is a factual  matrix  which  has  not
         previously been considered by the Secretary of State in the context
         of the decision in  section  82(1)  or  a  statement  made  by  the
         appellant under  section  120.  This  requires  the  matter  to  be
         factually distinct from that previously raised by an appellant,  as
         opposed to further or better evidence of an  existing  matter.  The
         assessment will always be fact sensitive."

11. She further submitted that the Judge had acted correctly in putting the
    new matter aside and in considering the balance  of  the  human  rights
    claim. That she does at paragraph 21 onward of  her  decision.  In  not
    considering the best interests of the Appellant's child the  Judge  has
    not materially erred. This was  a  child  who  was  non-qualifying  and
    little weight should be attached to this issue.

12. I find the Judge has not materially erred.

13. I am satisfied that completion of ten years continuous lawful residence
    during the course of a human rights appeal will generally constitute  a
    "new matter" within the meaning of Section 85  of  the  2002  Act.  The
    Tribunal is a creature of statute and bound by this. The absence  of  a
    Presenting Officer at the hearing is a matter for the Respondent alone.
    The Judge cannot be criticised in any way for this. The  Judge,  it  is
    accepted, was not faced with an  application  for  an  adjournment  and
    proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal  applying  the  appropriate  statutory
    provision.

14. The completion of ten years lawful residence was a new matter and is  a
    factual matrix not previously considered by the Secretary of  State  in
    the context of the decision in Section 82 (1) of the 2002  Act.  Having
    concluded that the  Appellant's  husband  completed  ten  years  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom on 17 October 2018 the Judge went on to
    make a further finding (paragraph 14 of her decision) that this was  in
    the course of his pending appeal. Whilst it was submitted to  her  that
    this issue was brought to  the  attention  of  the  Respondent  on  two
    occasions there was no evidence of such notification before the  Judge.
    The Judge referred herself to the authority of  OA.  Having  found  ten
    years  continuous  lawful  residence  the  Judge  concluded   that   it
    constituted a new matter because it is capable of affecting the outcome
    of the human rights appeal. The  Respondent  was  not  present  at  the
    hearing and the Judge was unable to confirm whether the Respondent  was
    agreeable to give consent for this new matter to be  considered.  That,
    in the absence of any correspondence from the Home Office  provided  by
    Mr Abbas to the  contrary  was  a  decision  open  to  the  Judge.  The
    Appellant was represented at the hearing and no application to  adjourn
    was made.

15. Having come to that conclusion that this  was  a  new  matter  and  the
    factual matrix not previously considered by the Respondent it was  open
    to the Judge to consider the balance of the Appellant's  claim  in  the
    way that she did.  She  cannot  be  criticised  for  that  or,  in  the
    circumstances, not considering the best interests  of  the  Appellant's
    child as submitted by Mr Abbas.

16. There is here no material error of law.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside this decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                 Date:   19  September
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

