
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18412/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2020                  |On 10 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ep
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the  'respondent'  and  to  the
    respondent as the 'appellant', as they respectively appeared before the
    First-tier Tribunal. The appellant is a male citizen of Albania who was
    born in 2002. He claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in August
    2015 when he was 13 years old. His asylum  claim,  made  in  2015,  was
    refused and certified as clearly unfounded. The  appellant  applied  to
    the Secretary of State for leave to remain on human rights grounds  but
    his application was refused by a decision dated 4  November  2019.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 February 2020, allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR). The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara issued directions which were  served  on  2
    July 2020 indicating that the Upper Tribunal  was  of  the  provisional
    view that the matter of error of law may fairly be determined without a
    hearing. The Secretary of State has responded to those  directions  but
    the appellant's solicitors have not. I have considered  the  file  very
    carefully.  I am well aware that I should hesitate before proceeding to
    determine the question of error of law without a  hearing  and  without
    having  received  any  response  from   the   appellant/the   appellant
    solicitors. I  am,  however,  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  his
    solicitors have received the directions which  were  issued;  there  is
    nothing on the tribunal file to indicate that the directions  have  not
    been received by all their intended recipients.  Moreover,  I  consider
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this particular case is
    so deeply flawed by legal error that it cannot stand. For that  reason,
    I find that the overriding objective is best served by my setting aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The only fair course of action
    having set aside that decision is for me to return this appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the tribunal to remake the decision.

 3. The grounds for appeal complain that the  judge  completely  failed  to
    consider the reasons why the appellant failed to meet the  requirements
    of HC 395 (as amended) (in particular, paragraph 276ADE)  that  failure
    being the basis of the respondent's refusal  of  the  application.  The
    judge records the bare particulars of the refusal at [2-5] but makes no
    further detailed reference to Appendix FM at all. Whilst the appeal was
    brought on human rights grounds, it was not possible for the  judge  to
    identify those features of the case which  might  justify  a  grant  of
    leave under Article 8 without a undertaking a proper discussion of  the
    reasons why the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM. The judge's omission plainly amounted to an error of law.

 4. The judge made further errors as described in the  grounds  of  appeal.
    She did not consider whether the appellant is  financially  independent
    and  appears  to  have  attached  significant  weight  to  family  life
    established whilst the appellant had no  legal  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom. I agree with the Secretary of State that the  weight  attached
    by the judge to the appellant's private life is simply not justified by
    the facts of the  appeal.  Most  egregiously,  the  judge  has  applied
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (as amended) in a manner which makes no
    sense whatever. At [23], the judge wrote: '... the public interest does
    not require the removal of the appellant  given  the  extend  (sic)  of
    family and private life that he has developed over the  course  of  the
    last four years in the absence  of  a  support  network  on  return  to
    Albania... as reflected by Section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act.'  Section
    117B(6) has no  application  in  the  present  appeal  given  that  the
    appellant (perhaps unsurprisingly given his youth) has not  claimed  to
    enjoy a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying
    child. This part of the analysis appears to have weighed heavily in the
    outcome of the appeal and, if no other reason, the decision must be set
    aside on account of the judge's misapplication of the law.







    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 28 February 2020
    is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision at or following a hearing de novo.




    Signed   Date 7 September 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

