
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/18141/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                               tasleem saleem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmad of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Pakistan (born 24th December  1985)  appeals
    with permission against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Woolf), dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's refusal to grant
    him indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  ten  years'
    lawful residency.

 2. The Respondent's decision refusing the application  was  made  on  13th
    July 2016.  The appeal to the FtT was brought on the  ground  that  the
    Respondent's decision was unlawful in that it was incompatible with the
    Respondent's obligations under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. Throughout this decision, I have referred  to  the  Appellant's  former
    solicitors as "P.J. & Co". I have refrained from using their full title
    as I was informed that the Appellant has complained about them  to  the
    legal  ombudsman  and  the  outcome  of  this  complaint  is  currently
    outstanding.

Background

 4. The Appellant has a lengthy immigration history and it  is  appropriate
    for the purposes of this decision to set it out here.

   i) The Appellant arrived into the UK on 4th February 2006 with  leave  to
      enter as a student which was valid from 24th January 2006  until  31st
      October 2009.

  ii) On 30th September 2009 he applied for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) student; this was granted to him on 19th November 2009 until
      17th November 2010.

 iii) On 16th November 2010 he applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post
      Study Work) Migrant; this was granted to him  on  30th  December  2010
      which was valid until 30th December 2012.

  iv) On 27th December 2012 he applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
      (Entrepreneur) Migrant; this was refused on 1st June 2013.

   v) On 17th June 2013 he lodged an appeal against the decision of 1st June
      2013. This appeal was  dismissed  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  and  he
      subsequently became appeal rights exhausted on 14th February 2014.

  vi) On 25th February 2014 he made  a  further  application  for  leave  to
      remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. This, it was claimed on his
      behalf, was lodged within 28 days of becoming appeal rights exhausted.
       This further application was refused by a decision on 24th April 2014
      without a right of appeal.

 vii) On 27th May 2014 the Appellant's former solicitors (P.J. and Co)  sent
      a  pre-action  protocol  letter  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  to  the
      Respondent.

viii) On 23rd July 2014 the  Appellant  made  an  application  for  Judicial
      Review against the 24th April  2014  decision.  This  application  was
      refused on 17th December 2014. An application for permission to appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal was made and this application was listed on  9th
      March 2015 for an oral hearing.

  ix) On 9th June 2015 following an oral hearing permission  to  appeal  was
      refused.

   x) Following that refusal an application for permission to appeal to  the
      Court of Appeal was made on 6th July 2015. This was  refused  on  23rd
      December 2015 with no further appeal rights.

  xi) After exhausting all legal remedies in the UK the Appellant  submitted
      an application to the European Courts of Human Rights on 16th  January
      2016.  This application was returned invalid on 21st March 2016.

 xii) On 5th April 2016 the Appellant made a human  rights  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain on the basis of 10  years  long  residency.
      This was considered and refused by the Respondent on 13th  July  2016.
      The Appellant appealed that refusal to the FtT and it is this decision
      which forms that basis of the appeal before me.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 5. When the Appellant's appeal came before the FtT, the  FtTJ  noted  that
    what was  before  her  was  an  Article  8  ECHR  claim  based  on  the
    Appellant's ten year residency in the UK.  After noting the Appellant's
    lengthy  immigration  history,  and  the  relevant  immigration   rules
    contained under appendix FM 276ADE, she summarised  the  evidence  upon
    which the Appellant relied.

 6. She noted that the  Appellant  adopted  the  contents  of  his  written
    witness statement dated 17th November 2017 [13]. In addition  the  FtTJ
    prompted the Appellant to respond to her question of why  it  would  be
    difficult for him to return to Pakistan.

 7. At [20] the FtTJ said the following:

         "The appellant must  establish  that  he  has  at  least  10  years
         continuous lawful residence in the UK resided in  the  UK  lawfully
         for a continuous period 10 years subject to  the  caveat  contained
         within subparagraph (v) of paragraph 276B of the Immigration  rules
         as set out above."

    She followed this up by saying at [21]:

         "He arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 February 2006.   Taking  the
         10-year period from that date he has to show that his residence was
         lawful up until 4 February 2016.  Even if I were to accept that his
         appeal against the decision to refuse his first  application  as  a
         Tier 1 Entrepreneur made on 23 May 2013 was in time, his subsequent
         application was refused on 24 April 2014 and  his  application  for
         Judicial Review of that decision was not  successful  nor  was  his
         application to the ECtHR.  Neither of those  applications  extended
         his leave to remain in accordance  with  section  3C  of  the  1971
         (sic).  I conclude that the appellant has not had leave  to  remain
         since that second Tier 1 application was refused and  he  therefore
         cannot show that he  has  remained  lawfully  in  the  UK  until  4
         February 2016.  The appellant has confused advice  from  his  legal
         representative that he did not have to  leave  the  UK  whilst  his
         Judicial Review was pending with lawful residence.  He cannot  meet
         the requirements of the immigration rules as set out  in  paragraph
         276B."

 8. The FtTJ thereafter went on to consider the factors put forward by  the
    Appellant in respect of his Article 8 claim and subsequently  dismissed
    the appeal.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    following terms:

         "In reaching the decision set out the Judge  has  referred  to  the
         application for judicial review at paragraph 21  of  the  decision.
         The Judge states that  the  Appellant's  application  for  judicial
         review was not successful.  The Judge went on to state that neither
         of those applications, the Judge having referred to the Appellant's
         application to the ECtHR, had extended  the  Appellant's  leave  to
         remain in accordance with Section 3(C)  of  the  1971  (Act).   The
         Judge concluded the Appellant had not had  leave  to  remain.   The
         Judge has also stated at paragraph 21  of  the  decision  that  the
         Appellant had confused advice from his legal representative that he
         did not have to leave the UK whilst his judicial review was pending
         with lawful residence.  It is arguable that the Judge  should  have
         considered the issue of the advice provided by the Appellant's then
         solicitors and made findings on this matter since  it  is  arguable
         that this constitutes a  material  aspect  of  the  claim.   It  is
         arguable that the discretion conferred by the guidance referred  to
         in the permission application fell to be considered and facts found
         on that basis.  It is submitted in the permission application  that
         the Respondent did not consider the clear  discretion  provided  in
         the Long Residence guidance.  It is arguable that the Judge  should
         have dealt with this aspect of the case.  It is arguable  that  the
         proportionality exercise has been affected."

10. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether the  FtT  decision
    contains such error of law that it requires to be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

11. Mr Karim appeared for the Appellant; Miss Ahmad for the Respondent.  Mr
    Karim's submissions advance three challenges to the FtT's decision:

      i) the FtTJ failed to properly  consider  a  material  aspect  of  the
         Appellant's case; namely that  he  had  been  provided  with  wrong
         advice from his previous representatives;

     ii) following on from that, the FtTJ failed to consider  whether  being
         wrongly  advised  by  his  representatives,  should  have  led  the
         Respondent to exercise discretion under the long residency guidance
         by reference to the heading of "exceptional circumstances"; and

    iii) generally the FtTJ fails to embark on an adequate assessment of the
         Article 8 proportionality exercise.

12. In support  of  the  first  two  challenges  advanced,  Mr  Karim  drew
    attention to the Appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain
    which is contained in Malik and Malik's letter of 4th April  2016.   He
    also  submitted  further   documentation   which   included   follow-up
    correspondence with the legal ombudsman, and  which  was  submitted  to
    support the Appellant's contention that he had made a complaint against
    his former representatives, P.J. and Co.  For the sake  of  clarity  in
    this decision I confirm that the complaint letter does  not  relate  to
    Malik and Malik.

13. Ms Ahmad responded by defending the decision.  She submitted  that  the
    decision contains no error. An examination of the  evidence  which  was
    before the judge would show that she had considered  all  the  relevant
    evidence placed before her.  The main part of that  evidence  consisted
    of the Appellant's witness statement dated 17th November 2017.  He  had
    failed to make mention in that statement that he was alleging  that  he
    was disadvantaged by incorrect advice from his former  representatives,
    P.J. and Co.  Secondly it is correct to say there  was  a  letter  from
    those representatives dated 22nd August 2014 on file, but  that  letter
    was sent "To whom it may concern" as part of the  preparation  for  the
    judicial review.  The judicial review was unsuccessful.

14. So  far  as  the  recent  documentation  to  the  legal  ombudsman  was
    concerned, she submitted  that  this  did  not  materially  change  the
    position.  She said that whichever way it was looked at, the  Appellant
    could not  fulfil  the  Immigration  Rule  showing  ten  years'  lawful
    residence.  The judge had made a finding  on  that  point.   There  was
    nothing  exceptional  put  forward  before  the  judge  to  alter  that
    position.

15. She then referred to [5] of BT (Former solicitors' alleged  misconduct)
    Nepal  [2004]  UKIAT  00311  in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  said  the
    following:

         "We wish to make it clear that, in general,  we  will  not  make  a
         finding  of  fact   based   on   an   allegation   against   former
         representatives  unless,  first,  it  is  clear  that  the   former
         representatives have been given an opportunity to  respond  to  the
         allegation which is being  made  expressly  or  implicitly  against
         them, and secondly, we are  either  shown  the  response  or  shown
         correspondence which indicates that there has been no response."

16. The decision was sustainable and disclosed no error of law.

Consideration

17. Whilst there are three separate grounds seeking permission, it  appears
    that they are interconnected to  the  extent  that  the  central  issue
    before me  hinges  on  the  Appellant  saying  that  the  circumstances
    relating to his Article 8 claim are exceptional  because  of  the  poor
    advice he received in 2014 from his former  representatives,  P.J.  and
    Co.  Following on from that, his claim is that the Respondent failed to
    exercise  discretion  in  his  favour  and  the  FtTJ  failed  to  give
    appropriate credit for those factors when assessing the proportionality
    exercise in the Article 8 appeal.

18. I find firstly that I must observe that several assertions are made  by
    and on behalf of the Appellant concerning  the  FtT  hearing.   In  his
    witness  statement  of  18th  January  2018   which   accompanied   his
    application for leave, he says the following:

         "I would like to clarify that though  my  witness  statement  dated
         17th November 2017, does not clearly  address  the  issue  of  poor
         advice I  received  from  my  previous  solicitors  (P.J.  and  Co.
         Solicitors), but I provided a letter dated 22nd August 2014 as well
         as I made oral submissions on this point at the time of my hearing.
          However, I believe the FTT judge had not considered my submissions
         properly despite the fact that the judge clearly indicated  at  the
         hearing that I was poorly advised by  my  previous  solicitors  and
         admitted that there were exceptional circumstance  involved  in  my
         case."

19. I have read the FtTJ's decision. It is a careful decision. So far as  I
    can see there is nothing in the decision which would indicate that  the
    FtTJ informed the  Appellant  that  he  was  "poorly  advised"  by  his
    previous solicitors and there is certainly no indication that the  FtTJ
    "admitted that there were exceptional circumstances  involved"  in  his
    case.

20. On the contrary the evidence before the FtTJ was that contained in  the
    Appellant's witness statement of 17th November 2017.  It is a very full
    statement outlining his immigration history together with  reasons  why
    his Article 8 claim should be allowed.  It makes no mention at  all  in
    the statement of a claim that he received poor or wrong advice from his
    previous representatives.  It is correct that the Appellant submitted a
    letter from those representatives dated 22nd August 2014.   The  letter
    is  addressed  "to  whom  it  may  concern"  and  makes  the  following
    statement:

         "Our client is entitled to remain in the UK  until  a  decision  is
         made in his judicial review application."

21. The judge refers to it.  The judge clearly had that  evidence  in  mind
    because she refers to the Appellant confusing  advice  from  his  legal
    representative [21].  The difficulty for the  Appellant  is  that  this
    piece of correspondence is the  only  documentary  evidence  concerning
    this issue put before the judge.  The judge has turned her mind to  it.
    Taking that evidence together with her assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence, the judge concluded that, "the  appellant  has  confused
    advice from his legal representative that he did not have to leave  the
    UK whilst his judicial review was pending with lawful residence."  That
    was a finding open to her on the available evidence.

22. Whilst it is correct that the Appellant has now made a complaint to the
    legal ombudsman against his former representatives, so far as both  the
    FtT and this Tribunal is concerned, there is no evidence of  resolution
    of this issue.  It is not a matter for the FtTJ to make  a  finding  on
    whether  the   Appellant   was   "poorly   advised"   by   his   former
    representatives.  The FtTJ simply needs to keep the matter in mind when
    assessing the Appellant's claim under Article 8.  I find that this  she
    has done because she refers to the issue [21].

23. So far as the second ground of challenge is concerned, it  is  hard  to
    see how this challenge can succeed.  What is said by Mr Karim  is  that
    the Respondent failed to give proper consideration to  the  Appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain.  This is on the basis  that
    the application dated 4th April 2016 under cover of Malik  and  Malik's
    letter, contains the following passages  which  were  set  out  in  the
    context of the Appellant's immigration history.

         "Thereafter the applicant submitted his subsequent applications for
         Judicial Review and European Court of  Human  Rights  within  their
         relevant deadlines.  We therefore submit that this is  similar,  if
         not tantamount, to having his leave extended by Section 3C  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971.

         Our client was not informed by his previous  legal  representatives
         that submitting an application for permission to apply for Judicial
         Review did not extend his lawful residence in the UK, and  to  this
         extend (sic) seek to rely on the case  of  BT  (Former  solicitors'
         alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311, which held  that  the
         negligence on the part of her former solicitors should not be  held
         against the applicant.

         Furthermore we request the  SSHD  to  exercise  her  discretion  in
         relation to this requirement in favour of the applicant. ..."

24. So far as I can see what was put before the Secretary of State on  this
    point, again amounts to no more than an allegation of misconduct.   Any
    response made by P.J. & Co. to the legal ombudsman is  not  before  the
    Tribunal and the outcome of the investigation is not decided.  Reliance
    on BT does not assist in this regard because it comes back  to  what  I
    said earlier in  this  decision  that  there  is  no  factual  evidence
    sufficient to show that the  Appellant's  former  representatives  have
    been negligent.  Furthermore I find no basis for the Appellant's  claim
    that the FtTJ  "admitted  that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances
    involved" in his case.

25. In his witness statement of 18th January 2018, the Appellant has stated
    that, "Had I known this (that the  period  during  which  his  judicial
    review was being considered would not constitute continuing 3C leave) I
    would have used other options to stay  legal  in  the  UK  as  I  never
    intended to overstay."  To date the Appellant has  not  signified  what
    "other options" would have been available to  him,  nor  is  there  any
    indication that he would have been successful had he pursued  any  such
    options.

26. Finally the last ground raised claims that the FtTJ failed  to  make  a
    proper assessment of the Article 8 ECHR claim.  I disagree, I find  she
    did so.  She has carefully noted the Appellant's  family  circumstances
    in Pakistan.  She has noted that she was satisfied that he  would  have
    family support there.  She also noted that he would be able  to  access
    treatment for his anxiety and  depression  and  more  particularly  she
    noted he is educated to degree level and therefore should  be  able  to
    access employment.

27. She self-directed herself in applying Section 117A and 117B of the 2002
    Act and set out in her decision that the Appellant has  no  partner  or
    children.  She concluded that even though the Appellant suffers anxiety
    and depression, he could  not  meet  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules.
    Accordingly she found no good reason to depart from the Rules and found
    that any Article 8 claim must fail in the face of the  public  interest
    element requiring his removal.

28. For the foregoing reasons therefore I find that the decision of the FtT
    discloses no error of law and the decision therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  8th  January  2018
discloses no error of law requiring  it  to  be  set  aside.   The  decision
therefore stands. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     16 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     16 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
