
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19718/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 August 2019                    |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                              emily chipo piki
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   the Entry Clearance Officer - pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr George Tizirai-Chapwanya, principal solicitor
with
     CB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  O'Hagan  who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer in Pretoria, refusing her entry
    clearance under paragraph 352D of the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended) as the child of a parent  who  currently  has  refugee  status
    granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom.

 2. Paragraph 352D requires the appellant to meet specified requirements as
    follows:

         "352D. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  leave  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order to  join  or  remain
         with the parent who currently  has  refugee  status  are  that  the
         applicant:

             (i)  is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
             granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and

             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
             is not a civil partner, and  has  not  formed  an  independent
             family unit; and

             (iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted  asylum
             at the time that the person granted asylum left the country of
             their habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and

             (v)  the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection  by
             virtue of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article
             1F of the Refugee Convention if they were to  seek  asylum  in
             their own right; and

             (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid  United  Kingdom
             entry clearance for entry in this capacity."

 3. The definition of an eligible sponsor is clarified in the  respondent's
    policy  guidance  Family  reunion:  for   refugees   and   those   with
    humanitarian protection Version 3.0 published on 19 March 2019:-

         "Sponsors who have indefinite leave to remain and refugee status or
         humanitarian  protection,  but  have  not  yet   obtained   British
         citizenship, are eligible to sponsor family reunion applications".

Discussion

 4. The First-tier Judge found as a fact that the sponsor left Zimbabwe  to
    seek asylum, and that the appellant was part of her  pre-flight  family
    unit. The appellant's mother, the  sponsor,  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a refugee but has not yet obtained British citizenship.    At
    the date of application the appellant was (just) under the  age  of  18
    and the respondent does not dispute that she meets the requirements  in
    sub-paragraphs 352D (ii), (iii) and (v).   Her  ability  to  meet  sub-
    paragraph (vi) depends on the outcome of the present appeal.

 5. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr Tufan suggested  that  sub-paragraphs
    352D(i) and (iv) were not met, relying in particular on  the  sponsor's
    having come to the United Kingdom for  a  wedding  and  claimed  asylum
    later.

 6. The First-tier Judge's findings on the  sponsor's  reason  for  leaving
    Zimbabwe, and the appellant's forming part  of  her  pre-flight  family
    unit, were reached after hearing and seeing the sponsor give  her  oral
    evidence.  They were not challenged by the  respondent  before  today's
    hearing, either in her Rule 24 Reply or by way of a cross-appeal.

 7. I decline to reopen the First-tier Judge's findings of  fact  on  these
    points.  It follows that all the requirements of paragraph 352D are met
    and that the appellant is entitled  to  entry  clearance  to  join  her
    sponsor mother in the United Kingdom.

Conclusions

 8. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.


    I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     21 August 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

