
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19636/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2021                              |On 23 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                           NYAKALLO ELLEN RATSOLO
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms Turner, Counsel instructed by Calices Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Nightingale ("the judge")  promulgated  on  21  February
      2020 dismissing her human rights claim.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Lesotho, born on 14 June 1961,  who  has
      been in the UK since 2002.

   3. She lives in  the  UK  with  her  nephew,  his  wife,  and  their  two
      daughters, all of whom are British citizens.  She has been living with
      her  nephew  and  his  family  since  2009.  She  has  a  very   close
      relationship with her nephew's children, born in 2005  and  2014,  for
      whom, inter alia, she provides childcare.

   4. One of the arguments advanced in the First-tier Tribunal was that  the
      appellant's relationship with  her  nephew's  children  amounts  to  a
      parental relationship. This was noted by the judge in paragraph  4  of
      the decision.

   5. The significance of this is that if it can be said that the  appellant
      has "a genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with her nephew's
      children it might be the case that section 117B(6) of the  Nationality
      Immigration and  Asylum  Act  would  be  applicable.  Section  117B(6)
      provides that the public interest does not require a person's  removal
      from the UK where (a) the person is not subject  to  deportation;  (b)
      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
      qualifying child; and (c) it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
      child to leave the UK. Given that the  appellant  is  not  subject  to
      deportation and it would plainly  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
      children of  her nephew, who are qualifying children, to leave the  UK
      (as they are British citizens and leaving the UK  would  entail  being
      separated from both their parents), section 117B(6) would apply if  it
      can be established that the appellant has "a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship" with her nephew's children.

   6. The judge did not make an explicit finding  as  to  whether,  for  the
      purposes  of  section  117B(6),  the  appellant  had  a  genuine   and
      subsisting parental relationship with her nephew's children,  but  the
      judge did make findings about their relationship. At paragraph  33  of
      the decision the judge found that the children have become  accustomed
      to the appellant providing care to them and that they would miss  her.
      However, the judge did not accept that the  relationship  amounted  to
      family life for the purposes of article 8. The judge  found  that  the
      childrens' "primary  family  life  is  with  their  mother  and  their
      father".

   7. The grounds of appeal contend that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
      consider whether the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with her nephew's children.

   8. The children of the appellant's nephew live with both their parents as
      part of a family unit. Both parents  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with their children.

   9. For the appellant to establish that she has  a  parental  relationship
      with the children she would need to show that she  has  "stepped  into
      the shoes" of one of the parents  notwithstanding  that  both  parents
      themselves have a parental relationship with  the  children.  This  is
      difficult, but not impossible, to establish. At paragraph 44 of R  (on
      the application of RK) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT  00031  (IAC)  it
      was explained that:

           44. If a non-biological parent  ("third  party")  caring  for  a
           child claims such a relationship, its existence will depend upon
           all the circumstances including whether or not there are  others
           (usually the biologically parents) who have such a  relationship
           with the child also. It is unlikely,  in  my  judgment,  that  a
           person will be able to establish they have taken on the role  of
           a parent when the biological parents continue to be involved  in
           the child's life as the child's parents as in a case such as the
           present where the children and  parents  continue  to  live  and
           function together as a family. It  will  be  difficult,  if  not
           impossible, to say that a third  party  has  "stepped  into  the
           shoes" of a parent.

  10. I asked Ms Turner to identify the evidence that was before the  First-
      tier Tribunal which indicates that the appellant has stepped into  the
      shoes of one of the parents of her nephew's children.  She  identified
      evidence which indicates there is  a  close  and  loving  relationship
      between the appellant and children, where the  appellant  takes  on  a
      range of roles including taking them to appointments, putting them  to
      bed, and looking after them when their parents travel. She also showed
      me evidence where  the  family  describe  how  the  appellant  is  the
      "matriarch" of the family, and is thought of as a second mother.

  11. This evidence does not come close to showing a parental  relationship.
      The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal shows that the people  who
      have a parental relationship with  the  children  of  the  appellant's
      nephew are their actual parents (i.e. the appellant's nephew  and  his
      wife), and that the appellant's relationship with the children is that
      of a loving and close relative who lives with them, assists with their
      care and takes a close interest in their well-being. The evidence does
      not, on any legitimate view, support the conclusion that the appellant
      has stepped into the shoes of one of the parents or that she  has,  in
      any way, assumed  a  parental  role  in  their  lives.  Indeed,  I  am
      satisfied that there is no rational basis upon which the  judge  -  or
      any judge - could have reached the conclusion that the appellant has a
      genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  for  the  purposes  of
      section 117B(6) with her nephew's children. In these  circumstances  I
      do not consider it  erroneous  in  law  for  the  judge  to  not  have
      explicitly addressed the issue but if by not doing  so  an  error  was
      made, for the reasons explained above, the error was not material. The
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.

  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law and stands.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 17 March 2021               |

