
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/19293/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Sent to parties on                 |
|On 26 July 2021                    |On 12 August 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                           AGYEMANG GABRIEL OPOKU

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr S Tampuri of Tamsons Legal Services

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a national of Ghana with date  of  birth  given  as
   9.8.04, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  15.2.21  (Judge  Hone),
   dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 8.11.19, to  refuse  his  application  made  on  9.7.19  for  entry
   clearance to the UK to join his sponsoring mother pursuant  to  paragraph
   297(e) of the Immigration Rules.

2. The First-tier Tribunal found at [16] of the decision  that  the  sponsor
   did not have sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's  upbringing  and
   failed to demonstrate that she financially supported  him.  At  [17]  the
   judge concluded, "I find that there is no credible evidence to show  that
   she is solely responsible for the  major  decisions  in  the  appellant's
   life."

3. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  24.3.21,
   on the basis that the grounds disclosed arguable errors of  law  but  for
   which the outcome of the appeal might have  been  different.  "The  judge
   arguably had regard to irrelevant considerations  in  deciding  that  the
   sponsor did not have sole responsibility for the  appellant."  The  judge
   granting permission noted that at [17] the judge  stated  "the  sponsor's
   claim is not supported by any phone  records  or  messages.  This  is  of
   course a pre-requisite, but there is no evidence to support her assertion
   that she contacts her son every day and has had  control  over  his  life
   since 2004". The judge granting permission  observed  that  the  sentence
   "reads uneasily but on its face is arguably suggestive of the proposition
   that the judge regarded the making of telephone calls and the dispatch of
   messages as either a requirement of  the  Rules  or  a  consideration  so
   important as to be decisive of the issue whether the sponsor had had sole
   responsibility for the appellant or not. For the same reasons the judge's
   assessment of the  proportionality  of  the  decision  under  appeal  was
   carried out against a backcloth which  included  an  arguably  irrelevant
   consideration."

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. It is abundantly clear that the primary error of  law  relied  on  is  an
   attempt to take  advantage  of  what  was  undoubtedly  no  more  than  a
   typographical error at [17] of the decision.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
   judge fully intended to state that phone records or messages  are  not  a
   pre-requisite. Indeed, that is the only way in which the entire  sentence
   can make any sense. It was for that reason that  the  judge  went  on  to
   state, "but there is no  evidence  to  support  her  assertion  that  she
   contacts her son every day..." It follows that whilst there was an error,
   it was not material and fully explicable as an error of typing.

6. With regard to the complaint that the judge failed to  apply  Section  55
   of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  take  the  best
   interests of the child into account as  a  primary  consideration,  I  am
   satisfied that on a reading of the decision as a  whole,  the  judge  did
   take all due account of the appellant's best interests. As Mr Tan pointed
   out,  by  their  nature,  the  requirements  of  paragraph  297  of   the
   Immigration Rules incorporate the best interests of the  child.  However,
   if the appellant cannot demonstrate that she has had sole  responsibility
   for her son, or that there are "other considerations which make exclusion
   of the child undesirable," the child's best interests are for the  status
   quo to remain. As Mr Tan also pointed out, the appellant has been  looked
   after by his uncle for some 15 years and refers to him as 'Dad',  as  the
   judge noted at [23] of the decision, suggesting a close relationship.

7. It is beyond challenge  that  in  considering  whether  the  sponsor  had
   established sole responsibility, the judge was entitled to point  to  the
   absence of evidence, including documentary evidence supporting the  claim
   of daily communication with the child.  Mr  Tampuri  submitted  that  the
   mother has always been involved in the child's life  but,  with  respect,
   that is not  the  test  of  sole  responsibility  as  opposed  to  shared
   responsibility. As Mr Tan pointed out, both the uncle and the mother  are
   listed as contacts at the appellant's school.

8. Considering the limited evidence available to the judge and  reading  the
   decision as  whole, in the round, I am satisfied that the judge has  made
   a holistic assessment of the child's best interests. At  [24]  the  judge
   specifically stated that consideration was given to what was best for the
   child. I am satisfied that the judge properly applied the requirements of
   the Rules and carefully considered whether the appellant has demonstrated
   that his mother has had sole responsibility. In  that  consideration,  at
   [23] the judge pointed out a discrepancy between the uncle's  letter  and
   the sponsor's claim that the uncle no longer wishes  to  look  after  the
   appellant because his wife is not willing to continue  to  care  for  the
   appellant. Whilst the uncle states he  wishes  to  move  to  a  different
   village, no reason is give why the appellant cannot  relocate  with  him.
   There have been no material changes in  circumstances  between  this  and
   previous application.

9. In the circumstances and for  the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       26 July 2021

