
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19180/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 March 2018                          |On 17 April 2018                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR YURIY [V]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Panagiotopoulou, instructed by Yemets
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision of  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  [V]
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 26 July 2016 refusing  his
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under Appendix FM
    and paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  heard  helpful
    submissions from Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Secretary of State and from
    Ms Panagiotopoulou on behalf of Mr [V].  I will refer to Mr [V] as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the  respondent  as  they  were
    before the judge.

2.    The  judge  from  noted  the  immigration  history  that  Mr  [V]  has
    overstayed since his visa expired in November 2001.  He was working  up
    to 2015.  As regards relationships, he met his partner in  2002,  their
    relationship began then and their daughter [M] was born in 2009.   Both
    she and her mother have  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom but neither is a British citizen.  The  relationship  with  his
    partner ended in 2012 and there were problems with access.   The  judge
    set those out.  There were financial contributions made  from  2012  to
    2015.  The appellant managed to see [M] once a month up  to  June  2017
    but had not seen her since then because of  ongoing  difficulties  over
    access and he said he had now instructed his current solicitors to make
    an application to the  Family  Court.   There  was  a  requirement  for
    mediation and his former partner did not cooperate and  so  he  made  a
    formal application to the court.  That  application  was  lost  by  the
    court and a fresh application had to be made.

3.    The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with [M] despite difficulties with his  partner
    over access.  There was recent evidence of him wishing to  give  her  a
    present.  She sent him a Father's Day card in 2017 and the judge  noted
    that he is attempting to obtain a formal order  giving  him  access  to
    [M].  It would not be reasonable the judge said to expect her to  leave
    the United Kingdom and therefore the  appellant  should  succeed  under
    EX.1(a).  The judge was also satisfied there would be very  significant
    obstacles to Mr [V] returning to Ukraine in order to apply for leave to
    return to the United Kingdom not least because he might  be  called  up
    for military service and he would also be deprived of the right to  see
    [M] in the meantime and be unable to  pursue  his  application  to  the
    Family Court.

4.   The judge went on to say that if her had not  concluded  the  appellant
    should succeed under the Immigration Rules he would  have  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 because it would be wholly disproportionate  for
    Mr [V] to be compelled to return to Ukraine and the public interest did
    not require his removal where he has a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom under Section  117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.  The appeal was therefore allowed.

5.   The Secretary of State's grounds were adopted by Mr Tarlow today.   The
    first point that is  made  is  that  it  was  common  ground  that  the
    appellant could not satisfy the grant of GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM because
    he had not been cohabiting with his current partner for  two  years  at
    the  date  of  the  application.   Despite  this  point  which  as  the
    respondent says acts as a complete  bar  to  reliance  on  the  partner
    route, the judge went on to consider EX.1 and  apparently  allowed  the
    appeal under EX.1(b) which I think is common ground a  clear  error  of
    law and there is the authority of Sabir [2014]  UKIAT  00063  (IAC)  to
    attest to that.

6.   The judge was then criticised for allowing the  appeal  with  reference
    to EX.1(a) noting again the point that EX.1 is not freestanding and  it
    was not  made  clear  how  EX.1  was  reached  via  the  parent  route.
    Secondly, [M] is not British, was less than 7 years old at the date  of
    application so could not meet those elements of EX.1(a)  and  also  the
    grounds also argue that there was an error as to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  daughter.
    The point is made that it is unclear whether he ever  claimed  to  have
    lived with her but his relationship with  her  mother  ended  in  2012,
    contact with the daughter was limited to about once a month afterwards,
    none since June 2017, and there was no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    that he had made an application through the Family  Court  for  contact
    with her and so, it was argued, the judge had erred with regard to  the
    nature of the  relationship  and  elsewhere  as  regards  the  decision
    outside the Rules other than referring to  section  117B(6)  the  judge
    referred to the risk of Mr [V] being called up for military service  in
    the Ukraine but the point was made in that regard  that  there  was  no
    evidence  to  support  this  finding  and  also  the  country  guidance
    suggested that he was not in an age range where he would be  likely  to
    be called up and there had been a failure to take account of the public
    interest in assessing the claim outside the Rules.

7.   As regards the decision  within  the  Rules,  I  think  essentially  Ms
    Panagiotopoulou accepts that the judge may have gone wrong.  She argued
    that he was not in error in respect of the decision outside  the  Rules
    and that he was entitled to conclude that the relationship between  the
    appellant and his daughter was a genuine and subsisting  one  and  that
    there was proper consideration given to the public  interest.   He  was
    clearly aware of the fact of the overstaying and so on and  she  argued
    that as a consequence the appeal was properly allowed in that regard.

8.   It is clear,  I  think,  that  the  judge  erred  with  regard  to  the
    situation under the Rules.  He appears to have treated  EX.1  as  being
    freestanding where it is clear that it is not.   The  claim  could  not
    succeed under the Rules in that regard and I  think  the  point  should
    also be made, given the timing the decision, that the appeal could  not
    be allowed under the Rules anyway because there was  only  a  right  of
    appeal under human rights or international protection grounds  by  then
    so that would be a further difficulty with the decision.   And  so  for
    the reasons set out in the grounds, as I have  sketched  out  above,  I
    consider the judge clearly erred with regard to the decision under  the
    Rules.

9.   As regards the issue of a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    which is an element of the  consideration  of  the  claim  outside  the
    Rules, I think the points made in the grounds  are  well-taken.   There
    has been limited contact since 2012, no contact since June 2017 and  no
    evidence of an application through the Family Court  for  contact.   If
    there had been such an application made one would  have  thought  there
    would have been evidence of that and it seems  to  me  that  the  judge
    therefore erred in that regard also.  There is no proper  consideration
    of the public interest in the rather brief paragraph 38.  Certainly  it
    is right that the judge had noted earlier on  the  immigration  history
    but  that  was  not  factored  into  the  equation  in   deciding   the
    proportionality issue at paragraph 38.  The judge was  also,  I  think,
    wrong to factor in the risk of being called up for military service  in
    light of recent country guidance in VB [2017] UKUT  00079  (IAC)  which
    indicates that people of his age would not be likely to  be  called  up
    for military service.  There is also the linked point which is made  in
    relation to the decision within the Rules but also  outside,  that  [M]
    was not at that time anyway a qualifying child, not a  British  citizen
    and less than 7 years at the date of application.  So for all of  these
    reasons it seems to me that the points made in the grounds are properly
    made out and as a consequence the  judge  has  erred  in  law  and  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.  The matter  will  have  to  be
    fully reconsidered in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  with  a
    time estimate of an hour and a half.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 12 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen










