
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19234/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2019                     |On 3 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  mr A b l
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Grace Brown, Counsel - Direct Access.
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who appealed the refusal of  his
    human rights claim on family and private life grounds for further leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom. His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Plumptre who, in a decision promulgated on 26 April
    2019, dismissed it.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    but a renewed application was successful on 4 July 2019.  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Manuell  gave  the  following  reasons  for   granting
    permission to appeal: -

         "The renewed grounds dated 26 June 2019 (to which reference  should
         be made) address the  timeliness  issue  identified  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Ford, who refused to extend time but went on  to  identify
         two arguable errors of law, then  formally  refused  permission  to
         appeal  rather  than  declining  to  admit  the  application.   The
         Appellant has now produced compelling evidence that the  permission
         to appeal application was in fact submitted in time to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal but was subject to  postal  delay.  The  tribunal  is
         satisfied that Bhavsar [2019] UKUT 00196 (IAC) applies so  that  it
         has jurisdiction. The permission to appeal application to the First-
         tier Tribunal was in time.

         If that for any reason  were  a  mistaken  view,  the  tribunal  is
         satisfied that the interests of justice would require the admission
         of the out of time application where even on an  adverse  view  any
         delay was marginal and where arguable material errors  of  law  had
         been identified.

         As to the arguable errors of law, given the new finding now made on
         timeliness, it is plain that the Appellant has  in  effect  already
         secured permission to appeal and it  will  now  be  for  the  Upper
         Tribunal to determine whether the two arguable  grounds  identified
         by Judge Ford are material. The other grounds for which Judge  Ford
         refused permission but for which a renewed application is made  are
         in substance quarrels with findings of fact open to the  judge  and
         are in any event largely  subsumed  within  the  arguable  material
         errors of law identified by Judge Ford.  Permission  to  appeal  on
         those grounds is refused. Permission to appeal is granted only  for
         the arguable material errors of law identified by Judge Ford  on  7
         June 2019."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. With reference to Judge Manuell's above mentioned grant  of  permission
    to appeal, he refers to the two grounds identified initially  by  Judge
    Ford, which disclose arguable errors of law. For completeness, the  two
    grounds found to be arguable by Judge Ford are:-

         "a.  Failure to assess the issue of reasonableness as at  the  date
         of hearing and deciding that "it would be reasonable for the  three
         minor children to leave the UK with one or other of their estranged
         parents, but in reality, with their mother, should her asylum claim
         fail". It is arguable that this involved the Tribunal in  assessing
         the reasonableness issues on facts other than the facts as  at  the
         date of hearing. It is arguable that if the Tribunal considered the
         mother's asylum claim relevant to the issue of reasonableness,  the
         case should have been adjourned to await the outcome of her claim.

         c.   Concluding that progression to staying  contact  was  unlikely
         and that there was no subsisting relationship between the Appellant
         and the qualifying children, given the evidence  that  contact  had
         progressed from supervised to supported contact sessions."

 5. Miss Brown referred me to  paragraph  22  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision where she states:

         "... hence, I find it reasonable for all three sons to leave the UK
         with one or other of their estranged  parents  (both  of  Pakistani
         origin), but in reality with their mother, should her asylum  claim
         fail".

 6. She submitted that the Judge erred in concluding that it was reasonable
    for the children  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  in  particular  the
    qualifying children, in the event that their mother's asylum claim  was
    unsuccessful. The assessment of whether or not it is reasonable  for  a
    child or children to leave the United Kingdom must be made  as  at  the
    date of hearing and not be based on speculation as to what may  or  may
    not happen in the future. Thus, Miss Brown submitted that  the  Judge's
    conclusion was both unsustainable and erroneous in law. The  submission
    that the date of hearing is the relevant date was expressly made at the
    hearing both orally, and in the skeleton argument  and  the  Judge  has
    failed to  address  this  issue.  Moreover,  both  of  the  "qualifying
    children" are subject to the United Kingdom Court Order  providing  for
    them to reside with  their  mother  and  there  is  no  possibility  or
    prospect of those  children  leaving  the  United  Kingdom  with  their
    father. Accordingly, the Judge's conclusion  that  the  children  could
    leave with their father is also legally erroneous.  Further,  that  the
    Judge misdirected herself in stating  that  two  of  the  children  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 December 2010. One had  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 31 October 2010 and the other  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom. The Judge also misdirected herself in  respect  of  the
    period during which there had been no contact between the boys and  the
    Appellant. It was stated at paragraph 27 of her decision that this  was
    for a period of two years and nine months and later there is  reference
    to "nearly three years". This though, fails  in  assessing  contact  to
    take into account the evidence that indirect contact had  been  ordered
    on 13 July 2017 and there had been two sessions of  supervised  contact
    prior to it commencing formally in March of 2018. Miss Brown  submitted
    that these factual  errors  demonstrated  a  "less  than  careful  best
    interests assessment as is required by law".

 7. The second arguable ground relates to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    conclusion  that  progression  to  staying  contact  in  unlikely.   At
    paragraph 39 of her decision, the Judge concludes  that  the  Appellant
    has attended supervised and thereafter supported  contact  sessions  of
    two hours per fortnight for just over one year since supervised contact
    began in March of 2018 and that this  has  not  progressed  to  staying
    contact as was hoped by the Court Order. She went on to  state  "again,
    the reality is that this would now be unlikely given that the Appellant
    has  chosen  to  establish  a  new  family  unit  with  Ms  M  and  any
    relationship with his three sons, tentatively  re-established  after  a
    gap of nearly three years, is clearly too fragile for these children to
    be introduced to a step mother and a half sibling". Ms Brown  submitted
    that the Judge's conclusion is "grossly inconsistent" with the evidence
    which indicated that by the end of  the  supervised  contact  sessions,
    contact had progressed  sufficiently  well  to  progress  to  supported
    contact. This was quite simply a conclusion that was  not  open  to  be
    made on the totality of the  evidence.  Further,  the  Judge  erred  in
    failing to come  to  a  finding  on  whether  there  was  a  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and these two qualifying children.

 8. Miss Fijiwala relied upon the Respondent's Rule 24  response  dated  16
    July 2019. There it is stated  that  the  Judge  had  directed  herself
    "appropriately". That the suggestion that the test of reasonableness in
    respect of the qualifying children was considered  at  any  other  date
    than that of the hearing is "misconceived" and that any speculation  as
    to whether or not the Appellant's children's  mother  would,  or  would
    not, be successful in her asylum claim, would  not  have  assisted  the
    Judge at the date of hearing. In the  context  of  both  parents  being
    removable from the United Kingdom, the Judge needed to consider whether
    it was "reasonable" for the children to accompany either of  them.  She
    gave consideration to that and there is no materiality to  the  Judge's
    conclusion that progression to staying contact was unlikely.

 9. Miss Fijiwala confirmed that the  Appellant's  ex-wife  had,  in  fact,
    become appeal rights exhausted on 29 September  2016  and  accordingly,
    has had no status since then. It was unfortunate  that  the  Respondent
    was unrepresented at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  that  this
    information was not conveyed to the Tribunal. Even  if  the  Judge  had
    erred, it was not material. Beyond that, the Judge had  considered  the
    issue of reasonableness at the date of hearing  and  given  appropriate
    self-directions in relation to the authority of KO (Nigeria)  &  Others
    v.  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC53.  The  Judge  had  "properly   assessed"   the
    circumstances of the children and parents before concluding  that  they
    could return to their country of origin with either parent.  The  Judge
    had gone on to consider  all  factors  pertinent  to  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his qualifying children and the issue of  the
    subsistence of that relationship.

10. I find that the Judge has materially erred for the  reasons  for  which
    permission to appeal was granted. There is  a  failure  to  assess  the
    issue of reasonableness as at the date of hearing. In  noting  that  it
    would be reasonable for the three minor children to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom with one or other of their estranged parents,  but  in  reality
    with their mother, should her asylum  claim  fail,  the  Judge  plainly
    considered that the mother's asylum claim was relevant to the issue  of
    reasonableness and in the circumstances, consideration should have been
    given to the issue of an adjournment. I appreciate that no  application
    was made and also that post the decision, and at  the  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, it has been confirmed that the Appellant's  ex-wife  is
    in fact, and was at the date of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal,
    appeal rights exhausted. Whilst I appreciate the argument that the  now
    disclosed facts in relation to the Appellant's ex-wife's asylum  appeal
    may render the error immaterial, I do not find that to be the  position
    when considering the totality of error within the Judge's decision.

11. At the date of hearing, the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  concluding
    that it was reasonable for the qualifying children to leave the  United
    Kingdom in the event of their mother's asylum claim being unsuccessful.
    The assessment of such reasonableness must  be  made  at  the  date  of
    hearing and not on a speculative outcome as to what may be the position
    at a future date. Further, as asserted by Miss  Brown,  the  Judge  has
    misdirected herself in relation to the factual matrix  surrounding  the
    issue of contact between the Appellant and his qualifying sons. It  was
    not open to conclude that  the  Appellant's  ex-wife's  status  in  the
    United Kingdom was precarious if the outcome of  her  protection  claim
    was unknown. The Judge's reasoning in relation to the  progression  and
    increasing contact between the Appellant and his two qualifying sons is
    inconsistent with the evidence that was before her. The conclusion that
    the progression to staying  contact  was  unlikely  and  there  was  no
    subsisting  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the  qualifying
    children, given the evidence that contact  had  been  progressing  from
    supervised to supported contact, is unsustainable.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Plumptre.

Anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                        Date               22   August
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

