
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19449/2019 (P)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2020                 |On 05 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                   GESSICA CRISTIAN DE SOUZA ASSIS FREIRE

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mentor Legal LLP Solicitors

For the respondent:    No submissions received



                            DECISION AND REASONS



         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on  28
         May 2020 against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Ford, promulgated  on  6  February  2020  following  a  hearing  at
         Birmingham on 31 January 2020.

      2. The appellant is a Brazilian national born on 2 February 1991.  She
         entered the UK as a visitor in June 2013 and has been  here  as  an
         overstayer since then. On 22 October 2015 she married  a  Brazilian
         national by proxy. Her husband has been in the UK since he  was  10
         but had no leave until 16 August 2018 when limited leave to  remain
         was granted on the basis of his private life. At the  date  of  the
         hearing, the appellant was expecting her first  child.  That  child
         has since been born.

      3. On 15 August 2019, the appellant sought to regularize  her  status.
         As she could not meet the requirements of the rules  as  a  partner
         because her husband was not British  or  settled  in  the  UK,  the
         application was made outside the rules on article 8 grounds.

      4. The  respondent  considered  the  appellant's  private  life  under
         paragraph  276ADE  but  found  that  she   could   not   meet   the
         requirements. The matter was  then  considered  outside  the  rules
         under article 8  but  the  respondent  found  that  there  were  no
         exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant  a  grant  of  leave.   The
         respondent considered  that  the  appellant  could  live  with  her
         husband in Brazil.

      5. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford  who  heard
         oral evidence from the appellant and her husband as  well  as  from
         two friends. The judge accepted that the appellant had family  life
         with her husband and, further, that she had established  a  private
         life  arising  from  her  presence  here  since  June   2013,   her
         involvement in the church community, the sharing of  her  husband's
         well-established private life and friendships that she had  formed.
         She found, however, that the appellant and  her  husband  had  been
         strategic in their planning of their immigration  applications  and
         that neither of them had any regard for  immigration  control.  She
         noted that they met when neither had any long-term status and  that
         they had evaded immigration control for many years. The appellant's
         husband made his application to remain in June 2017 some four years
         after they had met and two  years  after  they  were  married.  The
         appellant, however, did not make any application  until  after  she
         fell pregnant and after her husband had been granted limited  leave
         to remain on the basis of his private life.

      6. The judge found that the appellant would not face very  significant
         difficulties in integrating on return  to  Brazil.  She  spoke  the
         language and she had lived there until 2013. Her  mother  and  five
         siblings  remained  in  Brazil  and  the  appellant  had   a   good
         relationship with her siblings. Her  mother-in-law  also  lived  in
         Brazil and they were on  good  terms.  The  judge  found  that  the
         appellant's husband was working and earned  additional  money  from
         his own construction business. She found that the husband could set
         up a similar business in Brazil. She considered that the  appellant
         and her husband could continue their private and family life there.
         She recognised that they did not wish to do so and that there would
         be  repercussions  in  terms  of   lost   work,   study,   business
         opportunities and the potential loss of leave  to  remain  for  the
         appellant's husband but found that these problems did not amount to
         the high threshold of very significant obstacles to the appellant's
         return. The judge noted that the appellant and her husband were  in
         good health and that although the appellant was  anxious  over  her
         late pregnancy and uncertain immigration  situation,  she  had  not
         been diagnosed with any psychiatric or psychological condition that
         could  not  be  treated  in  Brazil.  The  judge  found  that   the
         appellant's husband had a good  understanding  of  Portuguese.  The
         judge also found that the appellant had the option of applying  for
         entry clearance from Brazil. She found that the public interest  in
         immigration control was strongly served by the decision because the
         appellant had deliberately overstayed  over  a  period  of  several
         years. The judge found that  the  decision  was  proportionate  and
         justified on the facts and that article 8 had  not  been  breached.
         Accordingly the appeal was dismissed.

      7. The appellant successfully sought permission to appeal. She argued:
         (i)  that  the  judge  had  focused  on  whether  there  were  very
         significant obstacles to the  appellant's  return  rather  than  on
         whether her departure amounted to a  disproportionate  interference
         with family life and that the reasoning on  the  latter  issue  was
         inadequate; (ii) that the determination of family life  issues  was
         not confirmed to assessing whether family life could  be  continued
         outside the UK; (iii) that the judge failed to have regard  to  the
         fact that the appellant's partner would lose his right to settle in
         the UK were he to relocate to Brazil; and (iv) that the  judge  did
         not attach weight to the fact that the appellant's husband had been
         here since he was ten years old.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      8. The matter would ordinarily have been listed for  a  hearing  after
         the grant of permission but due to the Covid-19 pandemic  and  need
         to take precautions against its spread, this  did  not  happen  and
         instead directions were sent to the parties on 31 July  2020.  They
         were asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with
         on the papers and to make any further submissions on the  error  of
         law issue within certain time limits.

      9. The Tribunal has received written submissions  from  the  appellant
         dated 13 August 2020 but  there  was  been  no  response  from  the
         respondent. I now consider whether it is appropriate  to  determine
         the matter on the papers.

     10. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

     11. I have had regard to the submissions made and to all  the  evidence
         before me before deciding how to proceed. The appellant agrees to a
         determination of the error of law issue without  an  oral  hearing.
         The respondent has not replied to the directions but I am satisfied
         that these were properly served and, further, that the  appellant's
         submissions were also served on the respondent. A full  account  of
         the facts are set out in those papers and  the  arguments  for  and
         against the appellant are clearly made. I am satisfied  that  I  am
         able to fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers.

         Submissions

     12. The appellant relies on her grounds for permission in her reply  to
         the Tribunal's  directions.  The  Tribunal  is  notified  that  the
         appellant's child was born on 19 February 2020 and  that  she,  her
         partner and their baby daughter live together in Watford.

         Discussion and conclusions

     13. I have considered all the evidence, the determination, the  grounds
         for permission and the submissions before making my decision.

     14. It is common ground that the appellant does not meet the definition
         of a partner within the Immigration Rules as her husband is neither
         British nor settled in the UK.

     15. The bases on which the  appeal  was  presented  to  the  judge  can
         clearly be seen from the skeleton argument. The judge was asked  to
         make findings on whether there were very significant  obstacles  to
         integration on return to Brazil. The basis for this contention  was
         that the appellant was nearing her due date of  delivery  and  that
         her private life here with her partner and  friends  could  not  be
         replicated in Brazil (at paragraph 17 of the skeleton argument). It
         was also argued for the  appellant  that  in  applying  the  public
         interest factors, she spoke English and her partner had a business.
         It was also maintained that he was settled[1] with  no  connections
         to Brazil, that he had been here since the age of ten  and  was  on
         the route to settlement. The appellant's submissions as recorded in
         the Record of Proceedings confirm that the appeal was presented  in
         this way. It was  argued  that  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles on return and that the appellant's absence from Brazil of
         over six years, her husband's presence here since childhood,  their
         ties here and the fact that the separation would not be a temporary
         one given that he could not seek indefinite leave to  remain  until
         2027 were compelling circumstances.

     16. Given the manner in which the appeal was presented and  submissions
         were made, it is hardly surprising that the judge proceeded as  she
         did. It is unhelpful when grounds are  prepared  by  someone  other
         than the representative who attended the  hearing  as  a  different
         view of what could  and  should  have  been  argued  is  often  put
         forward. However, the fact remains that the  judge  determined  the
         appeal on the arguments that were put at the hearing and the issues
         for determination were properly highlighted at 19.

     17. The factors relied on in the present grounds were all matters which
         the judge had regard to. The appellant's ability to  speak  English
         and her  husband's  ability  to  support  her  were  considered  at
         paragraph 30. Contrary to what is argued, the judge was well  aware
         of the appellant's husband's limited leave and loss of the route to
         settlement were he to leave the UK (at 24) and had  regard  to  the
         fact that he had been here since  the  age  of  ten  (at  9(d)  and
         15(a)). She also considered the imminent birth of their  child  (at
         19), language ability (at 20), the presence of family in Brazil (at
         20-22),  the  husband's  business  and  employment  (at  23),   the
         repercussions  of  their  relocation  to  Brazil   (at   24),   the
         appellant's past work experience and education (at 25), the  health
         of the appellant and her husband (at 26), the husband's ability  to
         relocate (at 27) and the need to maintain immigration control given
         the blatant disregard for the rules by both the appellant  and  her
         husband (at 18 and 29). This it can be seen that  all  the  factors
         the appellant now relies upon were considered by the judge  and  at
         best the appellant's complaint about the determination  is  one  of
         form rather than substance.  Plainly the appellant's  inability  to
         meet the provisions of the Immigration Rules as a partner are  also
         a weighty factor against her when proportionality is assessed.




         Decision

     18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors
         of law and it is upheld. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

         Anonymity

     19. I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.






         Signed


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 29 September 2020
-----------------------
[1] Presumably this is not meant to be taken in immigration
terms.??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????h???????
?????????????????????????[2]????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????


