
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19848/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2018                            |On 17th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AMMNA BEGUM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani, of Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January 1944. She
         applied on the 14th April 2016 for entry clearance to come  to  the
         UK as an adult dependent relative of her son, Mr Muhammad Akbar. On
         15th July 2016 the application was refused. Her appeal against  the
         decision was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  in  a
         determination promulgated on the 24th August 2017.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by First-
         tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes on 20th October  2017  on  the  basis
         that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in
         failing to consider the matter  as  a  human  rights  appeal  under
         Article 8 ECHR rather than an appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.
         There was also a failure to look at the prospect  of  care  by  her
         daughter in Pakistan or from the  Ahmadi  community  there  in  the
         context of the sponsor and his sister having travelled to  Pakistan
         which undermined any contention of a fear of  persecution  in  that
         country.

      3. The matter came before Dr HH Storey sitting as  an  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge who decided, in a decision promulgated on 23rd January  2018,
         that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  and  set  aside  the
         decision.  He preserved the findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge. The decision of Dr Storey is appended at Annex A of
         this decision.

      4. The matter came before me pursuant to a transfer order  to  re-make
         the appeal. In accordance  with  the  decision  of  Dr  Storey  the
         claimant needs to address compliance  with  the  Immigration  Rules
         under Appendix FM for adult dependents  including  compliance  with
         Appendix FM-SE. At the beginning of the hearing however Ms  Everett
         stated for the Secretary of State that compliance with Appendix FM-
         SE was accepted so evidence and submissions on this issue were  not
         required. At the end of hearing I reserved my decision.

Evidence & Submissions - Re-making

      5. Mr Muhammad Akbar, sponsor and son of the  claimant,  attended  the
         Upper Tribunal and adopted his two statements  and  confirmed  that
         they were true to the best of his knowledge and belief. In  summary
         in his statements and oral evidence Mr Akbar says that  he  is  the
         claimant's only son, and is head of the household since his  father
         passed away. He fled to the UK due to problems caused by his Ahmadi
         faith in 2000 and was granted refugee status in 2005.  He  obtained
         British citizenship, and in 2012 he married in Pakistan.

      6. From 2012 his wife and sister Nazia Kausar, who was also  a  widow,
         cared for his mother as she was too  ill  to  look  after  herself,
         until she moved to Germany as a refugee in 2015. He  did  not  feel
         safe being in Pakistan for more than a short time, but visited 4 or
         5 times between 2012 and April  2016  when  he  applied  for  entry
         clearance for his wife and mother to join him in the UK. He kept in
         almost daily contact with  the  family  by  Skype.  Initially  both
         applications were refused but then the decision  was  changed  with
         respect to his wife. He had provided DNA evidence showing he is the
         son of the claimant. He contends that the claimant  needs  everyday
         support of a female family member to care for her. He cannot return
         to Pakistan as he does not feel safe there for long periods due  to
         his Ahmadi faith; he has work in the UK as  an  Uber  private  hire
         driver; he and his son are British citizens; his  son  has  started
         nursery in the UK; and he cannot afford to fly  out  frequently  to
         see the claimant. The claimant has been  cared  for  by  his  niece
         since his wife came to the UK, who is normally resident  in  Ghana,
         and who is taking a break from her studies in Ghana but who  cannot
         remained permanently.

      7. The sponsor states that he is of the very strong opinion  that  his
         mother needs a full  time  female  carer.  He  has  considered  old
         peoples' homes in Islamabad, Karachi and Lahore but the cost is too
         high and he believes that his mother would be  miserable  there  as
         she would not be cared for by a relative and would not have  access
         to the Ahmadiyya community. There would also be issues  because  as
         an Ahmadi she would not be allowed to  share  cooking  utensils  or
         food with orthodox Muslims and this treatment would  be  unbearable
         for his mother. He has tried to find a female carer from within the
         Ahmadi community in Pakistan but he has only been able to obtain  a
         person who will provide help  with  cooking,  washing  clothes  and
         cleaning a few hours a day as very few women are without family  in
         Pakistan and those with family do not want to spend 24  hours  away
         from their family. In any case the claimant would not be happy with
         intimate  things  such  as  bathing,  helping  to  the  toilet  and
         medications being given by a non-family  member.  Even  if  such  a
         person were found, which has not happened yet, the  claimant  would
         not be happy with such a non-family arrangement.  He  is  in  touch
         with the claimant's doctors and is  aware  that  she  suffers  from
         depression; high blood pressure; and  has  a  need  for  a  further
         hernia operation but cannot be persuaded to have this at present as
         the last one was painful.

      8. The entire family bar the claimant have now left  Pakistan  due  to
         religious persecution. If the claimant is not allowed  to  come  to
         the UK the only solution is for his  wife  to  return  to  Pakistan
         which would mean he was separated from his wife and son which would
         be very sad for him as he has  already  sacrificed  five  years  of
         family life with them staying with the claimant in Pakistan.

      9. Kashaf Gull attended the Upper Tribunal and gave evidence,  adopted
         her statement as her evidence and confirming its  truthfulness.  In
         her statement and oral evidence she says, in summary,  as  follows.
         She married the claimant's son, Mr Muhammad Akbar  in  April  2012.
         After their marriage she  went  to  live  in  the  family  home  in
         Pakistan with the claimant and her husband's sister  Nazia  Kausar.
         The claimant was mostly not able to  do  household  chores  so  she
         would help  with  these.  The  claimant's  health  fluctuated:  she
         suffered  from  high  blood  pressure,  depression  and  had   some
         operations. When she came to the UK as a spouse  her  sister-in-law
         Shabana Kausar went back to be with her mother  for  a  month,  and
         then her husband's niece, who normally lives in Ghana went to  look
         after the claimant. The claimant needs  care  due  to  her  medical
         needs from her family, the sponsor and herself, as she is  old  and
         unwell and there is  no  one  left  who  can  remain  with  her  in
         Pakistan. Her husband's niece cannot postpone her studies and  stay
         with the claimant for ever, and attempts to find someone have  been
         unsuccessful and in any case the claimant would not be  comfortable
         and trust a  non-family  member.  The  claimant  is  becoming  very
         depressed as she dwells on her separation from her son and wants to
         talk to him; and this also affects her blood pressure.

     10. Ms Everett confirmed that whilst  compliance  with  E-ECDR  2.4  of
         Appendix FM was not in dispute there was a lack of specific medical
         evidence regarding the claimant. There was not the type of evidence
         that had been available in the Britcits v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  368
         case. There was also not the evidence that the claimant  could  not
         obtain the relevant care in Pakistan. Some enquiries had been  made
         but it was firmly in the sponsors' minds that they wished  to  care
         and that this was the cultural norm. There was  not  evidence  from
         the claimant, or an issue of dementia which meant that in  the  end
         she would not get used to a  non-family  member  carer.  It  seemed
         unlikely that no one in Rabwah, which is a city, within the  Ahmadi
         community would be willing to take on this work and provide 24 hour
         care. Whilst it was the genuine belief of the sponsor and his  wife
         that they would provide the best care the Immigration Rules did not
         provide a right for this "perfect" solution if a reasonable  lesser
         arrangement was available.

     11. Ms Bustani relied upon her  skeleton  argument.  She  reminded  the
         Tribunal that the positive credibility findings made by the  First-
         tier Tribunal were preserved, and of the preserved factual findings
         of the First-tier Tribunal, and that the remaining issue was simply
         whether the  care  that  the  claimant  needs  is   not  reasonably
         available to her in Pakistan because there is  no  person  who  can
         reasonably provide it.

     12. Ms Bustani drew attention  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in
         Britcits and that: "the provision of care in the home country  must
         be reasonable both from the perspective of  the  provider  and  the
         perspective of the applicant, and the standard of such care must be
         what is required for that particular applicant. " and further  that
         considerations when looking at  reasonableness  include  "emotional
         and  psychological  requirements   verified   by   expert   medical
         evidence". What is reasonable is ultimately an objective test.  She
         also cited Huang v SSHD [2007] 2 AC 167 and Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]
         EWCA Civ 31 which both considered that factors relevant to  whether
         separation of family members was an Article 8 ECHR breach  included
         "the prevailing cultural tradition and conditions in the country of
         origin".

     13. Ms Bustani submitted that it was the evidence of the  sponsor  that
         it would be difficult to find a full time Ahmadi carer who could be
         trusted with the claimant's care, and in any  case  his  belief  is
         that a non-family member would not be acceptable  to  the  claimant
         and so there was no option reasonably available in  Pakistan.  This
         claimant has been a widow for 20  years  and  has  never  lived  an
         independent life away from her  children  and  daughter-in-law  and
         granddaughter. Cultural norms meant that  non-family  members  were
         not acceptable carers for intimate care matters which were  amongst
         those  required  by  the  claimant;  and  further  breaching  those
         cultural norms would  exacerbate  the  claimant's  depression.  She
         accepted that the Immigration Rule created  a  high  threshold  but
         said on these particular facts where the  family  had  demonstrated
         that only their care would do  via  their  behaviour  over  a  long
         period of time it was met. In all the  circumstances  it  is  clear
         that there is no reasonable care in Pakistan.

Conclusions - Re-making

     14. The key parts of the  Immigration  Rules  at  Appendix  FM  are  as
         follows, although it is accepted by the Secretary of State that  E-
         ECDR 2.4 is met:

             E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their
             partner are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the
             applicant's partner, must as a result of age, illness or
             disability require long-term personal care to perform everyday
             tasks.

             E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their
             partner are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the
             applicant's partner, must be unable, even with the practical
             and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required
             level of care in the country where they are living, because-

                  (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that
                  country who can reasonably provide it; or

                  (b)  it is not affordable.

     15. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant's son  and  sponsor
         was a witness of truth, and his evidence is that the  current  non-
         relative carer could do  no  more  than  cook  and  clean  for  the
         appellant in the day. The claimant needed care with everyday  tasks
         such as cooking, washing, cleaning, and sometimes bathing and going
         to the toilet when she is unwell.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
         that she had always been cared for by a close relative: firstly, by
         her daughter-in-law until she got entry clearance as a spouse;  and
         then her daughter and finally her granddaughter who had  to  travel
         to Pakistan for a  period  of  time  to  do  this.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge found that  the  appellant's  daughter  and  the  UK
         sponsor have been recognised refugees from Pakistan  due  to  their
         Ahmadi faith; and that there is no institutionalised system of care
         in Pakistan, and things were  left  to  the  individual  family  to
         provide for elderly relatives.

     16. The Court of  Appeal  in  Britcits  emphasised  that  the  test  at
         paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 was one which required an objective assessment
         as to whether the required care can reasonably be provided  to  the
         required  level  in  Pakistan.  The  provision  of  care  must   be
         reasonable both from  the  perspective  of  the  provider  and  the
         perspective of the claimant. These issues are capable of  embracing
         psychological and emotional requirements  verified  by  appropriate
         evidence, see paragraph 76 of the decision. In  this  connection  I
         note that medical evidence from Dr Muhammad Faisal Raja was seen by
         the entry clearance officer [first paragraph of the second page  of
         the refusal] and that it is not disputed that this  supported  what
         was said in the application representations dated 3rd May 2016 from
         Wimbledon Solicitors that the claimant  suffers  from  hypertension
         and depressive illness, which is also the credible evidence of  the
         sponsor and his wife.

     17. It is accepted by the respondent that the claimant  is  an  elderly
         unwell widow now aged 74 years who requires long-term personal care
         to perform everyday tasks. I find on the evidence before me and the
         medical evidence seen by the entry clearance officer that  she  has
         hypertension, depression and hernias requiring repair, and that  as
         a result she needs cooking, cleaning, washing, and fairly regularly
         also with personal care in terms of bathing, helping to the  toilet
         and help with dressing.

     18. I am satisfied that the sponsor  and  his  wife  are  witnesses  of
         truth, as was the First-tier Tribunal, and that  they  have  sought
         through word of mouth in the  Ahmadi  community  in  Rebwah  for  a
         female person willing to live in 24 hours a day with  the  claimant
         but not been successful in this quest. I note that the period  that
         such a person has been sought is now a year: this being the  period
         since the sponsor's wife came to the UK and when it  was  necessary
         to prevail on the claimant's granddaughter to  take  a  "gap  year"
         from her studies in Ghana  to  provide  this  care.  Whilst  it  is
         obviously not impossible that such a person might be  found  if  an
         indefinite search was conducted there is  sense  in  the  sponsor's
         evidence that the majority of women likely to  take  such  work  in
         Pakistan also live and provide care for their own family  and  thus
         are not able to provide live  in  24  hour  care  to  the  claimant
         particularly given that culturally care of  the  elderly  within  a
         family is the norm so demand for such a service is not  widespread.
         In all the circumstances I therefore find that this option has been
         shown not be reasonably available to the claimant.

     19. The sponsor has also investigated old peoples' care  homes  in  the
         major cities in Pakistan. I accept his evidence that these are  not
         reasonable options as they are not Ahmadi institutions  in  Rebwah,
         in the  context  of  the  claimant's  Ahmadi  faith  and  community
         membership, and the likely antipathy towards her or lack of ability
         to follow her faith in such  an  institution.  In  coming  to  this
         conclusion, I have taken note of what is said in  the  respondent's
         public document Country of Origin Information and  Guidance  Report
         on Pakistan and Ahmadis dated May 2016  which  at  paragraph  4.1.2
         describes the community as possibly the most  persecuted  religious
         group in Pakistan. The city of Rebwah is however a relatively  safe
         space where adherents identity is not taboo and where Ahmadis  have
         communal facilities such as schools and hospitals,  see  paragraphs
         5.2.4 & 5 and 6.1.4. Ahmadi religion  is  associated  with  certain
         types of dress, see paragraphs 6.2.1 and 6.3.1 making Ahmadi  women
         recognisable  once  they  step  outside  their  home.  The  country
         guidance decision in MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -
         risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 sets out  what  is  termed  the
         anti Ahmadi religious legislation in the  Pakistani  Criminal  Code
         which prevents  various  public  manifestations  of  Ahmadi  faith,
         although makes it clear that faith can be  conducted  privately  or
         with other Ahmadis without infringing the law.

     20. I note that following the  guidance  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
         Britcits provision of care must be reasonable for the  provider  as
         well as the  perspective  claimant.  I  do  not  find  that  it  is
         reasonable to expect the claimant's granddaughter, Rukhsana, who is
         studying with her family in Ghana (see documents at pages 83 to  85
         of the claimant's bundle) to spend further time  in  Pakistan  away
         from her studies caring for the claimant; nor  for  the  claimant's
         two daughters (Shabana and Rehana) who are German citizens  or  her
         daughter Nazia who is an  asylum  seeker  in  Germany  to  do  this
         either. They would face at least prejudice  and  discrimination  as
         Ahmadis in Pakistan and have their own family commitments in  other
         countries. I also do not find it reasonable to expect  the  sponsor
         to be separated from his wife and child, as he was for  the  period
         of five years from 2012 to 2017, so that his wife can care for  the
         claimant. The thought of this clearly distressed him when  he  gave
         oral evidence, and it is in the best interests of his  young  child
         to be brought up by both parents. I also accept his  evidence  that
         he himself would not feel safe as an Ahmadi being in  Pakistan  for
         more than a short period of time, and this is consistent  with  his
         history of being granted refugee status prior  to  holding  British
         citizenship.

     21. In these circumstances I find that it is not simply the wish of the
         sponsor to provide the necessary long term  personal  care  to  the
         claimant but it is also the case that it is not possible for her to
         obtain this care in Pakistan as it is not available as there is  no
         one who can reasonably provide it  given  her  lack  of  family  in
         Pakistan due to their migration abroad; the lack of  women  in  her
         community who are willing to take on  this  work;  and  her  Ahmadi
         religious faith.

     22. I find the provisions  for  adult  dependent  relatives  under  the
         Immigration Rules have been met, and that  there  is  therefore  no
         public interest in the applicant being refused entry  clearance.  I
         find that the claimant has a family life relationship with her  son
         (the sponsor) and his family  in  the  UK  with  more  than  normal
         emotional and financial  dependency  between  them,  and  that  the
         interference with this family life relationship, which  refusal  of
         entry clearance represents, is a disproportionate interference with
         the claimant and sponsor's right to respect for their family  life.



    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal was set
         aside.

      3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on human rights
         grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  9th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant (hereafter the Entry Clearance Officer or ECO) brings  a
    challenge with permission to the decision of Judge Hussain of the First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) allowing on Article 8 grounds  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant) against the decision  made  by  the
    ECO on 15 July  2016  refusing  to  grant  her  entry  clearance  as  a
    dependent relative of her son Muhammad Akbar.  The claimant is now aged
    73.  The ECO's  reasons  for  refusing  her  application  included  the
    following points:

         "...  you  have  provided  no  evidence  that  with  the  continued
         financial support of your sponsor that the care you  require  would
         be unaffordable in Pakistan.  I am not  satisfied,  even  with  the
         practical and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required
         level of care in the country where you  are  living.   I  therefore
         refuse your application under paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM
         of the Immigration Rules.  (E.ECDR.2.5).

         ... under Article 8 ... no satisfactory reason has been put forward
         as to why the sponsor in the UK is unable to travel to Pakistan  to
         be with you.  I am therefore satisfied the decision is justified by
         the need to maintain an effective immigration and border control".

2.    The judge heard evidence from the sponsor,  whom  he  found  to  be  a
    "witness of truth" (paragraph 36).

3.    The judge referred to the guidance given by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Britcits v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368, paragraph 15 in particular:

         "... as is apparent from the Rules and the Guidance, the  focus  is
         on  whether  the  care  required  by  the  ADR  applicant  can   be
         'reasonably' provided and to 'the required  level'  in  their  home
         country.  As Mr Sheldon confirmed  in  his  oral  submissions,  the
         provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both  from
         the  perspective  of  the  provider  and  the  perspective  of  the
         applicant, and the standard of such care must be what  is  required
         for that particular applicant.  It is  possible  that  insufficient
         attention has been paid in the past to these  considerations  which
         focus on what  care  is  both  necessary  and  reasonable  for  the
         applicant to receive in their home country.   Those  considerations
         include issues as to the accessibility and geographical location of
         the provision of care and the standard of care.  They  are  capable
         of embracing emotional and psychological requirements  verified  by
         expert medical evidence.  What is reasonable is, of  course  to  be
         objectively assessed".

    Reference was also made to an unreported  UT  decision  (OA/18244/2012)
    which construed the requirement of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5  to  impose  "a
    significant burden of  proof  upon  an  individual  to  show  that  the
    required level of care is  not  available  and  no-one  can  reasonably
    provide it in the individual's country" and went on to accept  that  in
    certain circumstances it might be unreasonable to expect personal  care
    to be provided by non-family members.

4.    The judge concluded at paragraphs 33-40:

         "33.     In terms of the 'required level of care', I find that  the
             appellant requires care in everyday  tasks  such  as  cooking,
             washing cleaning and on some occasions  bathing  and  probably
             when she is not well with going to the toilet.  The question I
             have to now decide is whether this care is  available  in  her
             country.

         34.      In making that assessment, I take into account  the  needs
             of this particular appellant.  These are that she  appears  to
             have always had the benefit of being  cared  for  by  a  close
             relative.  This is  evident  from  the  fact  that  since  her
             daughter in law came to this country in April  2017,  she  has
             had the benefit of being cared for by her daughter and now her
             granddaughter.  In my view, unless there was a pressing  need,
             whether real or perceived, for the appellant to be  cared  for
             by a female family member, it is unlikely that the appellant's
             daughter who is recognised refugee in Germany would have taken
             the risk of travelling to Pakistan.

         35.      I give some weight to the appellant's son's evidence  that
             as a member of a minority faith (I say minority because whilst
             the Ahmadi's claim to be Muslims the laws of Pakistan  do  not
             recognise them to be as such), his fear that a carer from  the
             general population would unsuitable for his  mother  is  well-
             founded.  As a judge of this tribunal over many years, I  have
             tried many Ahmadi case where background materials  show  their
             risk to false allegations of all sorts of anti-Muslim activity
             in order to make life uncomfortable for  them.   Whether  that
             will happen in reality I do not know,  but  I  find  that  the
             sponsor's apprehension that that may happen and  as  a  result
             being weary of employing anyone other than an  Ahmadi,  to  be
             real.

         36.      I had the benefit of hearing  the  sponsor  give  evidence
             before me.  I found him to be a witness of truth.  I therefore
             accept his evidence that the present carer who is an Ahmadi is
             unable to engage herself on a full time permanent basis.   Her
             support is confined to cleaning and cooking for the  appellant
             during the day.

         37.      I find it quite likely that the appellant being  a  female
             and within the cultural norms  of  Pakistani  society,  to  be
             highly likely to be averse to being cared for by a male carer.
              On matters of intimate care, such as assisting with going  to
             the toilet and bathing, I find it highly likely that she would
             not countenance a non-relative's presence.

         38.      The conclusion to which I have come is that  in  terms  of
             the appellant's reasonable care needs, when compared  to  what
             is available, I am satisfied that such care is not  reasonably
             available in Pakistan.

         39.      In reaching that position,  I  have  had  regard  to  some
             background material provided by the  appellant's  counsel  for
             which I am grateful.  What is apparent from this  material  is
             that there is no institutionalised system of  social  care  of
             the  elderly  in  Pakistan.   Such  things  are  left  to  the
             individual's family to provide  for.   In  the  case  of  this
             appellant unfortunately all her immediate relatives have  left
             Pakistan.  I find that  she  has  no  remaining  relatives  in
             Pakistan who are likely to fulfil the needs that she has.

         40.      For all the reasons given above, I find that the appellant
             meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules".

5.    The ECO's grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  FtT  Judge  erred
    firstly in his treatment of the appellant's medical  care  requirements
    and secondly in failing to consider Section 117B  considerations  under
    the NIAA 2002.

6.    I  am  very  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their  targeted
    submissions. Miss Reid's built on a Rule 24  response  which  submitted
    that the ECO's grounds were  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings of fact that the claimant can only  be  cared  for  by
    members of the Ahmadi  community  and  that  (in  the  absence  of  the
    daughter-in-law who successfully  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse at the same  time  as  the  claimant  -  whose  application  was
    refused) the shortfall in care was being met by various family  members
    travelling to Pakistan to care for her for a period of time.  Paragraph
    5(e) of the Rule 24 response also took issue with the  ECO's  point  in
    the written grounds that the judge had  not  considered  whether  there
    were any insurmountable obstacles to the claimant's family returning to
    Pakistan to care for her.  This, it was said, is not a  requirement  of
    the Immigration Rules and  it  is  unclear  how  the  absence  of  such
    evidence has impacted upon the judge's decision to the extent  that  it
    could be considered a material error of  law.   As  regards  the  ECO's
    second ground, the Rule 24 response contends  that  given  the  judge's
    decision that the claimant met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, there was no public interest in  refusing  to  grant  her  entry
    clearance on Article 8 grounds.

7.    Having considered the respective arguments, I have concluded that  the
    FtT Judge materially erred in law.   As  emphasised  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Britcits, the question of whether care required by the  adult
    dependent relative can be "reasonably" provided and  "to  the  required
    level" is to be "objectively assessed".  There is no  dispute  in  this
    case that the claimant requires care in everyday tasks such as cooking,
    washing, cleaning and on some occasions bathing and probably  going  to
    the toilet (see the judge's finding at paragraph 33).  The  only  issue
    is whether the  requisite  care  is  available  to  her.   The  judge's
    reasoning on this issue is beset by the following difficulties.

8.    First of all, the evidence given by the sponsor was not to the  effect
    that the only suitable carers would be a  female  family  relative  (as
    appears to be the judge's logic at paragraph 34), but was only  limited
    to members of the Ahmadi community (indeed his oral evidence appears to
    leave open that even persons outside  the  Ahmadi  community  might  be
    suitable if care  is  taken  as  to  the  person  being  employed.)  At
    paragraph 8 the judge records the sponsor's evidence as being that:

         "[s]omeone cannot just be paid to help her with these tasks because
         being a member of a minority  community,  they  cannot  allow  just
         anyone in.   In  addition,  the  appellant  is  73  years  old  and
         therefore care has to be taken as to  the  person  being  employed.
         There is no  system  of  checking  backgrounds  of  individuals  in
         Pakistan".

    At paragraph 9 the sponsor is recorded as adding that:

         "In terms of the efforts he has made to find care for  his  mother,
         he has asked around relatives with no  luck  so  far.   No  one  is
         willing to be with her  on  a  permanent  basis.   Sometimes  those
         employed do not function properly and other times they demand extra
         money. ..."

    This evidence does not establish that only female members of the family
    could reasonably be expected to provide care to  the  appellant.   Even
    read as confining potential carers to those from the Ahmadi  community,
    it would appear that the sponsor's evidence only establishes there have
    been difficulties in getting someone to care  for  the  claimant  on  a
    permanent basis and "with no luck so far".  If  (as  the  judge  found)
    relatives were prepared to return to Pakistan for short periods to care
    for her (with all the expenses that such trips entail), the ability  of
    the family to offer a good wage or  payment  for  the  claimant's  care
    could not be a real issue.  The judge noted that  he  has  "tried  many
    Ahmadi cases" and on that basis it is hard to understand why he did not
    take into account from that case experience that the  Ahmadi  community
    (especially in Rabwa where the appellant lived) is a highly  supportive
    one when it comes to ensuring the welfare  of  family  members.   Given
    that what the judge had to make was an "objective  assessment",  it  is
    difficult to follow  why  he  was  prepared  to  accept  the  sponsor's
    statement that he had "no luck so  far"  as  determinative  of  whether
    carers from within the Ahmadi community could not be found when a  good
    wage or payment arrangement was not a barrier.

9.    A second difficulty is that the judge appears  to  have  assumed  that
    the need for care by a female family relative could  be  inferred  from
    the fact that "it is unlikely that the [claimant's] daughter who is [a]
    recognised refugee in Germany would have taken the risk  of  travelling
    to Pakistan".  It is  hard  to  see  how  the  judge  arrived  at  this
    conclusion. It rests on the assumption that  if  a  recognised  refugee
    returns to their country of origin, that demonstrates there is a  risk.
    That is simply incorrect.  Refugee status is acquired on the  basis  of
    an ex nunc assessment at the time it  is  granted.   According  to  the
    judge's summary of the evidence of the claimant's daughter who had been
    recognised as a refugee in Germany, "[s]he said that she had  lived  in
    Germany for a long time".  A return to Pakistan in April 2017  did  not
    necessarily entail anything as regards risk on return.  The same can be
    said for the return of the sponsor who is an Ahmadi  and  also  someone
    whom (Ms Reid told me on instruction) had been back  to  Pakistan  four
    times.  The judge appears to have assessed matters on  the  basis  that
    all Ahmadis are at risk  on  return.   That  is  contrary  to  Tribunal
    country guidance and also the country background evidence.

10.   Given the above errors in the judge's  approach,  it  cannot  be  said
    that he  approached  the  issue  of  where  care  would  be  reasonably
    available to the claimant by taking  into  account  factors  that  were
    based solely on evidence rather than also on unwarranted assumptions.

11.   In light of my conclusion as regards the respondent's first ground  of
    challenge, it is not strictly necessary for me to  address  the  second
    ground save to note that if the judge's conclusion  that  the  claimant
    met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  was  flawed,  then  his
    reasoning given for allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds must  also
    be flawed since at paragraph 41 the only reason given for allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8 was the fact that he was satisfied the  claimant
    met the Rules.

12.   Having found a material error of law I turn to consider whether  I  am
    in a position to re-make it without further ado.  I have concluded I am
    not.  Given, however, that the  ECO's  grounds  do  not  challenge  the
    judge's positive credibility  findings,  I  consider  these  should  be
    allowed to stand, subject to it being  understood  that  the  issue  of
    whether  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses,   objectively   considered,
    establishes that the claimant met  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules, remains a matter for the judge at the next  hearing.
    In such circumstances it is appropriate that the case  be  retained  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

13.   I add one further observation.  In amplifying the written  grounds  Mr
    Duffy raised the issue of  whether  the  claimant  met  the  evidential
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE at paragraph 23.  That was not  a  point
    taken by the ECO in the refusal decision but does seem to me  to  be  a
    matter properly engaged by the evidence before the  judge.   Since  the
    issue of whether the claimant meets the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules will remain a central one at the  next  hearing,  the  claimant's
    representatives  should  consider  themselves  on   notice   to   offer
    submissions on this aspect of the  Rules  as  well  as  the  provisions
    relied on by the ECO.

14.   To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  judge's  primary
    findings of fact are preserved.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:                                            Date: 21 January 2018
             [pic]
