
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/19495/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 January 2018                     |On 12 January 2018              |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Sheffield
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               PARVEEN MAHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Dr M Qazi (Sponsor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings  this  appeal  but,
to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were in  the  First-
tier Tribunal. This is an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  a
decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shore,  promulgated  on  29/09/2017
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR Grounds

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 14/11/1957 and is a national of  Pakistan.  The
Appellant applied for entry clearance as  an  adult  dependent  relative  to
join her son, a British citizen, in the UK. On 28/07/2016 the  Secretary  of
State refused the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Shore ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 25/10/2017 Judge Chohan  gave
permission to appeal stating

      2. The grounds argue that the Judge erred in law by simply relying  on
      the evidence of the sponsor but not considering objective evidence; no
      reasons have been given as to why the  appellant's  care  in  Pakistan
      could not continue; and that the Judge has failed to consider  section
      117B.


      3. It is clear from the Judge's decision that the  appellant  receives
      assistance from private carers in Pakistan. However, at  paragraph  32
      of the decision, the Judge concludes that the  care  would  be  better
      provided by the sponsor in the United Kingdom. No  reasons  have  been
      given as to why the appellant's care could not continue  in  Pakistan.
      It does not appear to be the  case  that  medical  treatment  for  the
      appellant's ailments is not available in Pakistan. In my view,  it  is
      open to argument that the Judge has given inadequate reasons  for  the
      conclusions made.


      4. Accordingly, there is an arguable error of law.

The Hearing

5.  Mr Walker for the  respondent  adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. He told me that the Judge had not considered  a  number  of  factors
and had not taken the correct approach  to  the  evidence.  He  argued  that
there  had  been  no  reliable  evidence  addressing  the   suitability   of
continuing caring Pakistan, or alternative arrangements which could be  made
by the sponsor from the UK. He acknowledged that the  Judge  had  found  the
sponsor to be a credible witness but said  that  the  Judge's  findings  had
been coloured by his impression of the sponsor. He  argued  that  the  Judge
had failed to consider section 117B of the 2002  Act  in  carrying  out  his
proportionality assessment. He urged me to set the decision aside.

6. Dr Qazi adopted the terms of his letter dated 4 December 2017,  and  told
me that the decision does not contain a material error of law.  He  referred
me to his CV & told me that  he  is  a  qualified  and  experienced  medical
practitioner, and so his evidence about his mother's medical needs  and  the
availability of care and treatment should be afforded weight.  He  explained
the  appellant's  circumstances  in  Pakistan  and  that  the  appellant  is
financially dependent upon him. He told me that  the  section  117B  factors
have been addressed and that he is a man of significant means  so  that  the
appellant would not be a burden on the NHS. He  referred  me  to  background
materials now produced about the availability of care in Pakistan. He  urged
me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. The Judge's findings of fact start at [14] of the decision. At  [27]  and
[28] the Judge finds  the  sponsor  to  be  an  entirely  credible  witness.
Placing reliance on the sponsor's evidence, at [29] the  Judge  specifically
finds that  the  appellant  requires  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
everyday tasks. That is a finding which was open to the  Judge  to  make  on
the evidence before the Judge. The Judge gives  clear  reasons  for  finding
the sponsor to be a credible  and  reliable  witness  &  for  accepting  the
sponsor's evidence.

8. It is the Judge's job to assess credibility. That  is  exactly  what  the
Judge did. The Judge sets out adequate reasons for placing reliance  on  the
sponsor's evidence. The sponsor's evidence was sufficient for the  Judge  to
make the findings at [29] and [34] that the appellant meets the  eligibility
and suitability criteria under the rules.  The  Judge  applied  the  correct
standard of proof and the correct burden of proof. The Judge's finding  that
the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the   immigration   rules   is
unassailable. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013]  UKUT  254  (IAC)  the
Upper Tribunal said that "Giving weight to a factor one way  or  another  is
for the fact-finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely  give
rise to an error of law".

9. The Judge's finding, at [30], that the appellant  meets  the  eligibility
and suitability requirements of the rules is a finding  that  the  appellant
is an adult dependent relative of her son, the sponsor. That  is  a  finding
that family life  within  the  meaning  of  article  8  exists  between  the
appellant and the sponsor.

10. The Judge's findings in relation to  article  8  are  contained  between
[31] of [38]  of  the  decision.  The  findings  are  brief,  but  there  is
sufficient there to demonstrate an adequate proportionality  assessment.  In
essence, the Judge finds that because the appellants  meet  the  suitability
and eligibility requirements of appendix FM, and because  the  appellant  is
the dependent mother of  the  sponsor,  then  by  analogy  the  respondent's
decision is a disproportionate interference with the right  to  respect  for
family life.

11. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)  the
Upper Tribunal  held that in appeals  against  refusal  of  entry  clearance
under Article 8, the claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules  is
capable of being a weighty, though not determinative, factor  when  deciding
whether such refusal is proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing
immigration control.

 12.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

13. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

14. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

15. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 29 September 2017 stands.


Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 9 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

