
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/19211/2018
                                                               hu/19213/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2016                  |On 18th December 2019                |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                              AG and GG (Kenya)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Schon, Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Kenya born on  31  August  1981  and  19
    September 2005.  On 11 April 2019, Judge  Lawrence  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed their appeals against  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 7 September 2018 to refuse their  applications
    for leave to remain and their human rights claims submitted on  18  May
    2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 5 August  2019,  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge found that the decision  of  Lawrence  had
    involved the making of an error of law and directed that the matter  be
    reheard in this Tribunal.  The substantive rehearing was transferred to
    me.  The central issue was to be whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the second appellant, a child who has resided  in  this  country
    for more than seven years (see below), to leave the United Kingdom.

Factual background

 2. The appellants came to the United Kingdom in 2010 as the dependants  of
    the first appellant's then husband.  They have not held leave to remain
    since 30 October 2014.  In that time, the  appellants  have  integrated
    into their communities and the second appellant and his younger  sister
    have begun to put down roots in this country.

 3. The deputy judge gave directions  enabling  the  appellants  to  adduce
    further evidence in advance of the rehearing.  This  they  did  in  the
    form of witness statements and an independent  social  worker's  report
    from a Ms Jenna Hayes dated 17 November 2019.

Discussion

 4. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Avery conceded that in  light  of  the
    contents of Ms Hayes' report, he no longer  resisted  the  appeal.   He
    accepted that in light of the second  appellant's  near  ten  years  of
    residence in this country, the fact that he is now approaching the  age
    of 14, and the other matters which are considered in the report  of  Ms
    Hayes, that it would not be reasonable for the  purposes  of  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules for the  appellant  to  be
    removed to Kenya.

 5. Paragraph EX.1 states as follows:

         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if

                (a)

                    (i)     the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                        parental relationship with a child who -

                        (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or  was  under
                             the age of 18  years  when  the  applicant  was
                             first granted leave  on  the  basis  that  this
                             paragraph applied;

                        (bb)   is in the UK;

                        (cc)   is a British Citizen or has lived in the  UK
                             continuously  for  at   least   the   7   years
                             immediately preceding the date of  application;
                             and

                    (ii)   taking into account their  best  interests  as  a
                        primary consideration, it would not  be  reasonable
                        to expect the child to leave the UK; ..."

    I am satisfied that the concession made by Mr Avery  was  appropriately
    made and was within the range of reasonable concessions that were  open
    to the Secretary of State on the facts of this case, in particular  the
    contents of the report of Ms Hayes.

 6. Although some of the contents of the Hayes  report  appeared  to  stray
    beyond her competence as a social worker and into the  territory  of  a
    country expert focusing on Kenya, much of the report's analysis  is  of
    merit and supports the concession made by Mr Avery.  In particular, the
    extent to which the second appellant is integrated in his  school  life
    here, his linguistic skills in English and  the  life  he  enjoys  with
    friends here as well as that of his sister, are all factors  considered
    by Ms Hayes that were clearly within her competence.  Those factors all
    combine  to  support  Mr  Avery's  concession  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the purposes of paragraph  EX.1  to  expect  the  second
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

 7. The Immigration Rules set out the Secretary  of  State's  views  as  to
    where the public interest in the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    controls lies.  Where the rules are satisfied, there can be  no  public
    interest in removal, thus rendering removal  disproportionate  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.  The first appellant (the mother) now  satisfies
    EX.1(a) by virtue of Mr Avery's concession, which, as I have said, I am
    satisfied was appropriately made.

 8. Turning to the second appellant in his personal  capacity,  it  follows
    that  he   satisfies   the   corresponding   provision   in   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules, which contains a  substantially
    similar criterion.  It would not be reasonable to expect him to  return
    to Kenya, for the reasons which lay behind Mr Avery's concession.

 9. Although the younger sister of the second appellant  appeared  to  have
    been one of the appellants before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  was
    named on Judge Lawrence's decision, it does not  appear  that  she  has
    been included as party to these proceedings.  Be  that  as  it  may,  I
    simply observe that everything that I have accepted in relation to  her
    elder brother would apply in relation to her as  well.   There  can  be
    absolutely no suggestion that, because she  is  not  included  formally
    within the confines of this appeal, it would be somehow  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the United Kingdom.

10. These appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

11. In view of the age of  the  second  appellant,  I  make  an  order  for
    anonymity.

NOTICE OF DECISION

These appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                           Date 12 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed Stephen H Smith                           Date 12 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

