
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19510/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2020                  |On 08 December 2020                  |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOLLIFFE


                                   Between

                             Ms Atita Senapituk
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Thailand, born on 30 August 1986. She
appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Aziz ("the judge"), promulgated on 24 February 2020, by which he dismissed
the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of her human rights
claim.  This claim was made in the context of an application for indefinite
leave to remain as the partner of a spouse present and settled in the
United Kingdom.

By way of brief history, the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with
entry clearance as a spouse in 2014.  She obtained an extension of that
leave from 2016 to 2019.  On 3 February 2019 she made an application for
indefinite leave to remain and this was refused on 1 November of that year.
 It is this refusal that led to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The judge proceeded to determine the Appellant's appeal without a hearing.
This was notwithstanding the absence of a bundle either from the Appellant
or, significantly, from the Respondent.  The reason why the latter is of
real importance in this case is that the sole bases of refusal of the
Appellant's human rights claim were that: first, it was alleged she and her
spouse had failed to attend for interview on two separate occasions;
second, that the Respondent had apparently been in receipt of a letter from
the spouse asserting that the relationship was no longer genuine and
subsisting.  Therefore, as a simple matter of fact, the judge proceeded
without any evidential basis for the assertions made by the Respondent in
her decision letter.

Whilst it appeared to be the case that the Appellant herself had not deemed
it appropriate to submit very much (if any) evidence herself for the
appeal, the very basis of the indefinite leave to remain application was
that she was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her spouse.  The
judge, having apparently accepted the assertion made by the Appellant that
she and her spouse had attended for interview on two occasions but had not
in fact been interviewed due to administrative issues, nonetheless
concluded that as the burden of proof rested with her, the appeal fell to
be dismissed.

The grounds of appeal, drafted by the Appellant herself, asserted that the
judge had erred in making the decision without any evidence. Permission was
granted by Resident Judge Zucker on 3 August 2020.

The Appellant had been invited to attend the hearing before us, but there
was no appearance.  We were satisfied that the notice of the hearing had
been sent out to her and that she had received it. Indeed, she had made a
written request that the matter be dealt with on the papers, but it was
deemed appropriate for the hearing to continue in order that we could hear
submissions either from the Appellant if she chose to attend) and/or from a
Senior Presenting Officer.  Having regard to all the circumstances and the
overriding requirement to act fairly, we are satisfied that we should
proceed with the hearing.

In the event, we heard from Mr Lindsay, who, in his customary manner, took
a fair and considered view of this case.  He accepted that the judge had
materially erred in law.

We agree with that concession.  Essentially, the judge materially erred in
either one of two respects. First, it was procedurally unfair for him to
have decided the case against the Appellant without having even expressly
considered the possibility of adjourning the matter in order for relevant
evidence to be served, in particular on the Respondent's side.
Alternatively, it can be said that the judge erred by finding against the
Appellant in the absence of any evidence in support of the only bases of
refusal put forward by the Respondent.

Neither error is rendered immaterial by the absence of little, if any,
evidence before him from the Appellant, given the nature of her human
rights claim.  It had been her assertion that there was a genuine and
subsisting relationship.

In light of the errors of law identified, we set the judge's decision
aside.

In terms of disposal, we are minded to remit this matter back to the First-
tier Tribunal, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement and
our primary conclusion that there has been procedural unfairness in this
case.  The First-tier Tribunal will reconsider the Appellant's case afresh.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

We remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) This appeal shall be reheard afresh by a judge  other  than  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Aziz;

      2) The First-tier Tribunal shall issue  any  further  case  management
         directions it deems appropriate.

Directions to the parties

      1) The Respondent shall, no later than 21 days after our  decision  to
         send out, file with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
         Appellant  a  bundle  of  all  relevant  materials,  including  all
         evidence relied on in this appeal;

      2) The Appellant must tell the First-tier Tribunal within 28  days  of
         our decision being sent out to her whether she wishes  to  continue
         with her appeal or whether she wishes to withdraw it;

      3) If the Appellant wishes to continue with her appeal, she must  send
         any evidence she wants to rely on to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
         the Respondent as soon as possible, and no later than 35 days after
         our decision is sent out;



Signed   H. Norton-Taylor  Date: 26 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
