
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19203/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2018                             |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MUHAMMAD IMRAN KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Laurence Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
                             Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr A Malik, Counsel instructed by Aldgate
                             Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Row  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  11
    August 2017) in which he allowed, on Article 8 grounds, the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse to grant him leave to  remain  as
    the spouse of a British national.  The only issue  in  the  appeal  was
    whether the Secretary of State had made out her case under S-LTR.1.6 of
    Appendix FM - namely, that the presence of the applicant in the UK  was
    not conducive to the public  good  because  their  conduct,  character,
    associations or other reasons made  it  undesirable  to  allow  him  to
    remain in the UK.  The Secretary of State alleged that the claimant had
    used a proxy to take two English language speaking tests on 19  October
    2011 and 15 November 2011 at Burnley Training College, and had  thereby
    obtained two TOEIC test certificates by deception.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 7 February 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Michael Keane granted the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal for the following reasons: "For
    the reasons mentioned in the grounds the Judge made arguable errors  of
    law but for which the outcome of the appeal might have been  different.
    The Judge found at paragraph 7 of  his  decision  that  the  respondent
    discharged the evidential burden of proof in respect of the appellant's
    alleged deception.  The Judge arguably should have gone  on  to  decide
    whether the appellant had raised an innocent explanation whereupon  the
    burden would revert to the respondent to discharge the legal burden  of
    proof.  The Judge arguably did not observe such an approach established
    by authorities which were binding on the Judge."

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a national of  Pakistan,  whose  date  of  birth  is  2
    December 1977.  On 21 July 2016 he made a human rights application  for
    leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  a  settled
    person.

 4. On 1 August 2016 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    the application.  On 19 October 2011 and 15 November 2011, he purported
    to take a TOEIC speaking test with  ETS.   ETS  had  a  record  of  his
    speaking test.  Using voice verification  software,  ETS  was  able  to
    detect that a single person was undertaking multiple  tests.   ETS  had
    undertaken a check of his test and had confirmed to  the  Secretary  of
    State  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that   his
    certificates were fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy  test-
    taker.  His scores from the test  taken  on  19  October  2011  and  15
    November 2011 at Burnley Training College had  now  been  cancelled  by
    ETS.  On the basis of information provided to her by ETS, the Secretary
    of  State  was  satisfied  that  his  certificates  were   fraudulently
    obtained.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-Tier Tribunal

 5. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Row.   The  claimant
    gave oral evidence.  He adopted as his evidence in  chief  his  witness
    statement signed on 11 August 2017.  In the statement he said  that  he
    failed the TOEIC test twice and he had only  passed  it  on  his  third
    attempt.  On his third attempt, he had obtained 170 marks, and  he  had
    thereby been able to obtain a student visa.  He took the exam  for  the
    third time at a different location.  The Home Office had  not  objected
    to his "third test results" or to other results which he  had  obtained
    when taking English language tests.

 6. In his subsequent decision, the Judge set out his consideration of  the
    evidence and his findings at paragraphs [7] to [12].  At paragraph [7],
    he held that the Secretary of State's case was established by producing
    the statements from Professor Peter French and Matthew Lister, and  the
    standard statements used in the  ETS  cases  of  Peter  Millington  and
    Rebecca Collings: "It is established  that  this  evidence  provides  a
    prima facie case that the tests were taken by  proxy.   The  [claimant]
    can rebut this."

 7. At paragraphs [8]-[11], the Judge gave his reasons for holding that the
    claimant had rebutted the Secretary of State's prima  facie  case;  and
    for being satisfied  that  the  claimant  had  genuinely  sat  for  the
    speaking tests on 19 October 2011 and 15 November 2011, both  of  which
    he had failed.

Discussion

 8. The error of law  challenge  is  supported  by  extensive  citation  of
    passages from SM & Qadir (ETS - evidence - burden of  proof)  UTIAC  21
    April 2016, Shehzad & Another  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615  and  R  (On  the
    application of Nawaz) -v- SSHD (ETS: review standard/evidential  basis)
    [2017] UKUT 00288 (IAC).

 9. This extensive citation of authority is directed  at  establishing  the
    uncontentious proposition that the standard generic evidence relied  on
    by the Secretary of State in ETS cases is sufficient to raise  a  prima
    facie case such that the evidential burden shifts to  the  claimant  to
    provide an innocent explanation.

10. I consider that the Judge adequately acknowledged  that  this  was  his
    necessary starting point.  The Judge expressly held at paragraph [7] of
    his decision that the Secretary of State had discharged the  evidential
    burden of  proof  in  respect  of  the  claimant's  alleged  deception.
    Accordingly, there is no merit in the argument that the Judge failed to
    observe the approach established by the authorities.  On the  contrary,
    he did precisely that which he was required to do, which was to  go  on
    to decide whether the claimant had raised an innocent explanation which
    rebutted the prima facie case of deception.

11. The second issue raised in  the  grounds  is  whether  the  Judge  gave
    adequate reasons for finding that the claimant had rebutted  the  prima
    facie case of deception.  Thus, in paragraph 10  of  the  grounds,  the
    following is pleaded: "In this case is it respectfully  submitted  that
    the FTT has failed to give adequate reasoning why  the  respondent  has
    not met the legal burden, nor that there is any  innocent  explanation.
    The fact that the test was  failed  does  not  amount  to  an  innocent
    explanation, neither does the fact that the test was not relied on."

12. Although this is not a point which is specifically taken in the grounds
    of appeal,  the  Judge's  line  of  reasoning  is  susceptible  to  the
    criticism that he  did  not  engage  with  the  supplementary  evidence
    provided by the Secretary of State to reinforce her prima  facie  case.
    The significance of the expert report of Professor Peter French is that
    it counters the expert evidence of Dr Harrison which was adduced in the
    case of SM & Qadir, and which was the  foundation  for  the  Tribunal's
    finding at paragraph [68] as follows: "As our analysis and  conclusions
    in the immediately preceding section made clear,  we  have  substantial
    reservations about the strength and quality of the Secretary of State's
    evidence.  Its shortcomings are manifest.  On  the  other  hand,  while
    bearing in mind that the context is one of alleged deception,  we  must
    be mindful of the comparatively modest threshold  which  an  evidential
    burden entails.  This calls for an evaluative assessment on the part of
    the Tribunal.  By an admittedly narrow margin, we  are  satisfied  that
    the Secretary of State has discharged this burden."

13. In reaching the conclusion that  the  standard  generic  evidence  only
    discharged the evidential burden  by  a  narrow  margin,  the  Tribunal
    attached great weight to the expert evidence of Dr Harrison, who was of
    the opinion that ETS' method of  analysing  the  TOEIC  test  data  was
    deeply flawed and was capable of generating a very high number of false
    positives.  Professor French's report is a direct riposte to the expert
    evidence of Dr Harrison.  The lawyers for the Secretary of State made a
    late application for Professor French's  report  to  be  admitted  into
    evidence at the hearing of the SM &  Qadir,  but  the  application  was
    refused on the grounds of lateness.

14. In his report, Professor French  was  asked  to  give  his  opinion  of
    whether, on the balance of probabilities, ETS's methodology was  likely
    to result in any false positives (i.e. speaking comparison test results
    wrongly indicating that different speakers were the same  person).   If
    he considered false positives were likely, and he was asked to estimate
    how many.


15. His conclusion at Section 3.2 is that the ASR used by ETS is  extremely
    likely to  produce  some  false  positives  among  the  58,464  matches
    identified by the software in respect of TOEIC test  recordings.   This
    is  despite  the  threshold  for  producing  matches  having  been  set
    conservatively.  The number of false  positives  produced  by  the  ASR
    cannot however be estimated with any great degree of precision.


16. The error rate of 2% quoted for the pilot test was not broken down into
    false positives versus false negatives.  But even if  one  assumes  the
    worst case scenario, that all the errors were false positives, the  the
    safety net system of having trained listeners assess  all  the  matches
    shown up by the ASR would, in his  opinion,  have  made  a  very  large
    reduction to the overall number of false positives.


17. At paragraph 3.3.7, Professor French refers to the  fact  that  of  the
    58,464 matches produced by the ASR, only 33,735 were confirmed  by  the
    listener pairs.  In other words, only 57.7% of matches were accepted.


18. Professor French opines that the very high rejection rate of  42.3%  is
    in part attributable to the stringent conditions laid  down  for  match
    confirmation i.e. for acceptance of  a  match  both  listeners  working
    independently had to confirm it, and the test for individual acceptance
    was that, "any doubt about the validity of the match will result in  it
    being rejected", citing the witness statement of  Peter  Millington  at
    paragraph 45.


19. His conclusions at paragraph 4 are that the conditions used for trained
    listener  pair  confirmation,  in  conjunction  with  the  conservative
    threshold set for ASR match identification, would, in  his  view,  have
    resulted in substantially more false rejections than false positives.


20. Even though there is material missing  from  the  body  of  information
    called for by Dr Harrison, he is not convinced that  the  provision  of
    such information  could  be  used  to  establish  a  closely  specified
    percentage of false positives.


21. If the 2% error rate established for the pilot recordings were to apply
    to the  TOEIC  recordings,  he  estimates  that  the  number  of  false
    positives is likely to be substantially less than 1% after the  process
    of assessment by trained listeners has been applied.

22. Accordingly, in the absence of expert  evidence  from  Dr  Harrison  in
    rebuttal, a much stronger prima facie case  of  deception  was  thereby
    raised against this claimant than was raised against the  claimants  in
    SM & Qadir, and the evidential burden on this claimant  to  produce  an
    innocent   explanation   for   the   invalid   test   results    became
    correspondingly greater.

23. However, I am nonetheless wholly unpersuaded that the Judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for  finding  that  the  claimant  had  given  an
    innocent explanation which rebutted the objectively strong prima  facie
    case of deception.

24. The Judge gave four reasons for finding that the claimant had  given  a
    satisfactory innocent explanation which rebutted the prima facie case.

25. The first reason was that the claimant  had  failed  the  two  speaking
    tests in which he was alleged to have used  a  proxy  test-taker.   The
    Judge observed in paragraph [10] as follows: "If the appellant had used
    a proxy it would have been odd to use someone who  is  not  capable  of
    passing the test.  It would tend to defeat the object of the  exercise.
    It would have been even odder to use someone in the second test who was
    also not capable of passing it."

26. The second reason was that the claimant had not relied upon  either  of
    the two failed tests in any application.

27. The third reason was that, having failed the first two tests,  he  then
    went on a course to improve his English and he subsequently passed  the
    test; and the third test result was used to support his application for
    further leave to remain; and the validity  of  that  test  was  not  in
    question.

28. The fourth reason was contained in paragraph [11]: "He gave  convincing
    detail about the test and his efforts to pass it.   I  saw  him,  heard
    him, and I believed what he had to  say.   I  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant did take the two tests."

29. It is clear from the surrounding evidence that the claimant  wished  to
    obtain further leave to remain as a student, and for  this  purpose  he
    required a speaking score of between  160  and  180,  corresponding  to
    level B2 CEFR.  On the test he purportedly sat on 19 October  2011,  he
    only obtained a speaking score of 150, which  meant  that  he  had  not
    achieved level B2.  In the speaking test purportedly undertaken  on  15
    November 2011, he only obtained a speaking score of  140,  which  meant
    that he was even further away from  attaining  the  required  level  of
    competence.  He  was  still  in  the  level  6   scale   score   range,
    corresponding to level B1 CEFR.  However, in the speaking test which he
    purportedly sat for at third time, on 13 December 2011, he  obtained  a
    speaking score of 170, which meant that he reached level  B2  CEFR.  It
    was not part of the Secretary of State's case  that  the  claimant  had
    used a proxy test-taker to obtain the third ETS speaking test result.

30. The fact that the claimant did not rely on the two  "failed"  tests  in
    support of his application for further leave to  remain  as  a  student
    would not, in itself, negate the proposition that he had used  a  proxy
    test-taker on the first two occasions.  Similarly, the  fact  that  the
    first two tests did not yield a high enough result for  the  claimant's
    purposes does not necessarily entail that he did not use a proxy  test-
    taker.  However, these two reasons must not be viewed in isolation from
    the remaining two reasons put forward  by  the  Judge,  which  are  not
    alleged in the grounds of appeal to be defective.

31. It was unarguably open to the Judge to find that the striking  sequence
    of events - a valid and successful third ETS speaking test in  December
    2011 which was preceded by two failed ETS speaking tests in October and
    November 2011 - pointed very strongly to the claimant having  genuinely
    sat for the first two tests, but as not having at that stage sufficient
    training and expertise to obtain a speaking score of at least 160;  and
    then genuinely achieving a speaking score of 170 on his third  attempt,
    after further training. Equally, it was unarguably open to the Judge to
    find that it was inherently unlikely that the claimant would pay for  a
    proxy test-taker to achieve a  false  speaking  test  result  that  was
    worthless to him - and that he would do this not just once, but twice.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not
consider that such a direction is required  for  these  proceedings  in  the
Upper Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 20 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

