
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19757/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 24th May 2021 via Teams       |On the 16th June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DN (vietnam)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION in force)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L. King, Counsel, instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.


The documents that I was referred to were primarily those that  were  before
the First-tier Tribunal, plus the grounds of  appeal,  written  submissions,
and the judgment of the First-tier Tribunal, the contents of  which  I  have
recorded.


The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. For  convenience,  I  will
    refer to the parties using the terminology from before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, unless otherwise stated.

 2. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Swaney  promulgated  on  23  October  2019.   The  judge
    allowed an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Vietnam born  in  June
    1980, against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  18  September
    2018 to refuse his human rights claim and to deport him from the United
    Kingdom.

Factual background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom unlawfully in  November  2003.
    He claimed asylum but absconded  and  his  claim  was  refused.  On  20
    October 2007, he was convicted of being concerned in the production  of
    what was then a Class C controlled drug, namely cannabis, and sentenced
    to 14 months' imprisonment. He made a further claim for  asylum  on  19
    December 2007. That claim was refused and subsequent appeals against it
    were dismissed. The appellant was deported from the United Kingdom on 5
    August 2008 pursuant to his conviction.  He claims to  have  re-entered
    in 2009.  His re-entry was in breach of the deportation order.

 4. The  appellant's  human  rights  claim  under  consideration  in  these
    proceedings was made in the form of a request to revoke the deportation
    order made against him in 2008. The appellant is married to  a  British
    citizen and they have two sons together, TN, born in 2011, and HN, born
    in  2015.  The  appellant's  wife  has  a  daughter  from  a   previous
    relationship, who was aged 14 at the time of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It was common  ground  below  that  the  appellant
    enjoys a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  all  three
    children. The judge below referred to all three children as  being  the
    appellant's, and I see no reason to adopt a different approach.

 5. In 2018, HN received speech and language  therapy  for  delayed  speech
    development. By the time of the hearing below, he continued to  receive
    support from his school, including weekly  visits  from  a  speech  and
    language therapist, and was being monitored by the  paediatric  service
    on a six-monthly  basis.  The  judge  outlined  the  treatment  HN  had
    received at [72].

 6. In unchallenged findings of fact, the judge  found  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the appellant's wife and three  children  to  relocate
    with him to Vietnam. The judge allowed the appeal on the basis that the
    appellant met the  requirements  of  "Exception  2"  contained  in  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  on
    account of  her  findings  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's wife and children, in particular HN, to remain here without
    the appellant.

 7. Before reaching that conclusion, the judge made findings concerning the
    best interests of the three children. She did so  on  the  basis  of  a
    report from an independent social worker and a country expert. Although
    the judge had some concerns about aspects  of  the  independent  social
    worker's report, she accepted that the report's analysis concerning the
    children's circumstances in this country attracted weight. At [46], she
    accepted the report's conclusion that it was in the best  interests  of
    the children to remain in this  country,  and  to  be  raised  by  both
    parents. There has been no challenge by the Secretary of State to  that
    assessment. At [47], the judge directed herself that simply because the
    best interests of the children concerned were  to  be  raised  by  both
    parents in this country, that was not determinative of the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

 8. The judge reached a number of findings of  fact  which  have  not  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State.  At  [76],  she  found  that  the
    appellant was the primary carer for all three  children.  Having  found
    that all three children would suffer considerable distress in the event
    of the appellant's deportation, she identified that  the  question  for
    her consideration was whether the children would suffer harshness going
    beyond that which would be "due" or otherwise expected in the event  of
    the deportation of a parent.

 9. The judge found at [79] that HN's speech and language therapy, and  the
    pivotal role played by the appellant in meeting his speech and language
    needs through providing support recommended by  the  therapists,  meant
    that the impact of the appellant's deportation  would  go  beyond  that
    which would normally be expected in  the  event  of  the  parent  being
    deported. In that paragraph she held:

            "[HN] has specific needs as a result of his diagnosis of speech
            and  language  delay,  social  anxiety  and  other  delay.  His
            particular circumstances place him outside the normal range  of
            normal expectations about children facing the deportation of  a
            parent."

10. At [80], the judge identified that HN's needs were to  receive  ongoing
    support, from the appellant. His  needs  included  the  opportunity  to
    associate with other children and to be provided with language  support
    at home. The judge found that it was the appellant who was  responsible
    for engaging with professionals and HN's school. It was  the  appellant
    who identified concerns with HN's speech initially, and it had been the
    appellant who attended all sessions  with  professionals  in  order  to
    acquire techniques and methods to practice with his son  at  home.  The
    judge found that it was the appellant who provided  his  son  with  the
    social opportunities outside school hours  recommended  by  the  speech
    therapists. The appellant's wife works full  time  in  two  roles.  The
    judge went on to say:

            "...it is true that the appellant's wife could reduce her hours
            in order to better meet the needs  of  her  son.  The  evidence
            before me to which I have referred suggests that she has not to
            date been involved in  his  speech  and  language  development.
            While it  may  well  be  the  case  that  she  could  fill  the
            appellant's shoes, the evidence demonstrates that the appellant
            has been showing various techniques over numerous sessions  and
            over a period of time. It appears reasonably  likely  that  she
            will not immediately be able  to  provide  the  same  level  of
            support as the appellant. I am satisfied that  the  appellant's
            absence will have a detrimental impact on the appellant's son's
            development and that in his particular circumstances the effect
            of the appellant's deportation on him would be unduly harsh."

11. The judge allowed the appeal on the basis that Exception 2 was  met  on
    account of the unduly harsh impact on HN remaining in this country.

Permission to appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on three grounds.  First, that the judge erred in her assessment of the
    "unduly harsh" test concerning HN's speech  and  language  development.
    The reasons given by the judge failed to identify how the harsh, severe
    or bleak threshold identified in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State
    for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223  (IAC)  at  [46]  was  met.
    Secondly, that the judge was wrong to conclude  that  HN's  speech  and
    language  needs  placed  him  outside  the  normal  range   of   normal
    expectations concerning children facing the deportation of a parent, in
    light of the approach of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.  Thirdly,  the
    judge failed to identify the support that could  be  available  to  the
    appellant's son from the social services, contrary to the  approach  of
    the Court of Appeal in BL (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 357 at [53], where it was said:

            "The UT were entitled to work on  the  basis  that  the  social
            services would perform their duties under the law and, contrary
            to the submission of Mr Rudd, the UT was  not  bound  in  these
            circumstances to regard the role  of  the  social  services  as
            irrelevant."

Submissions

13. The Secretary of State provided a skeleton argument dated 30 March 2020
    drafted by a Mr A. McVeety  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  Specialist
    Appeals Team.  The appellant provided a rule 24 response on 24 February
    2020 and  made  written  further  submissions  on  11  June  2020.   In
    addition, Mr McVeety wrote to the Tribunal on 15 June 2020  to  respond
    to  paragraph  33  of  the  appellant's  further  written  submissions,
    concerning the issue of whether HN would be face "neglect" in the event
    of the appellant's deportation, to clarify  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position.  Nothing turns on this point of clarification and I need  not
    address it any further.

14. At the hearing before me, Mr Tufan summarised the Secretary of  State's
    position as being primarily a sufficiency of reasons challenge  to  the
    judge's finding that it would be unduly harsh for  HN  to  remain  here
    without  the  appellant.   In  addition,  the  availability  of  social
    services was a material consideration that the  judge  failed  to  take
    into account.

15. Very fairly, Mr Tufan said that he no longer relied on  the  ground  of
    appeal that the facts as found by the judge were  incapable  of  taking
    the impact on the appellant's deportation on HN outside  the  range  of
    the "normal" consequences to deportation,  in  light  of  HA  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.

16. Ms King submitted that the judge identified the correct  test  for  the
    relevant exception to  deportation,  applied  it  correctly,  and  gave
    sufficient reasons  for  her  conclusion.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal were, Ms King submitted, no more than a  disagreement
    with the rational findings of the judge that were properly open to  her
    to reach.

Legal framework

17. The Secretary of State has not challenged the judge's self-direction as
    to the law at [36] to [40] of her decision.   The  essential  statutory
    provision is section 117C of the 2002 Act,  which  sets  out  statutory
    exceptions to the principle that the deportation of foreign criminals -
    such as this appellant - is in the public  interest.   Exception  2  is
    relevant in these proceedings:

            "(5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
            relationship with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
            subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,  and
            the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would  be
            unduly harsh."

18. Parliament has legislated to the effect that, if the above exception is
    met, the public interest does not require the deportation of a  foreign
    criminal.

Discussion

19. Properly understood, and as  focussed  on  by  Mr  Tufan  in  his  oral
    submissions, the Secretary of State's primary ground  of  appeal  is  a
    sufficiency of reasons challenge. In light of HA (Iraq), the  Secretary
    of State no longer contends that the facts of this case were  incapable
    of taking  the  impact  of  the  appellant's  deportation  outside  the
    territory of the  "normal"  impact  of  deportation  on  children.  The
    question for my consideration under  the  first  ground  of  appeal  is
    whether the judge gave sufficient reasons  for  her  finding  that  the
    impact of the appellant's deportation on HN would be "unduly harsh".

20. In English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd. (Practice Note)  [2002]  EWCA
    Civ 605, the Court of  Appeal  gave  guidance  as  to  the  concept  of
    sufficiency of reasoning.  At [19] it said:

            "... if the appellate process is to  work  satisfactorily,  the
            judgment must enable the appellate court to understand why  the
            Judge reached his decision.  This  does  not  mean  that  every
            factor which weighed with the Judge in  his  appraisal  of  the
            evidence has to be identified and explained. But the issues the
            resolution of which were vital to the Judge's conclusion should
            be  identified  and  the  manner  in  which  he  resolved  them
            explained. It is not possible to provide a  template  for  this
            process. It need  not  involve  a  lengthy  judgment.  It  does
            require the Judge to identify and record  those  matters  which
            were critical to his decision. If the critical issue was one of
            fact, in may be enough to say that one witness was preferred to
            another because the one manifestly had a  clearer  recollection
            of  the  material  facts  or  the  other  gave  answers   which
            demonstrated that his recollection could not be relied upon."

21. And at [118]:

             "...an unsuccessful party should not seek to upset a  judgment
            on the ground of inadequacy  of  reasons  unless,  despite  the
            advantage of considering the judgment  with  knowledge  of  the
            evidence given and submissions made at the trial, that party is
            unable to understand why it is that the Judge  has  reached  an
            adverse decision."

22. In Jones v First Tier Tribunal & Anor (Rev 1) [2013] UKSC 19 (17  April
    2013), [2013] 2 AC 48, the House of Lords held, at [25]:

            "It is well established, as  an  aspect  of  tribunal  law  and
            practice, that judicial restraint should be exercised when  the
            reasons that a  tribunal  gives  for  its  decision  are  being
            examined. The appellate court should  not  assume  too  readily
            that the tribunal misdirected itself  just  because  not  every
            step in its reasoning is fully set out in it."

23.  The  strongest  feature  of  Mr  Tufan's  submission  concerning   the
    sufficiency of the judge's reasons may be found in [73] of the  judge's
    decision, where she made the  following  finding,  in  the  context  of
    reaching her (unchallenged) findings that it would be unduly harsh  for
    the children and HN to accompany the appellant to Vietnam:

            "There was no evidence to support [counsel for the appellant's]
            submission that any of the difficulties [with HN's speech] were
            particularly serious."

24. On a superficial reading,  the  above  finding  of  the  judge  can  be
    difficult to reconcile with her  later  findings  that  the  very  same
    speech and language conditions experienced by HN lie at  the  heart  of
    her operative finding that the appellant's deportation would be  unduly
    harsh for HN. However, I recall that an appellate  tribunal  should  be
    slow to assume  that  the  tribunal  below  misdirected  itself  simply
    because every step in its reasoning was not  set  out:  see  Jones,  at
    [25]. In any event, the judge's analysis at [73] was  directed  at  the
    ability of  HN  to  adapt  to  life  in  Vietnam,  and  the  linguistic
    challenges that that  would  present  under  that  scenario.  That,  of
    course, would be a scenario in which HN would  be  accompanied  by  the
    appellant,  with  the  benefit  of  the  speech  therapy  coaching  and
    assistance he provides in this country; there would be no interruption.
    It was in that context that  the  judge  found  that  HN's  speech  and
    language conditions were not such as to  be  regarded  as  particularly
    serious, but those were findings reached as part of the judge's broader
    unchallenged analysis that it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    accompany the appellant to Vietnam.   The judge simply found  that,  in
    the context of the "go" scenario (that is, if HN and the family were to
    accompany the appellant to Vietnam), HN's speech conditions were not so
    serious that they would render the appellant's deportation unduly harsh
    in isolation.  That is an entirely different matter to the position, as
    found by the  judge,  in  relation  to  HN  staying  here  without  the
    appellant, as set out below.

25. In my judgment, bearing in mind the restraint with which  an  appellate
    court or tribunal should approach the scrutiny of reasons  given  by  a
    tribunal below, the judge's reasons for finding  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh on HN for him to remain here  without
    the appellant were tolerably clear.   The  judge  reached  unchallenged
    findings relating to the best interests of all three children were  for
    the appellant to remain in this country.  She correctly identified that
    that was not dispositive of the appeal.  She went on  to  identify  how
    the  appellant  attended  HN's  language  assessments  and   had   been
    identified in the care plan as being responsible for  implementing  the
    strategies identified  at  home.  She  recognised  that  there  was  no
    indication of the severity of the conditions, but did  note  that  they
    were  sufficiently  concerning  to  warrant  intervention  and  ongoing
    monitoring [73].  She reached a further unchallenged  finding  of  fact
    that the appellant was HN's primary carer [76], and that  the  fact  of
    HN's conditions place him outside the territory  of  "any  other  child
    facing the prospect of a parent being deported" [79].

26. I pause here to  observe  that,  as  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pre-dates the clarification of the law provided by HA  (Iraq),
    the judge is not to be criticised for interpreting the Supreme  Court's
    judgment in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53, in particular at [23], as  meaning  that  there  was  a
    benchmark of what amounts to a "normal" impact of deportation.  That is
    not the case: see Underhill LJ at [56] of HA (Iraq):

            "How a child will be affected by a  parent's  deportation  will
            depend on an almost infinitely variable range of  circumstances
            and  it  is  not   possible   to   identify   a   baseline   of
            'ordinariness'."

27. At [80], the judge found that it was the appellant who was  responsible
    for  providing  HN  with  the  care  and  assistance  that  he   needs.
    Significantly, the support required by HN was much  broader  than  that
    provided in the context of formal speech therapy sessions  provided  to
    HN by the health service or at school.  The  speech  therapy  treatment
    received by HN, under the  appellant's  parental  supervision,  was  in
    order to  identify  treatment  needs,  and  the  steps  that  would  be
    necessary for such treatment to be provided, by the appellant,  in  the
    home following the guidance given by the  relevant  professionals.  For
    that to take place, the appellant needed  to  improve  the  interaction
    between HN and other English-speaking children, which the  judge  found
    was the appellant's responsibility. Although it would be  possible  for
    HN's mother, the appellant's wife, to reduce the hours she worked, that
    would provide a lesser level of provision. The judge found  that  would
    have a detrimental impact on  the  appellant's  son's  development  and
    that, in the particular circumstances of the case, that impact would be
    unduly harsh.

28. It is nothing to the point, as submitted by Mr Tufan,  that  the  judge
    did not dwell in further depth on the ability of the  appellant's  wife
    to assume his role in his absence.  The decision  must  be  read  as  a
    whole; the wife/mother works in two jobs  full  time,  with  two  young
    children and a daughter who was 14 at the time  of  the  hearing.   The
    appellant was found to be the  primary  carer  for  the  children.   HN
    clearly had a degree of acquired  speech  therapy  expertise,  and  the
    judge found that the wife would not immediately be able to  assume  the
    appellant's role.  Plainly that conclusion was open to  the  judge,  as
    her unchallenged finding at [80] was that the appellant's wife had  not
    to date been involved in HN's speech therapy.  She also found that  the
    children all enjoy a strong attachment with the  appellant,  and  would
    suffer considerable distress if he were  to  be  removed,  which  is  a
    factor unaffected by his wife's ability to reduce her hours.

29. It is clear to the reader of the decision  the  basis  upon  which  the
    judge reached her findings. Her analysis was set out  sequentially  and
    in building blocks. It is tolerably clear. The reader of  the  decision
    is able to understand why the judge reached  the  operative  conclusion
    that she did. The considerable distress the children  would  inevitably
    experience in  the  event  of  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
    augmented by HN's conditions and the particular impact he would  suffer
    in the event of the appellant's deportation.  The submission  that  the
    judge failed to give sufficient reasons is without merit.

Social services

30. The remaining ground of appeal is that the judge failed to address  the
    potential role of the relevant social services in meeting HN's needs in
    the event of the appellant's deportation.  This submission  is  without
    merit.  It is new point, being raised for the first time on appeal.  It
    was not canvassed below.  This submission also fails to engage with the
    nature of the care provided by the appellant;  it  is  round-the-clock,
    day-to-day speech therapy assistance, provided to HN by his father.  It
    includes a focus on engaging with other  children  of  a  similar  age.
    There was no evidence before the  judge  which  could  rationally  have
    permitted her to conclude that the speech therapy needs of HN currently
    provided by the appellant could adequately be replaced by the  relevant
    social services.

31. The grounds of appeal's reliance on BL (Jamaica)  is  misplaced;  there
    the Court of Appeal was concerned with the ability of a family to  cope
    in the absence of BL as a consequence of his deportation, in  part  due
    to the claimed likelihood that BL's partner, KS, would not be  able  to
    manage her money or  control  her  alcohol  consumption.   Having  been
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment,  BL  was  in  the  most  serious
    category of foreign criminals, and would only be  able  to  demonstrate
    that the public interest would not require his deportation if  he  were
    able to demonstrate "very compelling circumstances" over and above  the
    two exceptions in section 117C of the 2002  Act.   There  was  evidence
    that the family had coped while BL had been imprisoned when  serving  a
    sentence of four years, and while he had been in immigration detention.
     There was no evidence that the family would fall into poverty, and, if
    they did, it was in that context  that  the  relevant  social  services
    could be expected to have  assisted.   That  is  an  entirely  distinct
    scenario to that in the present matter where the issue  for  the  judge
    was whether the  elevated  threshold  of  "unduly  harsh"  was  met  by
    reference to  HN's  particular  needs,  when  taken  with  the  judge's
    remaining (and unchallenged)  findings  that  all  three  children  had
    formed  a  strong  attachment  to  the  appellant  and   would   suffer
    considerable distress following his deportation.  The criticism of  the
    Upper Tribunal in BL (Jamaica) turned on the facts of the case and  did
    not seek to establish the proposition for which the Secretary of  State
    relies upon it.

Conclusion

32. In conclusion,  while  not  all  judges  would  have  found  that  this
    appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on HN, Judge Swaney  gave
    tolerably clear reasons for her conclusion  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for HN to remain here in the absence of the  appellant.   It  was
    not an error of law not to consider the "safety net" of  the  potential
    availability of social services, in light of the particular  nature  of
    HN's requirements, especially given it was not raised below.

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.

34. I maintain the anonymity direction already in force.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that it must be set aside.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Stephen H Smith
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

Date 2 June 2021


