
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19431/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th November 2019                          |On 21st November 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                 Ranbir [G]


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza of Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen India.  The appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully on 21st June 2010 but  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a student was refused on 29th September  2011.   He  made  no
    application to regularise his status until the Home Office attended his
    address in 2018.

2.   On 6th September 2018 he made an application for  leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of  family  and  private  life,  which  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision of 6th September 2018.

3.   The appellant failed to meet the Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  of
    suitability.

4.   It was noted in particular that on 16th  November  2011  the  appellant
    had purported to take a TOEIC speaking test  with  Educational  Testing
    Services.  Evidence was presented that such was not taken  by  him  and
    that therefore the  certificate  was  fraudulently  obtained.   It  was
    considered that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom was  not
    conducive to the public good.  In any event, the appellant was a  long-
    term overstayer.

5.   It  was  not  considered  that  there  were  any  very  significant  or
    insurmountable obstacles to his integration into India.  It  was  noted
    that the appellant's partner also had no status in the  United  Kingdom
    and had overstayed her leave to remain since 2011.  There was  a  child
    of the relationship born on 20th April 2016.

6.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nixon  on  16th  April  2019.
    Essentially the Judge upheld the matters raised  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and dismissed the appeal in all respects.

7.   Challenge has been made to that decision, and leave to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted, on the basis that the Judge  had  erred  in
    finding the appellant had fraudulently obtained a TOEIC certificate and
    failed to consider the obligations under Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in relation to the child  born  in
    the United Kingdom.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine  the
    issues.

8.   In terms of the TOEIC certificate it was the case, as advanced  on  the
    appellant, that he tried to book a test but all places were full so  he
    paid a friend double the cost to book a test for him.  When he realised
    that what he had done was  wrong  he  asked  for  his  money  back.  He
    received a certificate a few weeks later in his name as  having  passed
    the test.  He said that he threw  the  certificate  away  and  made  no
    further use of it but agreed that he had not  notified  the  respondent
    that he had received this unwanted or unrequested certificate.

9.   It was argued on his  behalf  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and indeed before me, that  his  motive  was  always  one  of
    honesty and that in considering the explanation which he gave,  it  was
    important to note that he had made no use of that certificate.  It  was
    said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  balance  those
    factors sufficiently in the determination as to whether his presence in
    the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good because of such
    conduct in  regard  to  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

10.  The Judge, however, considered that matter particularly  in  paragraphs
    19 and  20  of  the  determination.   The  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    explanation which the  appellant  had  given.   The  Judge  gave  clear
    reasons to support the finding that the appellant had  been  a  knowing
    party to the process to obtain the false certificate and was, in  those
    circumstances, acting dishonestly.  The Judge noted that the  appellant
    had made no effort to use the certificate but such did not  negate  the
    fact that he had obtained it dishonestly.  The  reasons  given  by  the
    Judge are in my estimation adequate.

11.  Had that been the only matter which stood in the way  of  consideration
    of suitability under the Rules, then possibly there could have been  an
    argument mounted as to whether there should  have  been  a  more  wider
    contextual consideration as to whether what was  done  should  make  it
    undesirable  for  the   appellant   to   remain.    However,   in   the
    practicalities of this  matter,  the  context  is  that  the  appellant
    nevertheless remained unlawfully for a number of  years  until  he  was
    discovered.  Neither he nor his partner had  made  any  application  to
    regularise their stay in  the  United  Kingdom  prior  to  their  being
    discovered.  Thus, even  a  contextual  consideration  of  the  act  of
    dishonesty, even absent of the use of the certificate, does  little  to
    advance the cause of the appellant.

12.  Further and in any event, the  act  of  overstaying  is  in  itself  an
    independent and separate consideration which has been applied rendering
    the appellant unsuitable to meet the requisite Immigration Rules.

13.   The  Judge  focused  also  upon  whether  there  were   insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant and his family returning to India.   It  was
    noted that both the appellant and his wife had lived together in  India
    and he had worked prior to  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    considered that the fact that his property in India was sold was not  a
    feature  which  rendered  return  significantly  difficult  or   indeed
    presented any insurmountable obstacles to return.  I can find no  basis
    upon which the appellant could reasonably succeed in any argument as to
    insurmountable obstacles on return.

14.  The Judge did not find there to be any  exceptional  circumstances  and
    there is nothing presented to give any  foundation  to  the  contention
    that there were.

15.  Although criticism may be made of  the  Judge  that  there  was  little
    overt  reference  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009,  the  interests  of  the  child  were  considered
    particularly in paragraph 22 of the determination.  The child is but  3
    and as was entirely dependent upon her parents for support.  No reasons
    were found which would prevent her return.  Clearly her best  interests
    at that age was to be with the parents.  She, like them, had no settled
    status.

16.  Having considered the arguments as were  most  helpfully  presented  on
    behalf of the appellant by Mr Raza, I do  not  find  there  to  be  any
    material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  The appellant and his wife were long-term overstayers and  gave
    birth to their child in circumstances where their  right  to  residence
    was precarious.  They are both from India and I can find  no  basis  to
    support the argument that there would be any  insurmountable  obstacles
    or exceptional circumstances which would prevent their enjoying  family
    life in India.

Notice of Decision

17.  In the circumstances, the appellant's appeal before the Upper  Tribunal
    is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 14 Nov 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

