
                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19295/2018
                                                               HU/19303/2018
                                                               HU/19299/2018
                                                               HU/19308/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 8th March 2019 On 18th April 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                               WAHIDA [S] + 3
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Mr. S Harding, Counsel, instructed by Londonium
Solicitors


                            DECISION and REASONS



Introduction

    1. It is the Secretary of State who is appealing in these proceedings.
       However, for convenience I will refer to the parties hereinafter as
       in the First-tier Tribunal. The first appellant is a national of
       Bangladesh. The other appellants are her husband and children.

    2. She came to the United Kingdom on 20 January 2010 as a student with
       leave until 31 July 2013.This was extended until 26 September 2016.
       Leave was curtailed on the 8th July 2016, effective from 24 September
       2016.

    3. On 19 April 2017 she made an application for leave to remain on the
       basis of her family life. This was refused on 22 March 2018.The
       respondent concluded she did not meet the eligibility requirements of
       appendix FM as her partner was not British and they lived as part of
       a family unit with their children. In terms of private life the
       suitability requirements were not met. This was because in her
       application for an extension as a student she submitted an English
       language certificate which the respondent concluded was taken by a
       proxy. The respondent saw no reason why she and her family could not
       reintegrate into life in Bangladesh.

The First tier Tribunal

    4. Her appeal was heard at Taylor House on 9 November 2018 before First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Bibi. In a decision promulgated on 28 November
       2018 the judge found that the appellant cheated in her English
       language examination. However, the appeal was allowed on the basis
       her daughter, the 4th appellant, had been living in the United
       Kingdom for 7 years at the date of hearing and that it would be
       unreasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom. She came to
       the United Kingdom at the age of 6 was now 14 years old and about to
       start her GCSEs and so was at a crucial part of her education.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguably the
       judge erred in applying KO (Nigeria) and others -v- SSHD UKSC 53 and
       section 117B(6).

The Upper Tribunal.

    6. At hearing, Ms Isherwood relied upon the grounds for which permission
       was sought and referred me to the decision of JG (s 117B(6):
       "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC). She
       highlighted the fact that the judge had found the 1st appellant
       engaged in deception in relation to the English language testing and
       consequently she and her entire family had benefited from this.

    7. The focus in the appeal has been upon the position of the fourth
       appellant who is a qualifying child. Ms Isherwood submitted that in
       allowing the appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Bibi failed to have
       regard to what was said in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)
       There, it was stated when the question posed by s117B(6) is the same
       as that posed in relation to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) it
       must be answered in the proper context of whether it was reasonable
       to expect the child to follow its parents to their country of origin
       (see also EV (Philippines)).

    8. I was referred to paragraph 49 of the decision of First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Bibi, where the judge stated the fourth appellant was about to
       start her GCSEs and this was a crucial part of her education. The
       judge concluded that it would be unreasonable to expect her to leave
       the United Kingdom and to relocate to Bangladesh. However, Ms
       Isherwood argued that a child's education is not a trump card. No
       other reasons were advanced.

    9. At paragraph 52 the judge referred to KO Nigeria and others -v- SSHD
       [2018] UKSC 53, pointing out that as neither parent had leave the
       question was whether it was reasonable for the 4th appellant to go
       with them to Bangladesh. In support of the conclusion that it would
       be unreasonable the judge referred back to comments made at paragraph
       49 about her education. Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge failed
       to follow the guidance given , particularly at paragraphs 18 and 19.
       The Supreme Court said it was necessary to consider where the
       parents, apart from the  provision in 276ADE(1)(iv) and section 117B
       6, are expected to be since it will normally be reasonable for the
       child to be with them. Because of this, the record of the parents
       becomes indirectly material, for instance, if it leads to them having
       no right to be here. The Supreme Court referred to the comments of
       Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home
       Department 2017 SLT 1245:

           "22.   In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
           whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK one
           has to address the question, 'Why would the child be expected to
           leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as this there can only
           be one answer: 'because the parents have no right to remain in
           the UK'. To approach the question in any other way strips away
           the context in which the assessment of reasonableness is being
           made ..."

       At paragraph para 21 Lord Boyd noted that that Lewison LJ had made a
       similar point in considering the "best interests" of children in the
       context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
       2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home
       Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

           "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests
           of the children must be made on the basis that the facts are as
           they are in the real world. If one parent has no right to
           remain, but the other parent does, that is the background
           against which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has
           the right to remain, then that is the background against which
           the assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be:
           is it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with
           no right to remain to the country of origin?"

   10. Ms Isherwood submitted that the factual circumstances of the
       appellants NS and AR in KO Nigeria and others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53
       where akin to the present. NS and AR entered the UK as students, on
       19 February 2004 and 4 February 2003 respectively. In the present
       appeal the 1st appellant came here as a student on 20 January 2010,
       with the other appellants joining her on 15 October 2010 as
       dependents.

   11.  NS and AR applied for leave to remain as Tier 1 (post study  worker)
       migrants. Those applications were refused on the basis that NS and AR
       were involved in a "scam" by  which  they  falsely  claimed  to  have
       successfully  completed  postgraduate  courses.  UT   Judge   Perkins
       dismissed the  appeals  finding  that  NS  and  AR  had  deliberately
       submitted false documents to support  applications  to  extend  their
       stays, and by so  doing  were  "acquiescing  in  a  cynical  plot  to
       undermine  the  Rules  by  issuing  meaningless  certificates"  (para
       179).    He acknowledged the position of their children  and  section
       117B(6).The children had no knowledge  of  life  outside  the  United
       Kingdom and have done well in the United Kingdom.  If  they  remained
       they could take advantage of  the  education  system.  Removing  them
       would unsettle them. He found no difficulty in concluding that  their
       best interests were to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their
       parents. However, the judge went on to refer to the need to  maintain
       immigration control and concluded it  would  be  outrageous  for  the
       parents to be permitted to remain in the circumstance.  He  concluded
       they must go and the other appellants must go with them.

   12. In affirming that decision, the Supreme Court pointed out that the
       parents' conduct was relevant in that it meant that they had to leave
       the country. It was in that context that it had to be considered
       whether it was reasonable for the children to leave with them. Their
       best interests would have been for the whole family to remain here.
       However, where the parents had to leave, the natural expectation
       would be that the children would go with them, and there was nothing
       in the evidence reviewed by the judge to suggest that that would be
       other than reasonable.

   13. Ms Isherwood submitted that the only reason given by the judge for
       concluding it would not be reasonable to expect the 4th appellant to
       leave was because she was in education. However, she submitted this
       could continue in Bangladesh where she would have the support of her
       family.

   14. Mr. Harding in response said that the judge posed the right question
       at paragraph 48, namely, whether under EX 1 or section 117B(6) it
       would be reasonable for the 4th appellant to leave. He contended that
       the judge did not simply consider the appellant's education but had
       regard to the length of time she had been here.

Consideration

   15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bibi's decision was given in the month
       following judgement in KO Nigeria and others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.
       The judge did not have the benefit of the consideration of that
       decision which has taken place since. This is a nuanced decision
       which requires careful study. Following it, the respondent has
       amended its instructions to caseworkers. The focus is upon the
       qualifying child but as stated, the conduct of the parents remains
       indirectly relevant. The judge here really only refers to the
       youngest child's education and the fact she came here at the age of
       6.

   16. The judge had found that her mother had engaged in deception in the
       taking of the English test. The 1st appellant's lack of credibility
       was reinforced by the evidence of her husband and sister which
       contradicted her claims about the use of English at her work. She
       compounded matters by claiming her eldest daughter, the 3rd
       appellant, could not speak Bengali whereas she had obtained an A star
       in her GCSEs examinations in the language. Both parents are from
       Bangladesh and have no right to be here. The question arising
       therefore was whether it would be reasonable to expect the fourth
       appellant to go to Bangladesh with them. The appellant's immediate
       family are from Bangladesh and she lived there until the age of 6.
       Consequently, there is evidence she has some appreciation of the
       country and its traditions. Singh LJ at para 75 of  Secretary of
       State for the Home Department v AB (Jamaica) & Anor [2019] EWCA Civ
       661 endorsed JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019]
       UKUT 72 (IAC) stating  that the question which the statute requires
       to be addressed is a single question: is it reasonable to expect the
       child to leave the UK?

   17. There is no appraisal in the decision of the likely prospects in
       Bangladesh for the appellant. A cumulative assessment was required,
       involving the likely family situation, including the circumstances of
       the appellant's elder sister. In effect the 4th appellant has been
       played as a trump card and the judge has not considered the real-
       world test, based on the entire family relocating and with due regard
       to the public interest factors. It is my conclusion therefore that
       the assessment materially errs in law and cannot stand. Consequently,
       the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
       hearing in relation to article 8 only.

   18. There has been no challenge to the finding in relation to the 1st
       appellant suitability and the submission of an English language
       qualification taken by a proxy.



Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal judge Bibi materially errs in law and
is set aside.

The decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.




Directions.

    1. Relisting for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor
       House, excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Bibi. The appellants
       representative should advise if an interpreter will be required.

    2. The finding that the 1st appellant fraudulently obtained a TOEIC
       certificate is retained. The finding that the 4th appellant is a
       qualifying child is retained.

    3. In preparing for the rehearing the appellant's representatives should
       consider the circumstances of all the family. Consideration in that
       context should be given as to whether it is reasonable for the 4th
       appellant to return to Bangladesh with her parents and sister bearing
       in mind what stage she is at in her life.

    4. A hearing time of up to 2 hours is anticipated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.   Dated 17 April 2019

