
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/19210/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2018                           |On 20 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                AMADOU JALLOW
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Y. Darboe, Toltops Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fenoughty, promulgated on 25 September  2017,  in  which
    she refused the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to
    refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.




 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "I have read the decision with  care  and  find  that  the  grounds  as
    detailed in the application are made out.  There are clear conflicts in
    findings on material matters in respect of the relationship between the
    Appellant and child; the Judge had recorded  clearly  the  evidence  at
    paragraph 34 that the Appellant meets his daughter, takes her to  play,
    etc. but failed to consider the quality  of  the  Appellant's  contacts
    with his daughter.  Most importantly the Judge had materially erred  by
    misconstruing distinction between having a parental responsibility  and
    the existence of parental relationship in light of the decision in  RK.
    "


 3. The  Appellant,  Miss.  Richardson  and  their  daughter  attended  the
    hearing.  I heard submissions from both representatives following which
    I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Darboe  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   In  addition,  with
    reference to paragraph [54], he  asked  why  the  Appellant's  daughter
    would choose to  go  with  the  Appellant  if  there  was  no  parental
    relationship, and if she was not used to the Appellant.  He referred to
    paragraph [92].  The Judge  had  made  a  finding  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant had taken part in any  decisions  regarding
    her upbringing, but no questions had been asked about  the  Appellant's
    daughter's upbringing.


 5. In response Mr. Richards relied on the Rule 24 response.  The Judge had
    taken full account of the evidence, and had concluded that it  was  not
    reliable.  She could not rely on the evidence either of  the  Appellant
    or of Miss Richardson.  He referred to [91].  The  Judge  accepted  the
    biological relationship.  However, having found there to be no reliable
    evidence of contact  with  his  daughter,  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had not shown that he had a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with her.


 6. He referred to the case of RK (s.117B(6);  parental  relationship)  IJR
    [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC).  There had to be  an  active  role  taken  by  an
    individual in the upbringing of a child.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant was not taking an active role in his  daughter's  upbringing.
    In all the  circumstances  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  her
    conclusion.  She gave adequate reasons  in  the  face  of  her  adverse
    credibility findings.


  7. In response Mr.  Darboe  submitted  that  RK  showed  that,  where  the
     biological father existed, it was difficult for anyone else to claim  a
     parental relationship with a child.  The  Appellant,  as  a  biological
     parent, had not abdicated responsibility for his child.  The Judge  had
     not found that he had abdicated his parental relationship.   The  Judge
     relied on the fact that there was only intermittent  contact,  but  she
     had not considered the quality of the contact.  The Judge accepted that
     the Appellant had taken his daughter to after-school classes, which  is
     what any parent would do.  He submitted that  the  child's  mother  had
     attested to what the Appellant did.  The child's mother had  done  what
     any mother who had the best interests of her child at heart  would  do,
     which was to make sure that the  best  interests  of  that  child  were
     served by having a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
     her father.


  8. It was not possible to say that the Appellant and his  daughter  had  a
     relationship but that it was not "parental".  The relationship  existed
     because the Appellant was the parent of  his  daughter.   The  decision
     contained errors of law and could not stand.

Error of law


  9. I have carefully considered  the  decision.   There  are  contradictory
     findings regarding the Appellant's relationship with his daughter.


 10. At [86] the Judge stated:


     "The tribunal did not doubt that the appellant had a relationship  with
     his daughter, and that, since 2014 or 2015, he  had  had  some  contact
     with her, albeit not regular, and only once in the last 11 weeks."

 11. The reason that the Judge found that the Appellant did not satisfy  the
     requirements under the immigration rules is because he did not  satisfy
     the criteria in E-LTRPT.2.4(b).  She found that  he  had  not  provided
     evidence that he was taking an active role,  or  intended  to  take  an
     active role, in his child's upbringing.  At [87] the Judge stated:


     "In  the  circumstances,  the  tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that  the
     appellant had demonstrated that his relationship with his daughter  had
     sufficient strength and depth to show  that  he  had  been  taking,  or
     intended to take an active role in his daughter's upbringing."


 12. The Judge considered the Appellant's  appeal  outside  the  immigration
     rules, and at [91(i)] states:


     "The tribunal accepted  that  there  was  a  relationship  between  the
     appellant and his daughter, but it had not accepted that this  amounted
     to a genuine and subsisting parental relationship, as the evidence  did
     not show that he was actively involved in her upbringing."


 13. The Judge accepted that there was a relationship between the  Appellant
     and his daughter.  The reasons she found that this was  not  a  genuine
     and subsisting parental relationship was because  she  found  that  the
     evidence did not show that he was actively involved in her upbringing.


 14. Later at [92] the Judge states:


     "In this case, the tribunal has found that the appellant does not  have
     a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his daughter, as it
     was not satisfied that he had more than occasional  contact  with  her,
     and there was no evidence  that  he  had  taken  part  in  any  of  the
     decisions regarding her upbringing."


 15. Putting aside the question of whether or not the  Appellant  was  asked
     about decisions taken regarding his daughter's upbringing, I find  that
     the Judge has confused the issue of parental relationship with that  of
     parental responsibility.  If the Appellant has a relationship with  his
     daughter, which the Judge has found, it is difficult to see what  other
     kind of relationship this can be other than  a  parental  relationship.
     The Judge has placed further requirements on the Appellant in order  to
     show that it is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship,  namely
     she has required the Appellant to show that he had taken  part  in  the
     decisions regarding his daughter's upbringing in order to show that  he
     had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her.


 16. I have considered the case of RK.  The headnote states:

     "It  is  not  necessary   for   an   individual   to   have   "parental
     responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship."


 17. The Appellant does not have parental responsibility in law, but he  has
     a relationship with his daughter.  The Judge acknowledged that he had a
     relationship with his daughter.  She acknowledged that he  had  contact
     with his daughter.  She found that this contact was  not  regular,  but
     nevertheless found that there was contact.   The  Judge's  reasons  for
     finding that their relationship  does  not  amount  to  a  genuine  and
     subsisting parental relationship are not good in law.   The  fact  that
     the contact is occasional does not mean that the parental  relationship
     between the Appellant and his daughter is not genuine  and  subsisting.
     Her finding that he had not  taken  part  in  decisions  regarding  his
     daughter's upbringing goes to the issue of parental responsibility, not
     parental relationship.


 18. The findings of the Judge are confused insofar  as  she  accepted  that
     there was a relationship between a father and  daughter,  but  did  not
     accept  that  that  constituted  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
     relationship primarily due to the frequency of contact.   I  find  that
     this is an error of law.

 19. Further, at [84] the Judge finds that it would be  in  the  Appellant's
     daughter's best interests to remain with her mother.   She  finds  that
     the quality of the child's life would not be seriously impaired if  the
     Appellant were to return to Gambia.  She has not considered the  extent
     to which the best interests of the Appellant's daughter are  served  by
     maintaining contact with her father.   She  stated  that  the  evidence
     showed that the Appellant had contact with his daughter,  but  she  has
     not given any reasons for her finding that the  lack  of  this  contact
     would seriously impair her quality of life.


 20. I find that these errors are material, as they go to the issue  at  the
     centre of the appeal.


21. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2 which contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have carefully considered whether  this  appeal
    could be remade by me on the basis of the findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   However,  given  that  these  findings  are  confused   and
    contradictory, and given the nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


22. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.   No  findings  are
    preserved.


23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


24. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Fenoughty.



Signed                                  Date 12 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

