
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19114/2018
                                                               hu/19102/2018
                                                               hu/19251/2018
                                                               hu/22492/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2019                 |On 13th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                               (1) ADEYEMI [A]
                                 (2) [T S A]
                                 (3) [J E A]
                                 (4) [J P A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Sandhu, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the  Appellants  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas (the judge) promulgated 23 April 2019,  dismissing
    their appeals, against the decision(s)  of  the  Respondent,  dated  15
    October 2018, refusing their application(s) to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria,  father  and  dependant  adult
    children, respectively born on 11 April 1963, 24 April 2005, 31  August
    2002 and 6 August 2000. They are a family  unit  enjoying  family  life
    together in the United Kingdom. Their applications were refused because
    none of the Immigration Rules  were  met,  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances and no compassionate factors to warrant a grant of  leave
    outside of the Immigration Rules.



Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Appellants did not attend the hearing but were  represented  before
    the judge by Counsel Mr Mian. The judge refused Mr  Mian's  application
    for an  adjournment  because  no  evidence  of  the  first  Appellant's
    inability to attend the hearing because of ill health was produced. The
    judge observed that a previous application  had  been  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal prior to the hearing. The judge went on to consider
    and dismiss the appeal on  the  basis  of  the  Appellants  failure  to
    prosecute it and, noted in particular the First Appellant's failure  to
    file  any  evidence;  his  failure  to  provide  instructions  to   his
    solicitors and his failure to attend the hearing without good reason.



Grant of Permission to Appeal

4.    The Appellants sought and were granted permission  to  appeal  because
    it was considered  arguable  that  (a)  the  appeal  should  have  been
    adjourned because of the  First Appellant's ill health  (b)  the  judge
    had not considered a 141 page bundle which had been submitted  and,  c)
    the judge considered the appeals in a superficial manner.



Hearing(s) before the Upper Tribunal

5.    The appeal first  came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  (DUTJ)
    Manuell on 25 July  2019.  The  Appellants  were  represented  on  that
    occasion by their Counsel Mr Mian. DUTJ Manuell noted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal file contained no record of receipt by it of  any  bundle
    consisting of 141 pages or otherwise. DUTJ  Manuell  observed  that  Mr
    Mian was seeking to give evidence about various matters surrounding the
    hearing and had not prepared a  witness  statement.  This  was  rightly
    viewed as unsatisfactory and the hearing  was  converted  into  a  Case
    Management  Review  Hearing.  Directions  were  issued  in   order   to
    facilitate a fact finding exercise to determine what  occurred  at  the
    Hearing before the judge.

6.    DUTJ Manuell did not reserve  the  matter  to  himself  and  thus  the
    matter came before me to decide in the first instance whether the judge
    materially erred in law.



Discussion and Decision

7.    Following a useful discussion at the  hearing  with  the  parties,  Mr
    Singh rightly accepted that the judge materially erred in law.

8.    Mr Sandhu produced satisfactory  evidence  demonstrating  that  a  141
    page bundle was faxed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  a  day  before  the
    hearing. Given its late filing it was not placed on file and the judge,
    through no fault of his own, failed to consider whether  that  evidence
    could be adduced and considered on behalf of the Appellants. In view of
    the uncontroversial  evidence  that  a  bundle  was  filed  before  the
    Hearing, the judge's finding that the First  Appellant  had  failed  to
    "engage with the appeal process and  has  submitted  no  evidence"  was
    plainly  incorrect.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  a
    procedural irregularity has occurred giving rise to unfairness.

9.    Even absent that error, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  materially
    erred in other respects. The judge was ceased with an appeal concerning
    a family unit comprising of a father and his three children. While  the
    children were young adults by the date of  Hearing  before  the  judge,
    they had lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of 7 years
    and each had advanced claims under the  Immigration  Rules  on  private
    life grounds. The basis of that claim and its particulars were to  some
    extent set out in the Appellants' representatives' letter of 20 October
    2017 addressed to the Respondent in support of the application.

10.   The judge's decision is very  brief.  The  decision  and  reasons  are
    confined to two pages of unnumbered paragraphs in bullet points much of
    which  focuses  on  the  application  for  an  adjournment,  the  First
    Appellant's absence  at  the  Hearing  and  his  failure  to  file  any
    evidence. There is a cursory reference to the Respondent's  refusal  in
    respect of the First Appellant only and no  reference  at  all  to  the
    circumstances  of  the  other  Appellants  or  indeed  to  the  written
    submissions that were made on their behalf. In the circumstances, I  am
    satisfied that the judge was in clear error in  dismissing  the  appeal
    without consideration to the evidence and submissions that were  before
    him.

11.   I find that the Appellants  have  not  had  a  fair  hearing.  In  the
    circumstances, I set aside the judge's decision and  remit  the  appeal
    with the consent of the parties to the First-tier Tribunal to  consider
    afresh.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined  afresh
by a judge other than Judge Lucas.


Signed:

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Bagral
Date: 20 October 2019









