


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19397/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham                 |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 31 August 2017                           |On: 05 September 2017        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R de Mello, instructed by Ash Immigration
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 29 August 1975. He has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Gribble dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
      decision of 9 August 2016 to refuse his human rights claim further  to
      an earlier decision to make a  deportation  order  against  him  under
      section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

Background to the Appeal

   2. The background  to  this  case  can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The
      appellant entered the United Kingdom on 23 February  1998  with  entry
      clearance  as  the  spouse  of  a  British  citizen  and  was  granted
      indefinite leave to remain on 27 February 1999. On 29  September  2005
      he applied for naturalisation whilst subject to a  police  prosecution
      and his application was refused on  19  December  2005  owing  to  his
      failure to inform the Home Office  of  the  ongoing  interest  of  the
      police.

   3. The appellant was charged with murder  following  an  incident  on  26
      September 2005 whereby he fought with another  man,  QZ,  in  a  local
      park, and subsequently resumed the  fight  armed  with  a  screwdriver
      resulting in the death of QZ. On 10 April 2006,  at  Birmingham  Crown
      Court, he was convicted of manslaughter as it was accepted that he had
      not intended to stab QZ. He was sentenced to four years' imprisonment.


   4. Following his conviction the respondent served the  appellant  with  a
      notice of intention to deport him on 8  October  2007.  The  appellant
      appealed against the decision  but  his  appeal  was  dismissed  on  7
      February 2008 and he became appeal rights exhausted on 20 May 2008. On
      8 July 2008 a Deportation Order  was  signed  against  the  appellant.
      Following  judicial  review  proceedings  seeking  to  challenge   the
      Tribunal's dismissal of the appeal, the respondent made a decision, on
      15 February 2010, to refuse to revoke the deportation order. Following
      further   judicial   review   proceedings    and    various    written
      representations the respondent issued a further decision to refuse  to
      revoke the deportation order on 12 September 2011  and  the  appellant
      lodged an appeal against that decision.


   5. The appellant's appeal was heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  9
      December 2011 and was allowed on Article 8 human rights grounds  in  a
      decision promulgated on 29 December 2011. The Tribunal found that  the
      respondent  ought  to  have  exercised  discretion  differently  under
      paragraph 390 of the immigration rules and that the appellant's family
      life with his wife and five children (14 year old twin daughters, a 12
      year old daughter, a seven month old daughter and an  eight  year  old
      son) outweighed the public interest in his deportation.


   6. Permission to appeal that decision was granted  to  the  Secretary  of
      State but the decision was ultimately upheld by the Upper Tribunal  on
      21 June 2012. The respondent then revoked the Deportation Order  on  9
      November  2012   and   granted   successive   six-month   periods   of
      Discretionary Leave to Remain to the appellant, on 27 October 2012 and
      then 27 April 2013, followed by  a  further  period  of  Discretionary
      Leave from 19 September 2013 until 19 March 2014.


   7. On 19 March 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain  in
      the UK. On that occasion  the  respondent  refused  to  grant  further
      leave. In a decision of 2 March 2015 the respondent made a decision to
      deport the appellant pursuant to section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration
      Act 1971 on the basis that his deportation remained conducive  to  the
      public good, with reference  to  paragraph  399C  of  the  immigration
      rules. The appellant was invited to make representations by way  of  a
      section 120 notice in relation to his human rights and in response  to
      the presumption under section 72(2) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      Act 2002 that he constituted a danger to the community of the UK.


   8. Written representations were made on behalf of  the  appellant  on  24
      March 2015. It was asserted that the respondent's letter of 27 October
      2012, confirming the decision not to take deportation  action  against
      him unless he came to adverse notice, created a legitimate expectation
      that he would not be  deported.  It  was  asserted  further  that  the
      issuing of a deportation notice in contravention of that assurance was
      an abuse of process and that the Secretary of State had  no  power  to
      issue a deportation notice following the appellant's successful appeal
      before the Upper Tribunal on the same facts. It was also asserted that
      the deportation decision was incompatible with the appellant's Article
      8 rights and with EU and ECHR law.

   9. On  9  August  2016  the  respondent  made  a  decision  refusing  the
      appellant's human rights claim and responding to his  representations.
      The respondent considered that the appellant's  deportation  continued
      to be conducive to the public  good  despite  the  fact  that  he  had
      previously been granted a period of limited leave to remain in the UK.
      The respondent considered that in accordance with Chapter  13  of  the
      Immigration Directorate Instructions (IDIs) Article 8 guidance section
      7.4 any further application for leave to remain submitted on Article 8
      grounds fell for consideration under the provisions of  paragraph  398
      to 399A of the  immigration  rules.  The  respondent  noted  that  the
      appellant, by that time, had five children, twin daughters MA  and  KA
      born in August 1997, a daughter LA born in May 1999, a son HA born  in
      March 2005 and a daughter IA born in March 2011. With  regard  to  the
      representations referring to EU law, the  respondent  considered  that
      the appellant did not benefit from the Zambrano  principles  entitling
      him to a derivative right of residence, as his children could continue
      to reside in the UK with their mother. With regard to Article  8,  the
      respondent considered that the appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate
      very compelling circumstances for the purposes of paragraph 398 of the
      immigration rules. The respondent refused the appellant's  application
      for leave to remain under  paragraph  322(5)  and  refused  his  human
      rights claim.

  10. The appellant appealed against that decision on grounds reflecting the
      written representations made on 24 March 2015. His appeal was heard by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble on 3 May  2017.  By  that  time  the
      appellant's twin daughters MA  and  KA  were  19  years  of  age,  his
      daughter LA was almost 18, his son HA was 12 and his daughter IA was 6
      years old. The appellant had another daughter, I, by  that  time,  who
      had been born  very  prematurely  on  9  November  2016,  and  medical
      evidence had been produced about her medical condition.  She  remained
      in intensive care in  hospital.  The  judge  also  had  before  her  a
      statement from the appellant stating, inter  alia,  that  he  had  not
      reoffended since being released from prison and  he  had  resumed  his
      life with his wife and children.  He  was  actively  involved  in  his
      children's lives and the family relied on him for support. He provided
      various certificates of qualifications obtained whilst in  prison  and
      confirmation that  he  was  employed  from  2014  to  2016,  when  his
      permission to work was withdrawn, and would be re-hired  if  permitted
      to work again. The judge also  had  before  her  various  certificates
      relating to his children's education and studies. She also heard  oral
      evidence from the appellant, his wife and three of their children.

  11. The judge rejected Mr de Mello's argument that paragraph  399C  was  a
      free-standing provision, finding that it was meant to be read together
      with the other provisions in Part 13. As regards his  submission  that
      the appellant had a  legitimate  expectation  that  he  would  not  be
      deported if he did not re-offend, the judge found that  there  was  no
      legitimate expectation that leave would continue  to  be  granted.  As
      regards the arguments made on the appellant's rights under EU law, the
      judge found that the appellant could not succeed  under  the  Zambrano
      principles as his children would remain in the UK with his  wife.  The
      judge also rejected Mr de Mello's submission on the 'ne bis  in  idem'
      principle and the lawfulness of being punished twice. The  judge  went
      on to consider section 117C. She found that the  appellant  could  not
      benefit from the exception in section 117C(4) in relation  to  private
      life. As for family life and  section  117C(5),  she  found  that  the
      appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife  and
      children, that it was in the best interests  of  the  children  to  be
      cared for by both parents and  that  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
      deportation would be unduly harsh. However,  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant's sentence was such that section 117C(6)  applied,  she  did
      not accept that there were  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
      above those in section 117C(4) and (5). She accordingly dismissed  the
      appeal.

  12. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on nine grounds. The first was that the judge  had  erred  in  law  by
      finding that she had no jurisdiction to strike down the power to  make
      a deportation order when she ought to have found that the issuing of a
      fresh deportation decision and the refusal of  further  leave  was  an
      abuse of power and that the interference under Article 8  was  not  in
      accordance with the law. The second ground  was  that  the  judge  was
      wrong to find that no legitimate explanation had  been  created  as  a
      result of the respondent's letter of 27 October 2012. The third ground
      was that the judge had erred by finding that  paragraph  399C  of  the
      immigration rules was not free-standing. The fourth  ground  was  that
      the judge had erred by finding that the appeal did not fall within the
      scope of EU law and by finding that the principle of 'ne bis in  idem'
      did not apply to the appellant. The fifth was that the judge had erred
      by applying sections 117A-117C to the appellant. The  sixth  was  that
      the judge had erred by finding no very  compelling  circumstances  and
      had failed to give proper  weight  to  the  youngest  child's  medical
      condition. The seventh was that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  to
      consider the  best  interests  of  the  children,  in  particular  the
      youngest child. The eighth  ground  was  that  the  judge  had  failed
      properly to determine the appellant's Article 8 claim  and  the  ninth
      was that the judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her
      decision.


  13. Permission was granted on 20 June 2017 on all grounds other than  four
      and five, the latter because Mr de Mello had conceded at  the  hearing
      that section 117C applied to the appellant.


Appeal Hearing

  14. At the hearing Mr de Mello expanded upon the grounds of  appeal.  With
      regard to the first ground,  he  relied  on  the  decisions  in  Rexha
      (S.117C - earlier offences : Albania) [2016] UKUT 335  and  George,  R
      (on the application  of)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] UKSC 28 in submitting that there had  to  have  been
      not only a change in the law, but also a change in circumstances, such
      as a further conviction, to justify the application of section 117C(6)
      and (7) where a deportation order arising from the same conviction had
      previously been revoked. He submitted that since  there  had  been  no
      change in the appellant's circumstances since the previous deportation
      order was revoked, the respondent could not now apply section  117C(6)
      and (7). It was an abuse of power for the Secretary of State to make a
      fresh deportation decision under section 3(5)(a) of the  1971  Act  on
      the same factual circumstances upon which the Tribunal had  previously
      allowed his appeal, as the Tribunal's findings  were  binding  on  the
      Secretary of State. With regard to the second ground he submitted that
      the respondent's letter  of  27  October  2012  created  a  legitimate
      expectation that  the  appellant  would  not  be  deported  unless  he
      committed a further offence. Mr de Mello submitted,  with  respect  to
      the third ground, that paragraph 399C  had  to  be  read  as  a  free-
      standing provision, otherwise it would create an absurd position  that
      someone could be subjected to an indefinite period of  uncertainty  as
      to whether he would be deported, with the clock starting afresh on the
      relevant ten year period. Mr de Mello submitted that his fourth ground
      was not pursuing  the  Zambrano  point  but  the  principles  of  "res
      judicata". He submitted, with respect to the remaining  grounds,  that
      the appellant's circumstances  were  compelling,  given  his  youngest
      child's condition, and  also  considering  the  point  that  a  second
      deportation decision had been instituted  when  he  had  done  nothing
      wrong.

  15. Ms Aboni submitted that the judge had considered the law properly  and
      directed herself appropriately. There was no abuse of  power  and  the
      deportation decision was a lawful one. It was not open to the judge to
      find that it was not. The judge gave adequate reasons for her decision
      on paragraph 399C. There was no legitimate expectation as  claimed  by
      the appellant as he had been warned with each grant of leave  that  he
      was only permitted to stay in the UK on a temporary basis.  The  judge
      had properly found there to be no compelling circumstances.


  16. Mr de Mello, in response, reiterated the points  previously  made  and
      also sought to withdraw the concession Judge Gribble had recorded  him
      having made, namely that section 117C applied to the appellant.


Consideration and findings

  17.  The first observation I make is that the grounds pursued before me by
      Mr de Mello were in essence the same  as  those  argued  before  Judge
      Gribble and it seemed to me that Mr de Mello  was  simply  seeking  an
      opportunity to re-argue the same matters in the hope  of  achieving  a
      different outcome. In a detailed and carefully written decision  Judge
      Gribble analysed each ground raised by Mr de Mello in the  context  of
      the relevant statutory and legal  provisions  and  provided  full  and
      proper reasons for rejecting his arguments.

  18. Mr de Mello submitted that he did not recall making a concession  that
      section 117C did not apply  in  the  terms  set  out  in  the  judge's
      decision and he seeks to withdraw such a concession. However the terms
      of the concession are clear, in particular  at  [36],  and  I  see  no
      reason to depart from that. In  any  event  I  find  no  merit  in  an
      argument that that section did not apply to the appellant, who, as the
      judge properly found at [31] is, and remains, a  foreign  criminal  as
      defined at section 117D(2). There is nothing in section 117C or  D  to
      suggest that a person ceases to be a foreign criminal within the terms
      of those provisions following the revocation of a deportation order or
      the grant of subsequent periods of leave to remain.


  19. Judge Gribble considered Mr de Mello's submission that paragraph  339C
      was nevertheless a free-standing provision, at [57]  to  [61]  of  her
      decision, and provided cogent reasons for rejecting that argument. She
      set out the terms of that paragraph at [60], as follows:

      "399C. Where a foreign criminal who  has  previously  been  granted  a
      period of limited leave under this Part applies  for  further  limited
      leave or indefinite leave to remain his deportation remains  conducive
      to the public good and in  the  public  interest  notwithstanding  the
      previous grant of leave".


  20. As Judge Gribble found, it is clear that that paragraph has to be read
      together with the other paragraphs in Part 13, as indeed is  indicated
      by the words "under this Part".  Accordingly the judge properly  found
      that the  deportation  of  the  appellant  was  to  be  considered  as
      remaining conducive to the public good and, as she said at  [64],  the
      introduction of such a provision enabling a deportation  order  to  be
      'revived' was a matter for parliament.

  21. It was Mr de Mello's submission that the  reviving  of  a  deportation
      order, in a situation where the appellant  had  committed  no  further
      offences and there was no change in  circumstances  since  a  previous
      deportation order had been revoked, was an abuse of  power,  and  that
      the  judge  accordingly  had  jurisdiction  to  find  the  deportation
      decision to be "not in accordance with the law" for  the  purposes  of
      Article 8 on that basis. However that was a matter fully and  properly
      dealt with by the judge at [62] and [69] to [70] where she referred to
      the changes in the law which had taken place since the  revocation  of
      the previous deportation order and to the  more  restrictive  approach
      introduced through the changes  in  the  legislation  and  immigration
      rules.


  22. Mr de Mello acknowledged that he was not assisted by the  decision  in
      Rexha,  which  involved  similar   circumstances   whereby   a   fresh
      deportation decision had been made relying on  an  earlier  conviction
      despite the revocation of a previous  deportation  order  relating  to
      that conviction and the subsequent grant of leave to the appellant. In
      that case, Dove  J,  sitting  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  rejected  the
      argument made before him, which relied on the decision in Secretary of
      State for the Home Department v TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977, that
      the Secretary of State was fixed with the  conclusion  of  a  previous
      Tribunal that the offence giving rise to a previous deportation  order
      did  not  justify  deportation  and  thus  could  not  make  a   fresh
      deportation decision on the basis of the same conviction. At [18] Dove
      J said:


      "Not only have the factual circumstances of the appellant's case moved
      on considerably since the point in time when  that  determination  was
      reached in excess of ten years prior to this decision, but also  there
      had been  a  change  in  the  law  through  the  introduction  of  the
      provisions in the Immigration Act 2014 which are at the heart of  this
      appeal. Whilst in our view it was necessary for the respondent to give
      consideration to which of the offences within the appellant's criminal
      past were relied upon as reasons for the decision to deport  him,  the
      respondent was not, in the circumstances,  precluded  by  Mr  Bailey's
      findings from relying upon the 2002 conviction as part of the  overall
      appraisal of the appropriateness of deportation in his case."


  23. Mr de Mello, however, sought to distinguish the  appellant's  case  on
      the basis that, contrary to the position in Rexha, there had  been  no
      change in his circumstances,  and  no  further  offending,  since  the
      determination in his appeal against the previous deportation  decision
      and that if anything his circumstances had become more compelling.  He
      submitted that a change in the law, absent a change in the appellant's
      circumstances and any further offending, was not sufficient to justify
      a fresh deportation decision being made on the basis of  the  previous
      conviction. However, not only was that nuanced  argument  not  put  to
      Judge Gribble, but it seems to me that the changes in the  legislation
      and immigration rules and the stricter approach to the public interest
      mentioned by the judge  at  [70]  were  sufficient  in  themselves  to
      constitute the said change in circumstances. There was  no  indication
      in paragraph 399C or in the caselaw to which Mr de Mello  referred  me
      that there was a requirement for further offending  or  a  significant
      change in circumstances in order for a fresh deportation  decision  to
      be justified and lawful. Accordingly I  consider  that  Judge  Gribble
      properly found that there was nothing unlawful about the  decision  to
      make a fresh deportation decision.

  24. Mr de  Mello's  argument  on  legitimate  expectation  raised  similar
      concerns and was fully and properly addressed by the judge at [63] and
      [64]. Judge Gribble had regard to the letter of 27 October 2012 relied
      upon by the appellant as giving rise to a legitimate expectation  that
      he would not be deported unless he re-offended. She concluded that the
      only legitimate expectation arising from the letter was  that  further
      periods of leave would be considered on the basis of  the  law  as  it
      stood at any particular time. I find no error in  such  a  conclusion.
      The letter made it very clear to the appellant that  it  was  on  that
      particular occasion that the Secretary of State  had  decided  not  to
      take deportation action but that he remained  liable  to  deportation.
      There is nothing in the reference in the final paragraph of the letter
      to future 'adverse notice' and committing a further offence to suggest
      that it was only in such circumstances that the Secretary of State was
      able to seek to deport the appellant in the future. It was made  clear
      to the  appellant  in  the  subsequent  letters  of  grant  of  leave,
      including the respondent's letter of 13 April 2013, that he was  being
      given only a limited  period  of  discretionary  leave  based  on  the
      circumstances at the time and that he was  required  to  make  further
      applications for leave to remain (and thus meet  the  requirements  of
      the current immigration rules)  if  he  wished  to  stay  in  the  UK.
      Accordingly I find no merit in the second ground of appeal.


  25. As Mr de Mello acknowledged, permission had not been  granted  on  the
      ground raising EU rights under the Zambrano principles, given that the
      appellant's children would not be required,  by  his  deportation,  to
      leave the UK, but could remain in the UK with  their  mother,  as  the
      judge properly found at [68]. Mr de Mello submitted that the point  he
      had been trying to make was that the principle of  "res  judicata"  or
      "double  jeopardy"  applied  and  that  the  appellant  could  not  be
      sanctioned for a second time for his  past  offending.  However,  that
      argument involved the same issues raised in  the  first  ground  which
      have already been addressed above and was also considered and rejected
      by the judge at [69] for reasons properly given.


  26. The remaining grounds assert, essentially, that the judge had erred by
      finding that the appellant's circumstances were not  very  compelling,
      given the medical condition and best interests of the youngest  child.
      Mr de Mello also submitted that the fact that a previous Tribunal  had
      found the appellant's circumstances to be  exceptional  and  that  the
      previous deportation order had been revoked as a result,  and  further
      that a second deportation decision had been made  despite  him  having
      done nothing wrong, was also a matter making his overall circumstances
      compelling. The judge, however, had full and  careful  regard  to  the
      question of  very  compelling  circumstances  under  section  117C(6),
      reminding herself at [71] of the correct approach as set out in recent
      case law, in  NE-A  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239. She considered the  circumstances  and
      best interests of all the children in concluding that  the  effect  of
      the appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on  them  and  their
      mother, and then went on to  consider  their  circumstances  again  to
      assess whether they could be considered as very  compelling  over  and
      above that finding.  At  [82]  and  [83]  the  judge  gave  particular
      consideration to the medical condition of the youngest child,  I,  and
      how her condition affected the rest of the family and would affect the
      family if the appellant  were  to  be  deported.  The  judge  provided
      detailed and cogent reasons for concluding that  there  were  no  very
      compelling circumstances over and above those in section  117C(4)  and
      (5). She was perfectly entitled to reach that conclusion  and  did  so
      upon a full and proper  application  of  the  relevant  statutory  and
      legislative principles and in accordance  with  the  most  recent  and
      relevant caselaw. The  appellant's  grounds  challenging  the  judge's
      findings in that regard are simply a disagreement  with  the  decision
      and do not disclose any errors of law.

  27. For all of these reasons I find  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision and I uphold the decision.

DECISION

  28. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.





    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  In  view  of  the
    involvement of children in these  proceedings,  I  continue  the  order
    pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.






Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  1 September
2017
