
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19121/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without A Hearing Under Rule 34   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 November 2020                       |On 03 December 2020              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             AHSAN RASHEED BUTT
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Birk ('the Judge') dated the 7 April 2020 in which the
       Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
       sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the operative part  of
       the grant being in the following terms:

           "2.    The appellant, it was accepted provides 24-hour care  for
                his  father  who  has  physical  disabilities   and   memory
                problems. The Judge found there to be Article 8 family  life
                between the appellant and his father.


           3.     The judge dismissed the appeal,  finding  that  he  could
                access the required level of care either  through  the  NHS,
                social services or by other family members.


           4.     It is arguable that in failing to  consider  whether  the
                advent of coronavirus rendered removal disproportionate,  as
                submitted at the hearing and referred to at [14], the  judge
                erred."

    3. Following permission  being  granted  directions  were  sent  to  the
       parties inviting them to comment upon the method by which  the  error
       of law finding was to be determined and providing an opportunity  for
       further submissions to be made.
    4. The time for providing a response has passed.
    5. Having considered the judgment of the High Court in The Joint Council
       for The Welfare of Immigrants (Applicant)  v  The  President  of  the
       Upper Tribunal (IAC) (Respondent) and The Lord Chancellor (Interested
       Party) [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), in which neither the Pilot  Practice
       Direction issued by the Senior President of  Tribunals  on  19  March
       2020 nor Rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 were declared unlawful, consideration can still be given to  the
       appropriate venue for the next hearing of this matter in light of the
       overriding objectives.
    6. Paragraph 4 of the Practice Direction reads as follows: "Decisions on
       the papers without a hearing: Where  a  Chamber's   procedure   rules
       allow decisions  to be  made  without  a hearing,  decisions   should
       usually  be  made  in  this  way, provided  this  is   in  accordance
       with  the  overriding  objective,  the  parties'  ECHR   rights   and
       the Chamber's procedure rules about notice and consent."
    7. It noted there is no objection to a remote hearing, but regard has to
       be taken of the Overriding Objective contained in the Upper  Tribunal
       Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with   a   case
       fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it  in  ways that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    8. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    9. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34. -


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper
                Tribunal to-






                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an application for permission to bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)    make a consent order disposing of proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

   10. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to  exercise  the
       discretion provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of law  question
       to be determined on the  papers  as  opposed  to  directing  an  oral
       hearing. There have been no submissions from either party raising  an
       issue that suggests otherwise, and nothing on the  facts  or  in  law
       makes consideration of the issues on the  papers  not  in  accordance
       with overriding objectives, a breach of the  parties'  ECHR   rights,
       and/or  UTIAC's procedure rules about notice and consent.

Background

   11. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  who  was  born  in  the  20
       November 1991.
   12. Having considered the documentary and oral evidence  the  Judge  sets
       out her findings from [19] of the decision under challenge.
   13. The Judge concludes that the  appellant  is  unable  to  satisfy  the
       Immigration Rules and goes on to consider the merits  of  the  appeal
       outside the Rules between [25 -  37],  writing  between  [27-37]  the
       following:

           "27.   Mr Rashid suffered a car accident in or about 2016. There
                is a letter from Adult Social Care dated 31 10.16  which  is
                addressed  to  Mr  Rashid.  This  is  the  outcome  of   the
                assessment after Mr Rashid had suffered his car accident. It
                states that  this  has  left  him  physically  impaired  and
                suffering age related  memory  problems.  He  is  unable  to
                achieve the following outcomes without assistance. These are
                managing and maintaining nutrition, personal hygiene,  being
                appropriately  dressed,   maintaining   a   habitable   home
                enrichment, developing and maintaining family  and  personal
                relationships and making use of necessary or services in the
                local community. Mr Rashid requires support during  the  day
                and night but adult social care do not fund  this  level  of
                support  through  home-care.  It  is  beneficial  he  is  to
                continue receiving support from the Appellant.


           28.    Mr Rashid in his unsigned statement states that currently
                he has severe neck pain, shoulder pain,  significant  lumbar
                spinal canal stenosis which cases back  and  leg  pains.  He
                also suffered a foot fracture which causes pain  and  issues
                with mobility. A letter from his GP dated 28.1.20  sets  out
                that in addition to  this  he  suffers  from  long  standing
                symptoms of shortness of breath which has recently  worsened
                and he  has  been  referred  to  the  chest  clinic  and  he
                struggles to walk short distances. Mr Rashid is not  totally
                immobilised.


           29.    I accept that the Appellant carries  out  the  duties  of
                daily care in terms of personal hygiene,  shopping,  cooking
                and looking after the house. Mr Rashid does not require  24-
                hour care since he states that the Appellant would  commence
                part time work in the UK and there is  no  medical  evidence
                which states that  24  hours  7  days  a  week  is  what  is
                necessary for Mr Rashid. The account by the Appellant of  Mr
                Rashid's memory problems  points  to  minor  and  infrequent
                incidents. If this was a serious problem then his  GP  would
                have provided further assistance or the necessary  referrals
                to medical professionals. There is no medical evidence  that
                only the Appellant has the skills to look after Mr Rashid.


           30.    I find that if Mr Rashid could not manage on his own that
                he would be entitled and be able to access benefits  to  pay
                for assistance for his functional needs e.g.  a  cleaner,  a
                shopper and also social care in terms of  being  visited  by
                carers at his home and meals provided. If he  is  unable  to
                move  easily  then  he  can  apply  for  walking  aids  e.g.
                crutches, a wheelchair etc. If his condition required it  he
                would also be entitled to be  placed  into  a  council  care
                home. Therefore more there is sufficient  and  a  myriad  of
                state assistance available for him.


           31.    No attempts have been made by the  Appellant,  Mr  Rashid
                nor his GP  to  enquire  as  to  what  care  would  be  made
                available to the Appellant's father in the  absence  of  the
                Appellant and accordingly I have no  evidence  that  what  I
                have set out in paragraph 30 above would not be available.


           32.    There is an unsigned statement from Mr Mohammed Butt.  He
                is the person who was looking after  Mr  Rashid  whilst  the
                Appellant attended this hearing. He states that Mr Rashid is
                a good friend of his. He states that  he  believes  that  Mr
                Rashid would feel uncomfortable and  uneasy  if  a  stranger
                does what his son does for him every day. I face some weight
                on that letter as that witness was unable to  attend  for  a
                good reason of caring for Mr Rashid. However,  I  find  that
                these considerations carry  less  weight  because  there  is
                nothing intrinsic in the duties and care that the  Appellant
                performs  which  cannot  be  performed  and  carried  by   a
                combination of social worker, medical professional will care
                worker. It may be a personal preference but not a necessity.


           33.    I also find  that  Mr  Rashid  has  the  benefit  of  his
                daughter living in the area.  I  find  that  the  Appellants
                assertion at paragraph 13 of his statement to be  inaccurate
                and an exaggeration. He states  that,  "We  only  have  each
                other as we have no family elsewhere." His sister lives a 10-
                minute drive away and his father as all his  other  children
                in Pakistan.


           34.    There is an unsigned statement from Ms  Shakeel,  who  is
                the daughter of Mr Rashid. She did not attend the hearing in
                support of her statement. The  Appellant  accepts  that  she
                lives nearby. She asserts that she  cannot  look  after  her
                father or spare him much time. However, she  does  not  work
                and she does not assert that she does not visit him. I  find
                that she would be  available  to  assist  and  provide  some
                companionship her father even if  she  is  unable  to  visit
                frequently or to reside with him.


           35     I also find that Mr Rashid can continue to  enjoy  family
                life by modern means of  communication  with  his  son.  The
                medical evidence does not support that he would be unable to
                travel to Pakistan to visit the Appellant and  the  rest  of
                his family in Pakistan.


           36.    I move to consider whether the decision to  refuse  is  a
                proportionate one.


           37.    In balancing the relevant factors  I  take  into  account
                that the Rules  have  not  been  met  and  this  is  a  very
                significant factor which weighs  against  the  Appellant.  I
                find the public interest for removal to  be  strong  because
                the Appellant is not required to be the carer of his  father
                in light of my findings above and there are no other factors
                which support him remaining in the UK, when much of his time
                in the UK has been without leave and precarious. I place  no
                reliance upon his assertion that he does "abide by  all  the
                rules and law here." (Paragraph 25 of his recent  statement)
                as he has failed to do so as evidenced  by  his  periods  of
                being in the UK without leave.


           38.    On balancing the various fact above, I find that there is
                no real risk of a breach of Article 8 and so the decision is
                a proportionate one."

   14. The decision is challenged  on  three  grounds  the  first  of  which
       relates to an alleged failure by the Judge  to  have  regard  to  the
       exceptional circumstances prevailing at the date of hearing, 17 March
       2020, namely the Covid 19 public health crisis. It is argued that the
       relevant date at which matter were to be considered was at  the  date
       of the hearing when, despite increasing deaths  in  the  UK  and  the
       heightening rate of infection, there is no mention  or  consideration
       of this in the determination or  likely  impact  upon  Mr  Rashid  of
       living  alone  without  a  cohabiting   carer   in   light   of   his
       vulnerability. The appellant asserts that should have been considered
       by the Judge as it was capable of forming  "compelling  circumstance"
       pursuant to article 8 ECHR.  The  second  ground  asserts  the  Judge
       failed to apply the correct test when assessing  the  proportionality
       of  family  life  disruption,  as  having  found  that  family   life
       recognised by article 8 exists the Judge  was  required  to  consider
       whether separation of the appellant from his father was proportionate
       in all the circumstances. It is argued  the  Judge  was  required  to
       evaluate whether the  disruption  of  the  relationship  between  the
       appellant and his father was proportionate weighing up  the  strength
       of the  family  life  against  the  public  interest  in  immigration
       control. It argued the Judge  should  have  considered  the  test  of
       compelling circumstances and whether it was unjustifiably  harsh.  It
       is said the Judge failed to indicate what weight should be  given  to
       the family life  against  any  hypothetical  alternatives  canvassed.
       Ground three asserts an irrational consideration of  the  factors  in
       the proportionality assessment  arguing  the  giving  of  significant
       weight to the purported availability of alternative  care  failed  to
       have regard to the nature and extent of the current care provided  by
       the  appellant  himself  some  aspects  of  which  are  said  to   be
       irreplaceable. The appellant argues that the appellant's  ability  to
       care for his father was an important part of the family life for both
       of them. It is also  argued  the  Judge's  finding  Mr  Rashid  could
       maintain family life by means of modern communication is  contentious
       and something the Upper Tribunal has long deprecated.
   15. The Secretary of State's case is set out in a Rule 24 response  dated
       26 October 2020 in which it is stated the application is  opposed  as
       the Judge direct herself appropriately and gave adequate reasons  for
       the findings made. The document continues:

           "The respondent submits that the Judge of the FTT accepted  that
           the appellant's father had care needs but found that  there  was
           no medical evidence  to  demonstrate  that  he  has  significant
           memory problems or that he requires 24 hour care.  The  evidence
           indicating that the appellant  intended  to  work  part-time  if
           permitted to remain in the UK supports a finding that his father
           does not require 24-hour care.


           The respondent submits that it was open to the  of  the  FTT  to
           find that, if the appellant's father could not manage alone,  he
           was entitled to benefits to pay for care,  mobility  aids,  etc.
           The appellant and his father had made no enquiries regarding the
           availability of support and it was open to the Judge of the  FTT
           to find the appellant had failed to establish  that  his  father
           would enable to access suitable assistance.


           It was also open to the Judge to find there  were  other  family
           members who would be able to provide some support in the absence
           of the appellant, and that the  appellant  had  not  established
           that his sister was unable or unwilling to assist their father.


           All though the Judge of the FTT did not  consider  the  Covid-19
           tube, the respondent submits that this is not  material  to  the
           overall conclusions of the FTT.


           The respondent submits the determination discloses  no  material
           error of law and should be maintained."


Error of law

   16. In an application for leave to remain  as  a  carer,  the  underlying
       nature of the appellant's human rights application, it  is  necessary
       to consider a number of relevant issues.
   17. An application for Entry Clearance as a  carer  would  ordinarily  be
       refused under paragraph 320(1) of the Immigration Rules as  there  is
       no provision in the Rules for entry is such capacity.
   18. A 'carer concession' exists which is a concession to enable a  person
       already  in  the  UK  in  a  temporary  capacity  to  make  long-term
       arrangements for the care of a friend  or  relative.  This  was  not,
       however, the nature of the remedy the appellant was seeking.
   19. In relation to an application for  leave  to  remain  such  as  this,
       whilst each case must be looked at on  its  individual  merits,  when
       considering whether leave to  remain  should  be  granted,  a  number
       points should be considered by a decision maker such as:

             i. The type of illness or condition supported by a Consultant's
                letter;


            ii. The type of care required;


           iii. Care which is available (e.g. from the  Social  Services  or
                other relatives/friends); and


            iv. The long-term prognosis.

   20. These are all matters that the  Judge  took  into  account  with  the
       required   degree   of   anxious   scrutiny   when   assessing    the
       proportionality of the decision.
   21. In respect of the Covid 19 pandemic, the Judge is criticised for  not
       considering the impact of  the  same  upon  Mr  Rashid  living  alone
       without a cohabiting carer in light  of  his  vulnerability  but  the
       grounds fail to establish in what way this is material to the Judge's
       decision to dismiss the appeal.
   22. The respondent has published guidance dealing with  removals  and  it
       was not made out at the date of decision that suitable care would not
       be available including within the care sector. A decision speaks from
       the date it was promulgated on 7 April 2020  when  despite  increased
       levels of deaths and pressures upon the NHS the care sector continued
       to function especially once additional PIP was available.
   23. It is not made out to be  an  irrational  finding,  on  the  evidence
       available to the Judge, that if Mr Rashid is reliant upon the type of
       care discussed such will be available to him within the care  sector.
       In relation to Mr Rashid's psychological health, that was no evidence
       before the Judge to show that the impact of the appellant's  removal,
       especially in light of the findings of the availability of in country
       family support, would result in a deterioration sufficient to warrant
       a finding of compelling circumstances.
   24. The Judge was clearly  aware  of  the  correct  manner  in  which  to
       approach an article 8 ECHR appeal. The Judge found in the appellant's
       favour in relation to the first of the Razgar questions and  went  on
       to consider the final question which is that upon  which  the  appeal
       turned, whether the interference  with  the  appellant's  family  and
       private  life  and  that  enjoyed  by  the  appellant's  father   was
       proportionate to the legitimate aim relied upon.
   25. The Judge was not required to set out findings in relation  each  and
       every aspect of the evidence and it is clear that in concluding  that
       the public interest outweighed the protected family and private  life
       the Judge took into  account  the  nature  of  the  tie  between  the
       appellant and his father, which was predicated  on  the  support  the
       appellant gives to his father, without which there  was  no  evidence
       that the relationship was such as to amount to family life recognised
       by article 8 rather than de facto family life.
   26. The Judge accepted that at the date of decision the appellant was  Mr
       Rashid's main carer but found alternative care  was  available  which
       did not require the appellant's presence in the UK and that  although
       the Judge identified credible sources  of  such  potential  care  and
       support it was noted  no  enquiries  had  been  made  by  either  the
       appellant or his father to establish whether the same was available.
   27. The Judge clearly  noted  the  human  aspect  of  the  case  and  the
       importance to Mr Rashid of the fact he is living with his son who  is
       providing care. The evidence before  the  Judge  did  not  establish,
       however, that this was the determinative factor.
   28.  There  is  nothing  arguably  irrational  in   the   proportionality
       assessment in which all competing arguments were taken into account.
   29. It is understandable that Mr Rashid would prefer to receive carer and
       support from his son, but there was nothing to show alternatives were
       not available or that the specific nature and extent of  the  support
       provided by the appellant could not be replicated by  others.  Whilst
       the appellant and his father may want the appellant to  stay  in  the
       United Kingdom to  provide  such  support,  there  is  merit  in  the
       respondent's commented in  the  Rule  24  reply  that  the  fact  the
       appellant was indicating he would work part-time shows  that  support
       24 hours a day, 7 days a week, as alleged, was not  required  for  Mr
       Rashid.
   30. It is also settled law that article 8 does  not  give  a  person  the
       right to choose where they wish to live.
   31. Disagreement with the Judges findings is  not  enough.  The  findings
       made are supported by adequate reasons. The weight to be given to the
       evidence was a matter for the Judge. It is not made out the  findings
       are outside the range of those reasonably opened to the Judge on  the
       evidence sufficient to warrant the  Upper  Tribunal  interfering  any
       further in relation to this matter.

Decision

   32. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   33. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 November 2020












