
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/19717/2016
                                                               HU/24047/2016
                                                               HU/19720/2016
                                                               HU/19719/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September and 2 November 2018           |On 12 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               1) CE (NIGERIA)
                               2) OO (NIGERIA)
                               3) CO (NIGERIA)
                               4) SO (NIGERIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Rashid and Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (07.09.18) and Mr S. Kandola
                    (02.11.18), Senior     Home Office Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    NMK Lawrence who, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27  February  2018,
    dismissed their human rights appeals which were  primarily  brought  on
    the basis that the second and third appellants were qualifying children
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act and it was  unreasonable  to  expect
    them to leave the country.  The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, but as  the  central  issue  in  the  appeals  was
    whether the best interests of the minor children should or  should  not
    prevail over wider proportionality considerations, I considered that it
    was appropriate to make an anonymity direction for these proceedings in
    the Upper Tribunal.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 19 June 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "The grounds assert that the Judge erred in  effectively  reversing
         the ratio of MA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in  holding
         that there were no strong reasons to grant  the  minor  Appellants'
         leave.

         It is arguable that at paragraphs 36, 41 and 48 in considering  the
         case of the two minor Appellants had been in the UK for more than 7
         years the Judge requires strong reasons to be shown for a grant  of
         leave and therefore misunderstood the test  in  MA  (Pakistan)  and
         failed to direct himself properly."



Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellants are all nationals of Nigeria.  The  first  appellant  is
    the mother of the second to fourth appellants.  The  second  appellant,
    O, was born in the UK on 9 December 2008; the third appellant was  born
    in the UK on 18 June 2010; and the fourth appellant was born in the  UK
    on 25 July 2012.

 4. The first appellant entered the UK on 3  March  2008.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that whatever type of visa or its duration that she entered on,
    she overstayed after the visa expired.

 5. On 14 February 2011 the first appellant applied for a residence card as
    the spouse of a German national exercising  Treaty  rights  here.   She
    also made parallel applications on behalf of her  two  oldest  children
    (the youngest child not yet having been born).  In May 2011  the  first
    to third appellants were issued with residence cards as family  members
    of Denis Schmidt.

 6. On 6 July 13, in the course of executing a drugs search warrant (during
    which no drugs were found) Operation Trilogy officers  encountered  the
    first appellant and her children and the father of the  children,  "F",
    apparently living together.  F had also obtained a  residence  card  as
    the partner of a German national, Amma Brempong.  The  first  appellant
    and F were arrested and then bailed pending further enquiries.

 7. On 9 March 2015 the respondent revoked the first appellant's  residence
    card as there was sufficient evidence to believe that her  marriage  to
    Denis Schmidt was one of convenience contracted for the sole purpose of
    her remaining in the UK.  The residence cards of the two children  were
    revoked in line with the revocation of their mother's residence card.

 8. Their appeals came before Judge Rozanski sitting at Taylor House  on  2
    February 2016.  Both  parties  were  legally  represented.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the mother and the father of the children.

 9. The Judge went on to find that  it  was  most  likely  that  the  first
    appellant and F were living in a marriage-like relationship;  and  that
    the first appellant was not  living  in  a  marital  relationship  with
    Denis; and nor was F living in a marital relationship with Amma.   This
    was further confirmed in his view by the fact that the first  appellant
    and F had subsequently conceived a fourth child together.  The  overall
    picture that he formed of the relationship which  the  first  appellant
    had had with Denis was that it was never a genuine  marriage.   He  was
    satisfied that it was more probable than not that, from its  inception,
    it was a marriage of convenience.

10. On 7 March 2016 the appellant's solicitors submitted an application  on
    behalf of the second appellant for leave to remain on the grounds  that
    she had accrued more than seven years' residence in the UK as a  child.



11. On 25 July 2016 the  respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    application.   She  had  lived  with  her  parents  who  were  Nigerian
    nationals, and she had lived  in  the  UK  which  was  a  multicultural
    society with a resident Nigerian diaspora, so it was not accepted  that
    she had lost all ties, including social, cultural and family  ties,  to
    her home country.  It was noted on  her  passport  that  she  had  last
    visited Nigeria on 15 December 2011 until 13  January  2012.   Although
    she was in school, Nigeria had a functioning education system that  she
    would be able to access.  It  was  generally  accepted  that  the  best
    interests of a child whose parents were facing removal from the UK were
    best served by the child remaining with their parents and being removed
    with them.  This represented the centrality of a  child's  relationship
    with their parents in determining their wellbeing.   Further  to  this,
    there were also a number of general factors which made  a  decision  to
    refuse her application reasonable and section 55 compliant.

12. In a separate letter, also dated 25 July 2016, the respondent gave  her
    reasons for refusing parallel applications for leave to remain made  by
    the first  appellant,  and  the  third  and  fourth  appellants.   With
    reference to the first appellant, it was not accepted that she met  the
    suitability requirements as her presence in the UK was not conducive to
    the public good because she had entered into a marriage of  convenience
    with a German national in order to obtain Treaty rights  to  remain  in
    the UK - thereby using deception.  With regard to the third and  fourth
    appellants, it  was  observed  that  they  had  not  lived  in  the  UK
    continuously for at least seven years immediately preceding the date of
    application.



The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appeals of all four appellants came before Judge  Lawrence  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 16 February 2018.  Mr Lee appeared on behalf of  the
    appellants, and  the  respondent  was  represented  by  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The Judge received oral evidence from  the  mother
    and father of the children.

14. In his subsequent decision, he  recorded  at  paragraph  [3]  that  F's
    residence card had been revoked on the grounds  that  his  marriage  to
    Amma was a marriage of convenience, and that  his  appeal  against  the
    revocation had been dismissed.  At paragraph [4], he noted that  F  had
    made a separate human rights application which had been refused  on  30
    January 2017, and that he had lodged an appeal against  this  decision,
    but a date for the appeal had not yet been set.

15. The Judge set out his findings at paragraph [11] onwards.  At paragraph
    [21], he found that the parents' continued denial of the  finding  that
    each of them had entered into a marriage of convenience was relevant to
    their credibility on the circumstances they  were  likely  to  face  in
    Nigeria.  The Judge returned to this them at paragraph [47],  where  he
    held that the parents were not "creditworthy" witnesses.  In any event,
    they were able-bodied adults, both in mind and body.   They  had  lived
    most of their lives in Nigeria  and  were  familiar  with  life  there.
    Returning to Nigeria with their three children could not amount to very
    significant obstacles.

16. The Judge referred to MA (Pakistan) at paragraphs  [34]  and  [35].  He
    directed himself that the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  held  that
    significant weight must be attached to the seven years that a child has
    been in the UK, and that there must  be  strong  reasons  for  refusing
    leave.  The Judge continued in paragraph [36]:

         "In the instant appeal the minor children are healthy, both in mind
         and body.  They are doing well in school.  There is healthcare  and
         schools in Nigeria.  Their parents are likely to find  difficulties
         in finding employment and a home in Nigeria.  The  adults  are  not
         physically and mentally incapable of finding employment in Nigeria.
          They may prefer not to return to their home country  but  that  is
         not the issue.  The children may find they need  to  adapt  to  the
         Nigerian way of life.  However, they grew up in  a  Nigerian  home,
         provided by their parents.  Further, they are young enough to do so
         and will be assisted by their parents. There is  no  evidence  that
         their "welfare" or  "life  chances"  are  likely  to  be  adversely
         affected by returning to Nigeria. In all the circumstances of  this
         appeal there are no "strong reasons" to grant them leave.  There is
         no evidence of any adverse consequences or that their life  chances
         are likely to be affected.  They have to make adjustments.  But  it
         is not unusual for children to move from  one  country  to  another
         with their parents.  Children have moved from Nigeria  to  the  UK.
         In the instant appeal, the mere fact that the children have to move
         from the UK to Nigeria does not of itself mean  that  it  must,  or
         likely, be to their detriment."

17. At paragraph [41], in the context of a discussion of Azimi-Moayed,  the
    Judge repeated his finding that  there  were  not  powerful  or  strong
    reasons for a grant of leave.

18. At paragraph [48], the Judge held that the minors'  circumstances  were
    not sufficiently serious and compelling to grant "the first two" status
    in the UK.  There were no strong reasons to grant  leave.   There  were
    not strong reasons to find that by  returning  to  Nigeria  their  best
    interests  were  likely  to  be  adversely  affected.   Therefore,  the
    decision in PD did not apply, and neither the first appellant, nor  the
    fourth appellant, nor F was entitled to the grant of leave.



The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

19. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Wilding acknowledged that the approach by the  Judge  was  very
    clumsy, but he submitted that his misapplication of the guidance  given
    in MA (Pakistan) was not material.  After hearing from Mr  Lee  and  Mr
    Wilding in reply, I found that an error of law was made out  such  that
    the decision needed to be set aside and remade.  I gave my reasons  for
    so finding in short form, and my written reasons are set out below.



Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

20. While the Judge correctly identified the  ratio  of  MA  (Pakistan)  at
    paragraphs [14], [20], [34] and [35] of his decision, the Judge  failed
    to apply the ratio to the facts of the case  before  him.   Instead  of
    asking himself whether there were  strong  reasons  for  requiring  the
    qualifying children to go to Nigeria, he answered a different question,
    which is whether there were strong reasons for granting them  leave  to
    remain.  This is clearly erroneous in law, as this is  not  merely  the
    same question put the other way round. The crucial distinction is  that
    the way in which the Judge framed the question placed the burden on the
    children to show strong reasons as to why they should be granted  leave
    to remain, rather than placing the burden  on  the  judicial  decision-
    maker to identify strong reasons for expecting the  children  to  leave
    the country with their parents.

21. The knock-on effect of the Judge's error is that the assessment of best
    interests is flawed.  The Judge failed to make  clear  findings  as  to
    whether, overall, the best interests of the children lay in them  going
    to Nigeria as against staying in the UK; and, if  the  latter,  whether
    there  were  wider  proportionality  considerations  that   nonetheless
    outweighed their best interests.

22. The Judge wrongly addressed the question of reasonableness on the basis
    that it was a purely  child-centric  question.   This  would  not  have
    mattered if the only answer to the child-centric question was  that  it
    was in the children's best interests to go to Nigeria, and  hence  that
    it was reasonable to expect them to do so.  But this is  not  the  only
    possible answer. On the contrary, the necessary starting point is that,
    where children have accrued over seven years' residence, prima facie it
    is in their best interests to remain here.

23. Justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be done, and  it  is
    well-established that the assessment of the best  interests  of  minors
    facing removal must be properly performed.  Accordingly,  the  decision
    must be set aside on the grounds of inadequate reasoning.



Future Disposal

24. Mr Lee submitted that the appeals should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing because the Judge's  error  was  so  gross
    that the appellants were deprived of a fair hearing in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

25. The Judge adequately engaged with the evidence that was before him, and
    he made sustainable primary findings of fact which are not the  subject
    of an error of law challenge.  As matters stand, the  underlying  facts
    relevant to the assessment of the children's best interests are settled
    and/or uncontroversial, and the resolution of the appeals turns on  the
    proper application of the  test  in  MA  (Pakistan),  and  not  on  any
    identifiable dispute of fact.

26. Accordingly, as I ruled at the hearing, I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellants were deprived of a fair hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and I am not persuaded to depart from the normal practice of the  Upper
    Tribunal which is to retain cases such as this.

27. However, I have agreed to adjourn the remaking of  the  decision  to  a
    resumed hearing, at which the appellants will have the  opportunity  to
    present evidence of a material change of circumstances (if  any)  since
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



Conclusion

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that the decision must be set aside and remade.



The Resumed Hearing for Remaking

29. On 24 October 2018 the Supreme Court gave its judgment in the  case  of
    KO (Nigeria) & Others -v- Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53.  Lord Carnwath, with whom the  other  Justices  agreed,
    said at paragraph  [16]  that,  unlike  its  predecessor  DP5/96,  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) contains no requirement to consider  the  criminality  or
    misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor and that it was impossible
    in his view to read it as importing such a requirement by  implication.
    At paragraph [17],  he  said  that  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
    substance of the Rule without material change, but  this  time  in  the
    context of the right of a parent to remain.  He inferred  that  it  was
    intended to have the same effect.  The  question  again  was  what  was
    reasonable for the child.

30. Opening the appellants' case on remaking, Mr  Lee  submitted  that  the
    declaration of law by the Supreme Court assisted the appellants, as  it
    meant that the respondent could no longer rely on the misconduct of the
    parents as fortifying the case that it was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    qualifying children to leave the UK.  The oldest qualifying  child  was
    due to celebrate her 10th birthday on 9 December 2018, and  the  second
    qualifying child had been resident in the UK for some eight and a  half
    years.

31. My attention was drawn to paragraphs [46]-[52], in which Lord  Carnwath
    gave his reasons for dismissing the appeals of NS and AR.  Both of them
    had entered the UK as students, on 19 February 2004 and 4 February 2003
    respectively.  NS's wife and older child had entered as  dependants  of
    NS in  December  2004.   AR's  wife  and  child  had  entered  as  AR's
    dependants in February 2004.  In October  2008,  NS  and  AR  had  made
    separate applications for leave to remain as Tier 1  (Post-study  work)
    migrants.  In early 2009 the SSHD refused  these  applications  on  the
    basis that both NS and AR were involved in a scam  by  which  they  and
    numerous others falsely claimed to have  successfully  completed  post-
    graduate courses at an institution  called  The  Cambridge  College  of
    Learning.

32. NS and AR both appealed against the SSHD's decision, and their  appeals
    were ultimately joined, and came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins.
    In his decision issued on 5 November 2014, he  dismissed  the  appeals.
    With regard to the children, he had no difficulty  in  concluding  that
    the best interests of the children required that they remain in the  UK
    with their parents. That, from their point of view, would be  an  ideal
    result.  He reminded himself that one of  the  children,  particularly,
    had been in the UK for more than 10 years,  and  this  represented  the
    greater part of her young  life  and  she  was  someone  who  could  be
    expected to be establishing a private and family life outside the home.
     He also reminded himself that none of the children had any  experience
    of life outside the UK and they were happy,  settled  and  doing  well.
    But the fact was that their parents  had  no  right  to  remain  unless
    removal would contravene their human rights. Given their behaviour,  it
    would be outrageous for them to be permitted to remain in the UK: "They
    must go and in all the circumstances I find that the  other  appellants
    must go with them."

33. Mr Knafler QC, on behalf of the children, submitted that  the  decision
    of UTJ Perkins was erroneous in law as parental misconduct should  have
    been disregarded.  However, Lord Carnwath said at paragraph [51]:

         "I accept that UTJ Perkins' final conclusion is  arguably  open  to
         the  interpretation  that  the  "outrageousness"  of  the  parents'
         conduct was  somehow  relevant  to  the  conclusion  under  section
         117B(6).  However, read in its full context,  I  do  not  think  he
         erred in that respect.  He correctly directed  himself  as  to  the
         wording of the subsection.  The parents' conduct  was  relevant  in
         that it meant that they had  to  leave  the  country.   As  I  have
         explained (para 18 above) it is in that context that it had  to  be
         considered whether it is reasonable for the children to leave  with
         them. Their best interests would have been for the whole family  to
         remain here.  But in the context where the parents  had  to  leave,
         the natural expectation would be that the children  would  go  with
         them, and there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by  the  Judge
         to suggest that that would be other than reasonable."

34. By parity of reasoning, Mr Kandola submitted, the  natural  expectation
    was that the qualifying children in this appeal should  go  with  their
    parents who have no leave to  remain,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the
    evidence to suggest that that would be other than reasonable.   Indeed,
    in retrospect, First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence had not erred in law,
    as he had applied what was now recognised to be the  correct  approach,
    which was a real world approach,  as  distinct  from  the  ideal  world
    approach approved in MA (Pakistan).

35. In reply, Mr Lee submitted that  it  was  difficult  to  reconcile  the
    decision on the appeals of NS and AR with the earlier declaration  that
    parental misconduct was not relevant to the question of reasonableness.
     He submitted that I should be cautious in applying the decision on the
    appeals of NS and AR by analogy, as the analysis of the UTJ Perkins had
    not been endorsed by the Supreme Court. It had only been held not to be
    clearly erroneous.



Discussion and Findings on Remaking

36. From the appellants' perspective, it seems to me that the  decision  of
    the Supreme Court in KO & Others gives with one hand,  but  takes  away
    with another.  The misconduct of the parents in entering into marriages
    of convenience so as to facilitate them remaining in the UK is  removed
    from  the  assessment  of  reasonableness,  as  the  issue  under  Rule
    276ADE(i)(iv) and section 117B(6) is what is reasonable for the  child,
    not what is reasonable for the parent.  However, Lord Carnwath endorsed
    as a highly relevant consideration the following guidance contained  in
    an Immigration Directorate Instruction (IDI) of the Home  Office  cited
    at paragraph [10]:

         "It is generally the case that it is in a child's best interests to
         remain with their parents.  Unless special  factors  apply,  it  is
         generally reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK  with  their
         parents, particularly if the parents have no right to remain in the
         UK (my emphasis)."

37. At paragraph [17], Lord Carnwath said:

         "The list of relevant factors set out in the IDI Guidance (para  10
         above) seems to me wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the
         context of section 117B(6) as with paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)."

38. At paragraph [18], he continued:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI Guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it would normally be reasonable for  the  child  to  be  with
         them.  To that  extent,  the  record  of  the  parents  may  become
         indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have  a  right
         to remain here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even  on  that
         hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to leave  that
         the provision may give the parents a right to remain."

39. Lord Carnwath went on to say that the point was well expressed by  Lord
    Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) -v- SSHD [2007] SLT 1245 at  22,  and  also  by
    Lewison LJ in  EV  (Philippines)  -v-  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  at
    paragraph [58].  Lewison LJ said, inter alia, as follows:  "If  neither
    parent has the right to remain, then that is a background against which
    the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question would  be:  is
    it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to
    remain to the country of origin?"

40. Lord Carnwath said, at [19], that, to the extent that Elias LJ may have
    suggested otherwise in  MA  (Pakistan)  at  paragraph  [40],  he  would
    respectfully disagree.  There was nothing in  the  section  to  suggest
    that "reasonableness" was considered otherwise than in the  real  world
    in which the children find themselves.

41. A useful summary of the learning on the best interests of  children  in
    the context of immigration is to be  found  in  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC):

         "30. It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases."

42. I consider that the effect of the Supreme  Court  ruling  is  that  the
    first principle in Azimi-Moayed is potentially an overriding one,  even
    in appeals involving qualifying children  -  if  they  are  part  of  a
    household where both parents have no leave to remain.

43. The second appellant, O, has the strongest private life claim,  as  she
    is the oldest child.  She is nearly at the 10-year threshold  when  she
    will be eligible to apply for naturalisation as a British citizen.  The
    third principle of Azimi-Moayed clearly operates in  her  favour.   The
    fourth principle also operates in her favour to a more limited  extent:
    she has not accrued seven years' from the age of four, so she  has  not
    yet embarked on her secondary school education.  But she is at  an  age
    where  she  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  have  established   some
    significant  social  contacts  involving  friends  at  primary  school.
    However, she has  not  yet  reached  a  significant  milestone  in  her
    education.  She is still a long way off from taking GCSEs.

44. O is likely to receive an adequate  education  in  Nigeria.   With  the
    support of her parents in adjusting to life there, and in  common  with
    her younger siblings, she will  be  able  to  enjoy  all  the  benefits
    attendant upon her Nigerian citizenship, including  being  immersed  in
    the social and cultural milieu from  which  both  her  parents  spring.
    Return to Nigeria will also promote the possibility of  family  reunion
    with extended family members on her mother's and father's side.

45. The Judge below found that the parents were not credible in their claim
    that they had lost contact with their respective families  in  Nigeria.
    He also rejected the suggestion of the parents that  the  family  would
    face destitution in Nigeria.  While he accepted that they are likely to
    face difficulties in finding a home and employment in Nigeria, he  held
    that they were not physically or mentally incapable of achieving  these
    objectives.  Moreover,  the  Judge  found  that  the  parents  had  not
    discharged the burden of proving a risk of  destitution,  following  MA
    (Proved destitution) Jamaica [2005] UKIAT 0013, which was referenced by
    the Judge at paragraph [23] of his decision.  He found that the parents
    had  not  seriously  addressed  the  issue  of  the  practicalities  of
    relocation.   They had not  investigated  schools  in  Nigeria  or  any
    employment prospects.  They had expressed concern about the health care
    system in Nigeria, but they did not bring forward any specific evidence
    of a relevant deficiency.  In any event, all the children, including O,
    are healthy, both in mind and body, as the  Judge  found  at  paragraph
    [36].

46. Accordingly, there is no reason to suppose  that  O,  and  the  younger
    children, would not thrive in Nigeria just as they have  thrived  under
    the care of their parents in the UK.

47. Nonetheless, in an ideal world and other things being equal,  I  accept
    that overall it is in O's best interests to remain in the UK  with  her
    parents and younger siblings; and that the same applies  to  the  third
    appellant, C, albeit that her private life claim is less compelling.

48. However, other things are not equal, and, following KO & Others,  I  am
    enjoined to assess the best interests of the children on the  basis  of
    the facts as they are in the real world.  Neither parent has  leave  to
    remain under the Rules.  Neither parent  has  established  a  right  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  (The Judge below refused to  grant  an
    adjournment so as to enable the  father's  appeal  against  a  separate
    refusal decision to be joined with these appeals.)

49. The question I must ask myself is whether it is reasonable to expect  O
    and her younger siblings to follow  their  parents  with  no  right  to
    remain, to the country  of  origin.  I  answer  this  question  in  the
    affirmative.  Given the ages of the children, including O, by  far  the
    most important best interest consideration is  that  contained  in  the
    first principle of Azimi-Moayed.  It is essential  for  the  children's
    welfare and  wellbeing  that  that  they  should  remain  in  the  same
    household as their parents,  wherever  that  household  is.   It  would
    clearly be contrary to their best interests to separate them from their
    parents; and it follows that it is in the best interests of O  and  her
    younger siblings to follow their parents with no right to remain to the
    country of origin.

50. By the same token, it is reasonable to expect the  children  to  follow
    their parents to Nigeria, notwithstanding the fact that the  two  older
    children have accrued over seven  years'  residence  in  this  country.
    There are sufficiently strong reasons to expect  all  the  children  to
    leave the UK, of which the most powerful is the reason identified in KO
    & Others, but the other  best  interest  considerations  in  favour  of
    relocation to Nigeria  identified  at  [44]  to  [46]  above  are  also
    relevant.

51. As only live issue in these appeals is how the reasonableness  question
    should be answered, this disposes of the  appeals.   However,  for  the
    avoidance of doubt, the other relevant public  interest  considerations
    arising under section 117B of the 2002 Act do not militate against  the
    proportionality of the removal of  the  entire  family.   The  decision
    appealed against strikes a fair balance between, on the one  hand,  the
    rights and interests of the appellants, and, on  the  other  hand,  the
    wider interests of society.  It  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end  sought  to  be  achieved,  namely  the  protection  of  the
    country's economic wellbeing,  the  prevention  of  disorder,  and  the
    maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.




Notice of Decision

52. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: these appeals are dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                       Date 6 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
