
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19074/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow Upper Tribunal      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                   MRS V B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Counsel instructed by Katani & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India whose appeal was dismissed by First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge Clapham in a decision  promulgated  on  23  January
    2019.  Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth in a  decision  dated
    13 March 2019.  The Secretary of State  responded  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24 and thus the appeal came before me  on  the  above
    date.

 2. Mr Winter, Counsel for the  appellant,  relied  on  his  grounds.   The
    appellant relied on Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act as her daughter had
    lived in the UK for more than seven years.  It was said in the  grounds
    that the Judge erred in law when assessing whether  it  was  reasonable
    for the daughter to leave the UK.  Although the Judge had  referred  to
    the psychological report of Dr Jack Boyle, the Judge had failed to make
    any or had failed to make an adequate assessment  of  the  report  when
    assessing whether it was reasonable for the  child  to  leave  the  UK.
    Reference was made to well- known case law.  It was true that the Judge
    had referred to the report from Dr Boyle (paragraph 23 of the decision)
    but the Judge had failed to deal with Dr Boyle's reasoned findings  and
    the Judge did not say why his view should  be  discounted.   Given  the
    report of Dr Boyle it was unclear why the Judge had made  the  findings
    he did make.  The decision should be set aside  because  there  was  an
    error in law in failing to make adequate findings and the appeal should
    either be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal or retained in the  Upper
    Tribunal for a fresh decision.

 3. For the Home Office Mr Govan relied on his Rule 24 notice.   The  Judge
    had applied anxious  scrutiny  and  produced  a  lengthy  and  detailed
    analysis of the  appellant's  appeal,  making  carefully  weighted  and
    balanced findings that  were  reasonable  and  soundly  argued  in  all
    respects.  Despite being a qualifying child the Judge  had  found  that
    taking into account the fabric of the child's life he  considered  that
    in the long-term adjustment would be possible and it was reasonable  in
    circumstances where the parents had no right to remain  to  expect  the
    child to follow them to India.

 4. Having heard arguments for both parties I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 5. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 states
    that in the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where -  (a)  the
    person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the United Kingdom.  It is not disputed that this is the  test
    the Judge applied and the criticism of the Judge is that he  failed  to
    make an adequate assessment of Dr Jack Boyle's report in assessing  the
    test of reasonableness.

 6. As the Judge put it (paragraph 23) the question that had to be answered
    was whether it was reasonable to expect the  child  [J]  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The Judge went on to say that there was  a  psychology
    report from Dr Jack Boyle who noted there were no grounds for  assuming
    that [J] could or would make a positive adjustment if she were returned
    to  India.   He  said  that  it  would,  all  things   considered,   be
    unreasonable and in [J]'s worst interests to leave an environment where
    she feels safe and secure.  The Judge noted  that  Dr  Boyle  said  the
    relocation for [J] would be unwelcomed, resisted and in all likelihood,
    compromise her adjustment.  She  would  not  be  "returning"  to  India
    because she had never lived there.  She was born here.  She  speaks  no
    language other than English and inevitably her values were the same  as
    those of other Scottish children of her  age  and  gender.   The  Judge
    notes Dr Boyle  saying  that  [J]  was  socially,  psychologically  and
    culturally a Scottish child who was indistinguishable from  her  peers.
    It is quite clear that the Judge, when he went on to make his findings,
    had the findings of Dr Boyle in mind as they were so fully set  out  in
    paragraph 23.  The Judge went on  to  note  that  he  had  considerable
    sympathy for the position of the child who  should  not  of  course  be
    punished for whatever her parents had done or had not done in  relation
    to their immigration history.  The Judge noted that the child's parents
    spoke the relevant languages.  There would appear to be family  members
    in India who would be able to provide social and emotional support.

 7. In paragraph 26 the Judge noted that there was no doubt that the  child
    was not only doing well at school but had involvement in  a  number  of
    activities outside it.  The Judge suggested however that there would be
    no good reason why the child could not be enrolled for lessons  outside
    school in India.  The best interests of the child were a  broad  notion
    and the Judge went on to recognise that her removal to India  would  be
    challenging (paragraph 27). I note that challenging was the  word  used
    by Dr Boyle on page 24 of his report - a further  indication  that  the
    judge did engage with the detail of the report and  not  simply  repeat
    its terms. There  was,  however,  no  reason  why  the  parents  cannot
    relocate to India.  The Judge noted that many families  move  from  one
    country to another.  The Judge said (paragraph 27) it appeared  to  him
    that this child was at an age where, with the support of  her  parents,
    she would be able to adapt.  The Judge went on to refer to KO (Nigeria)
    and considered that in the long-term adjustment would be  possible  and
    it was reasonable in the circumstances where the parents had  no  right
    to remain here to expect the child to follow them to India.

 8. In my view the Judge  gave  clear  and  coherent  reasons  why  it  was
    reasonable for the child to be returned to India.  The criticism of the
    Judge is really that he did not engage with all of the findings  of  Dr
    Boyle; having set out what Dr Boyle said in paragraph  23  he  did  not
    engage further with the terms of that report.  However, it seems to  me
    that it is tolerably clear  that  the  Judge,  in  making  his  careful
    findings, has taken Dr Boyle's observations into account  before  going
    on to give his own valid reasons why the appeal should be dismissed.

 9.  It  therefore  seems  to  me  that  the  grounds  of  appeal   express
    disagreement with the decision of Judge Clapham but go no further  than
    that and do not disclose any material error in  law.   The  Judge  made
    findings that he was entitled to make on the evidence presented to him.
      As such there was no error of law in the Judge's decision which  must
    stand.

Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

11. I do not set aside the decision.

12. I shall continue the anonymity order.


Signed   JG Macdonald  Date 11th June 2019

J G Macdonald
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

