
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19488/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 5 March 2021                    |On : 17 March 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            valerie marie fisher
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Clark, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mrs  Fisher's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  her  human
      rights claim.

   3. For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereinafter  refer  to  the
      Secretary of State as the respondent and Mrs Fisher as the  appellant,
      reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   4. The appellant is a citizen of the USA, born on 6  February  1963.  She
      entered the UK on 4 October 2016 after a successful appeal  against  a
      decision refusing her application for entry as an unmarried partner of
      a British citizen, Brian Coles, and  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      immigration  rules,  on  Article  8  human   rights   grounds.   Their
      relationship had commenced in December 2012, following the appellant's
      separation from her husband in October 2012 and the death of Mr Coles'
      wife in May 2012. The couple lived together for periods in the USA and
      the UK and then the appellant moved to the UK to live with Mr Coles in
      his former family home in Stafford. The house was sold in August  2017
      and they moved to a new home in Stafford, but  shortly  afterwards  Mr
      Cole was diagnosed with cancer. They intended to get married,  but  Mr
      Coles died before they were able to do so, on 29  November  2017,  and
      his funeral took place on 15 December 2017.

   5. On 7 June 2019, prior to  the  expiry  of  her  leave,  the  appellant
      applied for further leave to remain on compassionate grounds,  as  the
      partner of a deceased British citizen. Her application was refused  on
      8 November 2019. The respondent considered that  the  appellant  could
      not meet the requirements in Appendix FM of the immigration rules  and
      that there were no very significant obstacles to her integration  into
      the USA for the purposes of paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  immigration
      rules, because she had resided for 53 years and had two daughters  and
      various  friends  in  that  country.  The  respondent  considered  the
      circumstances of the loss of the appellant's partner  and  noted  that
      some of his ashes were scattered in the  UK  but  concluded  that  the
      appellant could return to the UK as a visitor and that there  were  no
      sufficiently compassionate circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave
      outside the rules. The respondent noted that the appellant  could  not
      qualify for indefinite leave to remain as a bereaved  partner  as  her
      last grant of  leave  had  not  been  made  as  a  partner  under  the
      immigration rules and she had not made an application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain outside the rules.

   6. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Garratt  on  18  September  2020.  The
      appellant gave oral evidence before the judge, as did her friend  with
      whom she was living. It was argued for the appellant that  her  return
      to USA would have unduly harsh consequences as she would be  separated
      from her partner's ashes and from her friends and family in  Stafford.
      Judge Garratt found that the appellant  could  not  benefit  from  the
      bereaved  partnership  provisions  in  Appendix  FM  and   could   not
      demonstrate very significant obstacles to integration in USA,  but  he
      concluded  that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  outside  the
      immigration rules on the basis of the appellant's strong private  life
      and he allowed the appeal on human rights grounds on that basis.

   7. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  Judge  Garratt's
      decision on the basis that he had failed to identify  anything  of  an
      exceptional nature which would elevate the appellant's position  above
      that of the public interest and failed to identify any reasons why the
      appellant's return to the USA would be unduly harsh.

   8. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal and the matter  then
      came before me for  a  remote  hearing  conducted  through  Skype  for
      Business.

Hearing and submissions

   9. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge had materially misdirected  himself
      by failing rationally to identify what exceptional circumstances there
      were and failing to give rational reasons for finding that there was a
      strong private life when the facts did not reveal one. The judge erred
      by using Article 8 as a  general  dispensing  power  contrary  to  the
      decision in Patel & Ors v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2013] UKSC 72.  The judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  why  the
      public interest in immigration control was outweighed by  the  factors
      in the appellant's  case.  The  previous  leave  was  granted  to  the
      appellant on an exceptional basis,  but  the  circumstances  were  now
      entirely different. The judge had given  weight  to  the  judgment  in
      McLaughlin, Re Judicial Review (Northern Ireland) (Rev 1) [2018]  UKSC
      48 in the proportionality exercise, but the circumstances in that case
      were not analogous to the appellant's. In this case, there had been no
      application made on  the  appellant's  behalf  under  the  bereavement
      provisions and it was therefore not clear  why  the  appellant  should
      have the benefit of the bereavement rules and policy.  Article  8  was
      not to be used to allow a person to develop a private life in  the  UK
      but that was what Judge Garratt was doing by allowing the appeal.  The
      decision contained material errors of law and had to be set aside  and
      re-made by dismissing the appeal.

  10. Mr Clark submitted that the judge had not erred but had considered all
      the evidence and had given proper reasons at [43] for concluding  that
      the appellant had shown exceptional circumstances. As the judge  found
      at [42], the  existence  of  an  immigration  rule  allowing  bereaved
      partners to remain in the UK showed the weight of the public  interest
      and that was where the case of McLaughlin was analogous. The appellant
      could not have applied within the bereaved  partner  category  of  the
      immigration  rules  because  she  had  been  given  leave  to   remain
      previously outside the rules and she had therefore applied  for  leave
      outside the rules. The tick-box exercise for making  applications  did
      not allow for such explanations to be given. The judge had carried out
      the correct test and had not erred in law.

  11. In response Mr Melvin reiterated the submission  that  there  were  no
      exceptional circumstances in this case and that Article 8 could not be
      used as a general dispensing power.

Discussion and conclusions

  12. Contrary to the submission made by Mr Melvin, it seems to me that  the
      respondent's grounds are simply a  disagreement  with  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's decision  and  that  there  is  no  proper  basis  to
      interfere with the decision.

  13. The judge had full regard to the evidence and assessed the evidence in
      the context of the relevant legal provisions  and  caselaw.  At  [37],
      [38] and [40] the judge  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
      previous grant of leave to  enter  and  remain,  noting  that  it  was
      granted outside the immigration  rules  as  a  result  of  a  previous
      successful Article 8 human rights appeal which recognised  the  strong
      family life the appellant had with her partner before  his  death  and
      the fact that the parties had been kept apart  by  circumstances.  The
      judge had regard to the fact that the appellant was unable to make  an
      application for further  leave  within  the  immigration  rules  as  a
      bereaved partner, following her partner's death,  owing  to  the  fact
      that the nature of the previous grant  of  leave  precluded  her  from
      meeting the requirements for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  such  a
      basis.

  14. The judge then gave full and proper consideration to the  requirements
      for exceptional circumstances and unjustifiably harsh consequences for
      the purposes of  Appendix  GEN.3.2  when  going  on  to  consider  the
      appellant's claim outside the immigration rules and had full regard to
      the public interest  factors  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in assessing proportionality on  wider
      Article 8 grounds.

  15. In so far as the respondent considers that  Judge  Garratt  failed  to
      identify any compelling circumstances or to give adequate reasons  for
      considering that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  outside  the
      immigration rules, I disagree. The respondent asserts in  her  grounds
      that the judge failed to identify any reasons why the appellant  would
      be unable to re-establish herself in the USA, but it  is  relevant  to
      note that the judge did not find that the appellant would be unable to
      re-establish herself in the USA. That was made clear  at  [39],  where
      the judge found that the appellant would have difficulty in  complying
      with  the  test  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)  to  show  very  significant
      obstacles to integration into the USA, since she had lived there  most
      of her life and had a house and family in that country. The basis  for
      the judge's decision in the appellant's  favour,  and  the  compelling
      circumstances identified, lay in the strong private  life  established
      in the UK with her late partner and the compelling nature of her  ties
      to the UK emanating from that relationship, rather than  the  lack  of
      ties to the USA. It was not, as Mr Melvin suggested, a matter  of  the
      appellant seeking to use Article 8 to develop a private life in the UK
      but rather, as the judge found at [41], that she did not want to leave
      behind the strong private life already established here and it was for
      that reason that the judge concluded that the  appellant's  return  to
      the USA would be unduly harsh.

  16. Furthermore, whether or  not  the  circumstances  in  McLoughlin  were
      sufficiently analogous to the appellant's situation, the fact is  that
      the judge was  entitled  to  take  account  of  the  existence  of  an
      immigration rule which benefitted bereaved partners and permitted them
      to remain in the UK indefinitely as weighing in the appellant's favour
      against the public interest in requiring her to leave the  UK,  whilst
      also acknowledging the limitations  of  a  'near-miss'  in  Article  8
      terms. It is not the  case,  as  submitted  by  Mr  Melvin,  that  the
      guidance in Patel and the warning therein that "article  8  is  not  a
      general dispensing power" in 'near-miss' cases is  applicable  to  the
      circumstances of the appellant's case.  In  Patel  the  appellant  was
      seeking to use Article 8 in circumstances where there was a  near-miss
      in meeting the requirements of the immigration  rules  as  a  student,
      where there was otherwise "little or nothing to  weigh  on  the  other
      side of the balance, apart from the time he had spent in this  country
      as a student under the rules" and where the Supreme Court  found  that
      "a near-miss under the rules  cannot  provide  substance  to  a  human
      rights case which is otherwise lacking in merit." The appellant's case
      before Judge Garratt was, on the contrary, a human  rights  case  with
      substance,  based  on  family  and  private  life,  where  there  were
      particular relevant circumstances why the rules could not be  met  and
      where the inability to meet the requirements of the immigration  rules
      was properly balanced against the various factors which were found  to
      be compelling.

  17. In all of the  circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  was
      perfectly entitled to make the decision that he did. His decision  was
      based upon a full and careful assessment of the evidence and a  proper
      application of the relevant legal provisions and  caselaw.  I  do  not
      find any material errors of law  requiring  the  decision  to  be  set
      aside.

DECISION

  18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to allow the appeal  stands  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal is dismissed.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  8 March 2021
