
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19236/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2020                      |On 27 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                 BUSHRA [K]
                          (Anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 30 August 2018 the Secretary of State decided  to  refuse  to  grant
    leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  to  the  claimant.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which,  following  a
    hearing of 15 April 2019, dismissed her appeal.  In  a  decision  of  9
    January 2020, I set aside the  decision  of  the  tribunal  and  issued
    directions for a rehearing of the appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  I  did
    not preserve any of the findings and conclusions  of  the  tribunal.  I
    held a hearing on 6 March 2020  so  that  I  could  hear  evidence  and
    submissions concerning the way in which I should remake  the  decision.
    That hearing proceeded as scheduled and representation  was  as  stated
    above. I am grateful to each representative.

2.   By way of background, the claimant was  born  on  10  January  1987  in
Pakistan. She is a national of that country. She entered the UK on 7  August
2007 having obtained entry clearance to do so on the basis of  her  marriage
to a person who was either  a  British  national  or  a  person  permanently
settled in the UK. She claims to have been a  victim  of  domestic  violence
and the marriage failed. Her leave expired  on  26  July  2009  but  on  the
following day (as I understand the immigration history) she  sought  further
leave as a victim of domestic violence. That application was not  considered
because she had not paid the appropriate  fee.  On  21  September  2017  she
asked the Secretary of State to grant her international  protection.  It  is
unclear to me what happened to  that  application  but  it  seems  she  made
another one but then failed to attend an interview in  connection  with  it.
That  second  application  was  either  subsequently  withdrawn  or  perhaps
treated as having been withdrawn. Be that as it may,  she  was  not  granted
the international protection which she was seeking. But on 15 November  2017
she made a human rights claim based largely upon her wish to remain  in  the
UK with one Khalid [R] whom she is in a romantic relationship with.  Mr  [R]
is a male British Citizen and is a permanent UK resident. The two  have  had
a religious marriage but not a  legal  marriage.  It  was  that  application
which led to  the  decision  of  30  August  2018  referred  to  above.  The
Secretary of State's reasoning was contained in  a  document  of  that  date
which I shall call "the reasons for refusal  letter".  In  the  reasons  for
refusal letter the Secretary of State said she was not  satisfied  that  the
requirements contained within paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  (a
rule which provides  for  a  right  to  remain  in  limited  and  prescribed
circumstances on the basis of private life as respected by  the  content  of
article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights) were met. Whilst I  am
not wholly sure, the Secretary of State seemed to be saying albeit in a  way
which lacked clarity that the requirements contained within  paragraph  EX.1
of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules were not met either (before  me  the
Secretary of State's position was  clearly  to  the  effect  that  the  EX.1
requirements were not met) and that it  was  not  thought  that  there  were
exceptional circumstances  such  that  the  claimant  should  succeed  under
article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

3.   At the hearing of 6 March each party was represented. I am grateful  to
each representative. I had documentation which had been provided at  various
stages of the appeals process by each party. I heard oral evidence from  the
claimant, from Khalid [R], from Sobia [K] (the claimant's sister), and  from
Nasar [H] (the claimant's brother in law). I  have  considered  all  of  the
evidence, both written and oral, in addition to the oral  submissions  which
were made to me at the hearing  prior  to  remaking  the  decision  which  I
previously set aside.

4.   Before me Mrs Aboni pointed out that if the  claimant  was  to  succeed
under the Immigration Rules on the basis of her relationship  with  Mr  [R],
she would need to satisfy paragraph EX.1. That was because she did not  meet
what are known as the eligibility requirements of the Immigration  Rules  as
a consequence of her unsettled immigration status. Mrs Aboni is right  about
that and Mr Alam did not seek to argue  otherwise.  But  in  this  case  the
converse is also true (again the contrary was not argued)  in  that  if  she
can bring herself within the terms  of  EX.1  she  will  succeed  under  the
Immigration Rules. It is also appropriate to  point  out  that  it  was  not
disputed that Khalid [R] is the partner of the  claimant  as  that  term  is
used in EX.1.

5.   EX.1 has a very high threshold. In the  context  of  a  person  seeking
leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  a  relationship  with  a  partner,  the
relationship must be genuine and subsisting, the partner must be  a  British
Citizen or must be settled in  the  UK,  (or  here  with  refugee  leave  or
humanitarian protection, and  there  must  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to
family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.  EX.2  goes  on  to
clarify  that  "insurmountable  obstacles"  means   the   very   significant
difficulties  which  would  be  faced  by  a  claimant  or  the  partner  in
continuing their family life together outside the UK and which could not  be
overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the  applicant  or  their
partner. It is for a claimant to show, to a balance  of  probabilities  that
those stringent conditions are met.

6.   It has been necessary for me to decide what to  make  of  the  evidence
and to make relevant findings  of  fact  prior  to  deciding  whether  those
conditions are met or not. But some are not in issue. The relationship  with
Khalid [R] is a longstanding one (the parties  having  entered  a  religious
marriage on 17 October 2010) and it was not disputed  before  me  that  that
relationship is genuine and subsisting. Nor was it disputed  that  he  is  a
British Citizen. The dispute revolved around the existence or  otherwise  of
insurmountable obstacles.

7.   The claimant's case was that she herself could not return  to  Pakistan
(her country of birth) because she would be ill-treated by others  who  live
there and because she  has  substantial  mental  health  difficulties  which
would prevent her living there and would lead to her  losing  vital  support
she receives from persons in the UK.

8.   The claimant gave confused evidence as to who might seek  to  harm  her
in Pakistan. She has provided two different  indications  in  two  different
witness statements as to precisely which individuals she says will harm  her
if she is to return. Mrs Aboni argues, in effect, that the inconsistency  is
damaging to the claimant's credibility and that  I  should  not  accept  she
fears anyone in Pakistan. I agree. It is reasonable to expect that  where  a
person asserts a  fear  of  particular  individuals,  that  person  will  be
consistent as to which individuals she has in mind.  I  accept  (see  below)
that the claimant has mental health difficulties but I do  not  accept  that
such difficulties explain  such  a  stark  inconsistency.  So,  I  find  the
claimant will not be targeted or harmed by any individuals  in  Pakistan  if
she has to go back there. But  I  do  accept  the  claimant  will  not  have
supportive family to return to in Pakistan. I must now treat what  she  says
with caution. But she has been in the UK for a considerable period of  time.
Ties can diminish over time. She has been consistent  about  the  fact  that
most of her family members are in the UK and that she will not  have  family
support from  anyone  currently  living  in  Pakistan.   Further,  the  oral
evidence of Sobia [K] which was unchallenged before me  was  to  the  effect
that the claimant does not have family in Pakistan.

9.   As to the claimed mental health  difficulties  which  the  claimant  is
said to experience, Khalid [R] said  in  oral  evidence  that  the  claimant
suffers from  depression.  He  used  the  term  "too  much  depression"  and
suggested the extent of it meant it would not be possible for  her  to  live
in Pakistan. Sobia [K] used the term "excessive  depression"  and  suggested
that the extent of the depression meant that the claimant had  to  be  given
her medication and also had to be given food and that  she  (Ms  [K])  would
sometimes undertake those tasks. Nasar [H] said in  oral  evidence  that  if
not prompted the claimant would forget to take her medication,  that  it  is
necessary for someone to "keep an eye" on her, that she "does not listen  to
anyone" other than three people being him, Sobia [K]  and  Khalid  [R].  The
thrust of his evidence, as I understood it,  was  that  the  claimant  needs
looking after but will only accept being looked after  by  the  above  three
people. Although all three of those persons gave evidence none  were  cross-
examined.

10.  I have looked  for  medical  evidence  of  the  claimed  mental  health
problems. As to that, there is in one of the bundles of papers before me,  a
letter of 3 April 2019 written by one Iftekhar Ahmed who is a senior  social
worker.  That  letter  suggests  a  background  of  domestic  abuse  and   a
prevailing state of confusion on the part of the  claimant  when  discussing
her history in addition to a lack of coherence. But it is  also  implied  in
the letter that her mental  health  has  improved  somewhat  more  latterly,
albeit it appears from a low base. There  is  a  letter  of  28  March  2019
written by one Doctor Prashara who is a GP. In that  letter  the  claimant's
mental health  problems  are  described  as  being  "severe  depression  and
psychosis". Reference is made to a history of her having  been  admitted  to
hospital "for becoming acutely unwell with regards to her psychosis". It  is
also said that she "is  under  regular  hospital  follow  up  by  consultant
psychiatrists".  It  is  further  explained  that  "her   illness   can   be
unpredictable and she is at risk of her mental health deteriorating  quickly
and acutely". Her condition is described as being chronic and long-term  and
it is said that it may never resolve. Although this letter  is  brief  there
can be no doubt that, on the face of it, it paints a picture of serious  and
ongoing mental health difficulties. There is a letter written  by  one  M  Z
Iqbal who is a consultant psychiatrist, of 2 April  2019.  He  confirms  the
diagnoses referred to above and the history  of  a  hospital  admission.  He
suggests a greater degree of compliance with treatment than does the GP  but
says she will continue to require psychiatric care and  that  her  prognosis
is unpredictable.

11.  As to the prospect of Khalid [R] going to live  in  Pakistan  with  the
claimant so that he might continue to support her and so that  the  two  may
enjoy family life there together, he said in oral  evidence  that  doing  so
would not be feasible. As to that he told me he has a settled  lifestyle  in
the UK, has a home and work in the UK (he is a taxi driver)  and  would  not
like to live in Pakistan.

12.  I need to make some findings about the above. First of  all,  I  accept
that  the  claimant  suffers  from  psychosis  and  severe  depression.  Two
qualified medical practitioners (one a consultant) who  have  been  involved
with her treatment have clearly said so. I accept that these are  conditions
of real significance and gravity and remain so even  if  there  has  been  a
degree of improvement as seemingly  suggested  by  the  social  worker.  Mrs
Aboni pointed out that the letters I have referred  to  above  are  somewhat
dated and she expressed the view that more  recent  medical  evidence  would
have been of more benefit. It is a point worth making. But the  evidence  is
that the condition is an intractable one and there is nothing  elsewhere  to
suggest otherwise. I find that the condition as at the date  of  hearing  is
essentially the same as it was when the GP and the  consultant  wrote  about
it. I  also  accept,  for  the  same  reasons,  that  the  condition  is  an
unpredictable one with the potential for sudden adverse variation.

13.  As to the claimant's need for assistance,  I  have  set  out  what  the
witnesses told me about that at the hearing.  I  have  mentioned  that  what
they said, which seems to me to be consistent  with  the  medical  evidence,
was not challenged by way of cross-examination. Against  that  background  I
accept that the claimant requires assistance to ensure she eats,  takes  her
medication and otherwise looks after herself and that she will  only  accept
assistance from the witnesses.

14.  I do not accept that Khalid [R] would  face  real  difficulties  if  he
were to go to live with the claimant in Pakistan. All the reasons  he  gives
as to why he could not or at least would not want  to  do  so  are  sensible
ones. I do not underestimate how difficult it must be for a  settled  person
who has a home and a steady income to give all  that  up  for  a  much  more
uncertain future. But I find that he could do it even though doing so  would
cause him hardship, stress and concern.

15.  So, I have now made my relevant findings and the next step is to  apply
them. I have concluded that in view of the claimant's  own  difficulties  in
returning to Pakistan,  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  as  the
meaning of that phrase is clarified in EX.2, to family  life  continuing  in
Pakistan. That is because in my  judgement  if  she  does  return,  even  if
accompanied by her partner, she will lose the valued  and  valuable  support
of her other close family members who gave evidence  before  me.  She  will,
therefore, be dependent upon one single individual for all her  care  needs.
That will be the same individual who will have to balance attending  to  her
needs as a consequence of her serious medical conditions, with  establishing
a home and earning a living sufficient for both of them.  It  will  be  very
difficult to undertake to a proper standard both tasks at the same time.  It
is true that there will be medical facilities in Pakistan but it  might  not
be controversial to say what is available might well not be of the  standard
available in the UK and given the chronic  and  significant  nature  of  the
conditions plus the potential for  sudden  and  significant  relapse,  might
well not be suitable for her particular and I  think  it  is  fair  to  say,
pressing needs.

16.  In light of the above, I conclude that  the  requirements  of  EX.1  as
clarified in EX.2 are met in this case. It has not been  said  I  should  do
anything other than allow the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  if  so
satisfied. That then is what I do.

17.  My having decided the above, it is not necessary  for  me  to  consider
whether the claimant meets the requirements of any other  Immigration  Rules
nor whether she would, in any event, be  able  to  benefit  from  article  8
outside the Immigration Rules.

18.  I have not granted the claimant anonymity. The tribunal did not  do  so
and I was not invited to consider doing so on behalf  of  the  claimant  who
has been represented throughout.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision, I allow the claimant's appeal from  the  Secretary
of State's decision of 30 August 2018 because she meets the requirements  of
the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  Dated: 21 April 2020

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

