
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19943/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2018                    |On 16 January 2018                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                Joel Wabwire
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person.
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghandi promulgated 24.3.17, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    1.8.16, to refuse his application for ILR under the  Immigration  Rules
    as the child of a settled parent, pursuant to paragraph 298.

 2. At the appellant's request, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dealt  the
    appeal on the papers, on 3.11.16.

 3. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    18.10.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 9.1.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. The appellant was not legally represented, but his father spoke on  his
    behalf.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to  be
    set aside.

 7. The appellant was previously  granted  LTR  as  the  dependant  of  his
    mother, granted LTR in 2015 as the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the UK, the leave of each limited to 1.4.18.  Thus,  at  the
    time of the application the appellant had, and still has,  LTR  in  the
    UK, co-terminate with that of his mother.

 8. On 1.8.16 the appellant made an application for ILR as the child  of  a
    settled parent, pursuant to paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules.  He
    could not succeed under those provisions because only  his  father  had
    settled status and his father and mother shared responsibility for  the
    appellant.

 9. Permission was granted on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    failed to consider paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules, which caters
    for the situation of one parent with settled status and the other  with
    limited LTR with a view to settlement.  However,  this  relates  to  an
    application for limited leave to remain.

10. It is suggested in the grant of  permission  that  qualification  under
    paragraph 301 was a Robinson-obvious point. I do not agree.  First,  he
    only right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  on  human  rights
    grounds. Whilst the appeal could not be allowed on immigration grounds,
    the extent to which the appellant meets the requirements of  the  Rules
    was  certainly  relevant  to  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise
    outside the Rules under article 8 ECHR. However, I do  not  agree  with
    the judge granting permission that the fact that the judge  found  that
    the appellant did not meet the Rules impacted on the assessment of  the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal, so  that  it  was  arguably
    flawed. The appellant's application was not made  under  paragraph  301
    for limited LTR, but for indefinite leave to remain (ILR). There was no
    need for him to make a limited LTR application, as he had and continues
    to have leave to remain. There was no basis  on  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should have considered paragraph 301, a provision on which the
    appellant did not rely on.

11. The judge went on to make a perfectly  adequate  article  8  assessment
    outside the Rules, balancing the appellant's family life rights against
    the public interest in immigration control and making an assessment  of
    the appellant's best interests. The judge pointed out that for most  of
    his life the appellant has not lived with his father and  that  it  was
    open for his mother to return to Uganda with him. At the  date  of  the
    appeal hearing, he was an adult and could not meet either  Appendix  FM
    or paragraph 287ADE. Section 117B of the 2002 Act should also have been
    considered, to the effect that little weight was to  be  given  to  any
    private life developed in the UK  whilst  the  appellant's  status  was
    precarious. There is no  removal  decision,  and  it  is  open  to  the
    appellant to make a further application for LTR.

Conclusion & Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                       I do not set aside the decision.

                  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and  the
                  appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
                       [pic]
                       Signed


                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                       Dated

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.

Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.
                       [pic]
                       Signed


                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                       Dated
