
                                    [pic]

 Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/19986/2018
                                                               HU/11987/2018
                                                               HU/19988/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 25 July 2019                     |On 09 August 2019                   |
|                                    |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                   OYF and
                                 ZBO and ZHO
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara of Counsel instructed by Lisa's Law,
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay of the Specialist Appeals Team

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or any member of the  Appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are father (the Appellant) and his two  minor  children.
    The father was born in 1985 and he and the children are citizens of the
    People's Republic of China. They live with their wife and mother who is
    also a Chinese citizen. The Appellant and his wife have a  third  child
    born last year. I was  informed  that  there  is  neither  any  pending
    application to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  for  the
    grant of leave for either or both the wife and the youngest  child  nor
    any appeal or other proceedings against refusal of leave.

 2. The Appellant claims that he arrived on 15  July  2009  using  a  false
    passport. On 6 January 2011 he claimed asylum. The  claim  was  refused
    and his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed. Following  the
    grant of permission to appeal the Respondent  (the  SSHD)  granted  him
    discretionary leave expiring on 13 October 2014. In time he applied for
    further leave which was refused. By a decision promulgated on  16  June
    2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett dismissed the appeal and
    his appeal rights became exhausted on 23 December 2016.

The Original Decision of the SSHD

 3. On 5 April 2018 the Appellant with his two elder minor children applied
    for leave on the basis  of  private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, in the case of the Appellant over the preceding 10  years  and
    in the case of the eldest child over a period of at least 7  years.  On
    17 September 2018 the SSHD refused all three applications.

 4. The SSHD noted that each of the appellant children was said to have had
    no contact with their mother since July 2014. The Appellant  could  not
    claim the benefit of Section EX1 of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules because of his initial illegal entry. In any event it was in  the
    best interests of the children to be in China, the country of origin of
    their parents and the Appellant and the  appellant  children  would  be
    removed as a family unit. The children were young enough  to  adapt  to
    life in China and integrate, building on their cultural  background  as
    children of Chinese citizens.

 5. The Appellant did not meet any of the  time  critical  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and  neither  he  nor  his
    children would face very  significant  obstacles  on  return  to  their
    integration into life in China where  they  had  extended  family.  The
    minor children could go with their father to China, even if the  oldest
    child had been in the United Kingdom for at least 7 years at  the  date
    of the application leading to the decision under appeal and had started
    to develop an  individual  private  life.  There  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances making removal to China unjustifiably harsh  for  any  of
    them.

The Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 6. On 26 September 2018 the Appellant and the  appellant  children  lodged
    notices of appeal. The grounds refer  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention and the length of time each of them has lived in the  United
    Kingdom. No other particulars are given

 7. By a decision promulgated on 3  April  2019  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal G Wilson dismissed all three appeals on human rights  grounds.
    On 21 June 2019 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Swaney  granted  the
    Appellants permission to appeal because it was arguable the  Judge  had
    erred in his assessment of the best interests of the  eldest  child  by
    failing to take into account relevant case law and guidance  which,  if
    so, would have infected his proportionality assessment.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 8. On 3 July 2019 the SSHD lodged a response under Procedure Rule 24 which
    asserted the Judge had taken into account that the oldest child was  "a
    qualifying child" within s.117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act) and the rights and best interests of
    a qualifying child were not "a trump card". The grounds for appeal were
    no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  outcome  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 9. Only the Appellant attended the hearing. Mr Kannangara  explained  that
    he had virtually no English at all. He confirmed there were no  pending
    applications or proceedings in relation to the  immigration  status  of
    the Appellant's wife or there third child who remained  in  the  family
    home.

Submissions for the Appellant

10. Mr Kannangara relied on the grounds for  appeal  which  challenged  the
    Judge's treatment of  the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  the
    reasonableness of their China. The relevant findings were at paragraphs
    45-51 of the Judge's decision. They were not  in  accordance  with  the
    SSHD's guidance for caseworkers which provided that  a  child  who  had
    been in the United Kingdom for 7 years or more would  not  normally  be
    required to leave. Mr Lindsay handed me a copy of the latest version of
    this guidance entitled 'Family Migration: Appendix FM  Section  1.0b  -
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and private life: 10  Year  Routes
    of 11 April 2019 and explained that so far as relevant to these appeals
    this edition, subsequent to the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  made  no
    material changes to the previous edition.

11. Mr Kannangara submitted that the Judge should have found that it was in
    the best interests of the minor appellants  to  remain  living  in  the
    United Kingdom with their parents and that he should then have gone  on
    to assess the proportionality of the SSHD's decision,  whether  it  was
    reasonable, separately by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and to s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. It should be  noted
    that at the hearing before the Judge the eldest child was over 8  years
    of age. The  Upper  Tribunal  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) Iran [2013] UKUT 197 had considered
    that a child would develop a private life from the age of 4, so at  the
    hearing before the Judge the eldest  child  had  developed  a  distinct
    private life. The Judge had erred in considering such a child to be  at
    an age that it would not be  unduly  difficult  to  adapt  to  life  on
    removal to China.  Such  a  child  will  already  have  an  independent
    integrated life in the United Kingdom.

Submissions for the SSHD

12. Mr Lindsay relied on the SSHD's response under Procedure Rule  24  that
    the Judge had taken note of  the  fact  that  one  of  the  Appellant's
    children was a qualifying child. Indeed, the SSHD took  the  view  that
    this was the only factor in the appeal of any substance. The judge  had
    not overlooked this and the rights and best interests of  a  qualifying
    child are not a "trump card".

13. In its decision in JG (s.117B(6):  "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)  Turkey
    [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) and  make  clear  that  the  reasonableness  of
    removal was  a  matter  which  had  to  be  addressed.  The  Judge  had
    considered all the relevant issues and had not taken into  account  any
    irrelevant  considerations.  The  Appellant  had  not  shown  that  his
    decision was perverse.

14. The Appellant had baldly claimed that it was in the best  interests  of
    any child to remain in the place where the child is but  had  cited  no
    authority for the proposition. The grounds for appeal essentially  were
    nothing more than several selective quotations from decisions  and  the
    SSHD's own Guidance.

15. The SSHD's Guidance provided that if it was the case that both  parents
    had no right to stay in the United Kingdom and should  leave  then  the
    starting point was  that  it  was  reasonable  for  their  children  to
    accompany them. The Appellant had not shown any evidence that it  would
    be unreasonable to expect his children to leave. Mr Lindsay referred to
    paragraph 13 of the determination in Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions
    affecting children; onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197  (IAC)  which
    provides: -

         "13. It is not the case that the  best  interests  principle  means
         that it is automatically in  the  interests  of  any  child  to  be
         permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom,  irrespective  of  age,
         length of stay, family background or other circumstances. The  case
         law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the  following  principles
         to assist in  the  determination  of  appeals  where  children  are
         affected by the decisions:

             i)   As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children to be with both their parents and if both parents are
             being removed from the United Kingdom then the starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

             ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

             iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
             leave or the reasonable  expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to
             give rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence
             of exceptional  factors.  In  any  event,  protection  of  the
             economic well- being of society  amply  justifies  removal  in
             such cases."

    The Judge at paragraph 45 of  his  decision  had  considered  the  best
    interests of the children and had gone on to make findings as to  their
    adaptability and the proportionality of their removal from  the  United
    Kingdom to China. His conclusion that it would be reasonable  for  them
    to go to China was sound.

16. Turning to the ground for appeal based on the view expressed in JO  and
    Others (s. 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517  (IAC)  evidence  of  the
    children's wishes could have been given at the hearing before the Judge
    at which the Appellant was represented. He referred me to the  headnote
    which stated that

         "In the real world of litigation, the tools available to the  court
         or tribunal considering this question will frequently  be  confined
         to the application or submission made to the SSHD and the  ultimate
         letter of decision."

17.  The  relevant  criteria  identified  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and s.117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 as amended were effectively the same and so there was no need  for
    the Judge to conduct separate assessments under the  Immigration  Rules
    and under the 2002 Act. Ground 15 disclosed no arguable error of law.

18. Mr Kannangara confirmed he  had  nothing  further  to  add  by  way  of
    response.

Findings and consideration

19. There was no challenge to the Judge's finding that the  Appellant  with
    his wife now have three children and that the Appellant had used  false
    documentation to enter the United Kingdom and had been willing  to  use
    it again and to conceal material facts when it suited him. The  grounds
    did not challenge the Judge's conclusions on  issues  relating  to  the
    elements of the claim based on the issues of China's population, family
    planning and  sterilisation  laws  and  practices  and  also  financial
    penalties.

20. Other than the fact of their continued presence in the  United  Kingdom
    and the fact of their schooling there was little, if any,  evidence  of
    the private life in the United Kingdom of  the  children  beyond  their
    immediate family. There was no evidence of the wishes  and  preferences
    of either of them.

21. The Judge noted the elder child, the second named appellant,  had  been
    lawfully resident for more than 7 years and so was a  qualifying  child
    for the purposes of s.117B of the 2002 Act  and  that  neither  of  the
    children's parents had a lawful right to remain in the United  Kingdom:
    see paragraphs 56 and 54. Given the  Judge's  finding  that  the  elder
    child was a qualifying child, references  to  the  decision  in  Azimi-
    Moayad would have been otiose, given the development  of  the  relevant
    statute law.

22. At paragraph 57 the Judge noted the issues  which  the  children  would
    face on China and concluded, in the light of his findings at paragraphs
    45-49 that it would be in their best interests  to  remain  with  their
    parents and indeed in all the circumstances to start  integration  into
    life in China at the earliest opportunity. He concluded there  were  no
    very significant obstacles to the parents' reintegration into  life  in
    China with their children.

23. The Judge referred to KO and Others as well as a part of  the  judgment
    of Elias LJ in R (MA (Pakistan) and Others) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ. 705
    which was not criticised in KO and Others. JG (s. 117B(6):  "reasonable
    to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) was reported 3 days  after
    the hearing before the Judge. There  was  no  subsequent  communication
    from either party to the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  Judge  should
    consider re-convening or further submissions on JG.  The  decision  was
    promulgated some 3 weeks after JG had been reported.

24. Neither the grounds for permission to appeal nor the  submissions  made
    to the Upper Tribunal referred expressly to JG or even  suggested  that
    had the Judge had the decision in JG been before  him  his  conclusions
    would have been any different.

25. The Judge's decision criss-crosses between the best  interests  of  the
    children and the relevant public factors to be considered  in  relation
    to the Appellant, their father, under s.117B of the 2002  Act  and  the
    assessment of the proportionality of the SSHD's decision with regard to
    the legitimate objectives identified in Article 8(2)  of  the  European
    Convention. This does  not  make  for  an  easy  understanding  of  the
    decision. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that having noted the Tribunal's
    decision of 16 June 2016 and the principles of jurisprudence enunciated
    in Devaseelan and decided the Appellant and  his  wife  had  no  lawful
    leave the Judge assessed the circumstances and best  interests  of  the
    children without regard to the failure of the parents to obtain  leave.
    If the parents were entitled whether within or outside the  Immigration
    Rules to remain in the United Kingdom, it would not have been necessary
    for the Judge to have considered the possible removal of  the  children
    to China.

26. I find the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
    material error of law such that it should be set aside and conclude the
    grounds for appeal amount to no more than disagreement with the  Judge.
    Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

27.  An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. The  second
    Appellant is a teenage child and although no submissions were  made  on
    the point at the hearing, I consider it  appropriate  to  continue  the
    anonymity direction.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.
    The substantive appeal of each of the Appellants is dismissed.
    Anonymity direction continued.




Signed/Official Crest                                     Date 01. 08. 2019








Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

