
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19110/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 December 2017                    |On 16 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           chidozie donatus okoli
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, Counsel, instructed by Eagles Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge M Khan of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  7
    August 2017 dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 24 June 2016 refusing him entry clearance  as  a  partner
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The grounds first take issue  with  the  judge's  assessment  that  the
    appellant had failed to meet the suitability requirements of the  Rules
    through  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in  relation  to   the
    application (the "suitability" point).  This assessment was said to  be
    inadequately reasoned.  The grounds further take  aim  at  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant had not established he was in a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his spouse.  This finding was also said to
    be inadequately reasoned.

3.   I heard excellent submissions from Mr Swain and  Ms  Pal.   Mr  Swain's
    submissions developed a further point flagged  by  the  FtT  judge  who
    granted permission who had written that "the decision is hard to follow
    at times due to a lack of proof-reading" which "of itself, could amount
    to an arguable material error of law".   In  amplifying  the  point  Mr
    Swain described the decision as "shoddy".  He drew particular attention
    to  the  judge's  failure  to   properly   consider   the   appellant's
    representative's  letter  which   accompanied   the   entry   clearance
    application, observing that the only reference to this was in  para  25
    when outlining the appellant's representative's submissions.

4.   I shall address first the  contention  that  the  judge's  decision  is
    shoddily written and "hard to follow".  It is  true  that  the  judge's
    decision contains a number of typos (e.g. "ineligibility"  is  rendered
    more than once as "illegibility") and that  the  grammar  is  sometimes
    lacking; but  these  deficiencies  are  not  such  as  to  obscure  the
    reasoning or rob it of sense.  Reading the determination as a whole  it
    is sufficiently clear what the judge's reasons were for dismissing  the
    appeal and indeed the written grounds do not  complain  of  a  lack  of
    clarity as such; the contention is rather  an  inadequacy  of  reasons.
    The only paragraph Mr Swain identified as illustrating the judge's lack
    of clarity was para 25, but in respect of that paragraph his  complaint
    was not about the reference in it to the  appellant's  representative's
    letter but to the judge's failure to address it when  setting  out  his
    conclusions.  However, as I shall specify below, this  letter  was  not
    anywhere near as helpful to the appellant's case as represented.

5.    As  regards  the  first  ground  of  appeal  challenging  the  judge's
    assessment that the appellant had not met the suitability  requirement,
    I do not consider it made out.  Paragraph S-EC.2.2(b) identifies  as  a
    basis for lack of suitability,  'whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
    knowledge... (b) there has been a failure to disclose material facts in
    relation to the application.'

6.   I am not persuaded that the judge erred in law in concluding  that  the
    appellant  fell  foul  of  this  provision.   Question  28  of  the  EC
    application form asked "Have you made an application to the Home Office
    to remain in the UK in the last 10 years?"  The  appellant's  reply  is
    recorded as "Yes".  Question 29 requires three particulars to be cited:
    Date of Application; Type of Application; Home Office Reference Number.
     The only entry in this box is against Type of  Application  where  the
    word "Dependency" is written.  The appellant submits that  his  failure
    to give an answer as regards the  date  of  application  and  the  Home
    Office reference number was purely secondary and  that  the  mere  fact
    that the appellant had said that he had  made  an  application  on  the
    basis of dependency discharged his duty to disclose material facts.  In
    this regard he points to the fact that  the  information  he  gave  was
    enough to enable the respondent to make inquiries  and  establish  that
    the application in question was  for  an  EEA  residence  card  as  the
    partner of an EEA national and the date on which it had been  made  and
    refused.  However, the provision refers to  "material  facts"  and  the
    facts relating to date of application  and  reference  number  were  as
    material as the answer regarding type of application.  Furthermore, the
    Declaration signed by the applicant declared that the information given
    on the form was "complete and correct to the best of my  knowledge  and
    belief".  The reference to the state of his  knowledge  and  belief  is
    significant because the sponsor's own evidence to the  judge  was  that
    she was speaking to the appellant whilst completing  the  form  online.
    He "had told her that the EEA application was refused in January  2012,
    she also knew that the EEA application had been made in December  2011"
    (paragraph 20).  That evidence made it very difficult to follow how she
    then went on to say that she did not know she had to put  the  date  of
    the EEA application.

7.   Mr Swain makes much of the fact that the  appellant's  application  was
    accompanied by a letter from his representatives  making  even  clearer
    that he had made a previous application.  In point of fact this  letter
    dated  18  March  2016,  does  not  mention  the  appellant's  previous
    application at all.  If anything, therefore, this letter represented  a
    complete failure to mention a material fact.  If anything  it  suggests
    that the previous application was an earlier attempt to regularise  the
    appellant's stay on the basis of his  relationship  with  the  sponsor:
    ("We understand that the applicant while in the UK instructed a firm of
    solicitors to regularise his stay but by the time any  application  was
    submitted  he  was  advised  to  leave  voluntarily  and  returned   to
    Nigeria").

8.   It must also be  recalled  that  on  the  sponsor's  own  evidence  the
    previous application is one that the appellant  should  have  withdrawn
    well before the date it was eventually refused.  Whilst it  is  correct
    that in the couple's evidence there was a short period during which the
    appellant was still in a relationship with  the  Dutch  national,  that
    relationship had clearly broken down by the end of 2011.   At  para  19
    the judge stated:

         "The sponsor said she did not speak to the  appellant  to  withdraw
         his EEA application as his relationship with  Ms  Peny  had  broken
         down.  She said that she did not advise the appellant  to  withdraw
         his application as he had told her that he was returning to Nigeria
         voluntarily, she said she thought that was a good idea.   She  said
         that the appellant left the UK voluntarily and his EEA  application
         was refused.  She said that the appellant did  not  write  to  th7e
         Home Office that his relationship with Ms Peny had broken down  and
         that she had left the UK.  She said that they did not discuss as to
         what may have happened if his EEA  application  had  been  allowed.
         She said that she was not sure if it was the same solicitor who had
         advised the appellant to go back to Nigeria who had  made  his  EEA
         application in the first place.  She said that she did not know  if
         the appellant had to withdraw his EEA  application  from  the  Home
         Office, she should have  advised  the  appellant  to  withdraw  his
         application."


9.   The grounds contend that when it came to an  assessment  that  material
    facts had not been disclosed it was for  the  ECO  to  prove  as  much.
    Reference was made to Agho v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  1198.   However  the
    suitability grounds are not the same as general grounds of refusal  and
    did not involve the ECO in alleging fraud or deception; only a  failure
    to disclose material facts.


10.  As regards the appellant's challenges to the  judge's  assessment  that
    the appellant had not established he was in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, I am once again, not persuaded that the  judge  erred  in
    law.  The burden of proof rested on  the  appellant.   In  making  this
    assessment  the  judge  clearly  took  into   account   a   number   of
    considerations including: the failure of the appellant  to  inform  the
    Home Office of the breakdown of his relationship with a Dutch  national
    in respect of his EEA application (para  30);  the  lack  of  time  the
    couple had spent together since the appellant returned  voluntarily  to
    Nigeria (para 31); and the lack of evidence  of  ongoing  communication
    between the couple  (para  32).   Mr  Swain  does  raise  a  number  of
    criticisms of the judge's treatment of the  evidence  relating  to  the
    couple's relationship prior to and since marriage, but these amount  to
    mere disagreements with  the  judge's  findings  of  fact.   The  judge
    clearly took into account the appellant's explanation for  his  failure
    to leave the UK (that he wished to remain in the UK  with  the  sponsor
    and when that was impossible, sought to return to  be  with  her)  (see
    para 31).   The judge gave careful consideration to the claimed contact
    between the couple since he returned to Nigeria, both in  the  form  of
    visits by her and electronic forms of communication (paras 31-32).  The
    conclusions reached by the judge on these matters were open to  him  on
    the evidence.  In  respect  of  the  Lycamobile  records,  it  was  not
    incorrect of the judge to say most were short  and  in  any  event  the
    majority of those produced  (like  the  payslips)  were  post-decision.
    There was no evidence of texting, WhatsApp or emails  (although  it  is
    fair to say the sponsor has now produced WhatsApp records said  to  run
    from January 2014 available in the event I found a  material  error  of
    law).


    For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 January 2018
             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

