
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19965/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2018                              |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    [S J]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia.  He was born on [ ] 2007.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated  21  July  2016  to
    refuse him entry clearance in accordance with the  respondent's  family
    reunion policy under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Judge Fox (the judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 August 2017.  The  judge  found  that  there  was  no
    credible evidence that the appellant was  a  member  of  the  sponsor's
    household prior to her departure from Gambia.

 4. The grounds appear to have been prepared by the  sponsor  and  read  as
    follows:

         "In paragraph 21, the judge stated that I the sponsor [FS] have not
         address the remaining issues to confirm that the appellant [SJ] was
         declared as a member of my household prior to my departure from the
         Gambia.  The judge have not considered all the documents that  were
         in front of him regarding the information I had given about my son.
          I had enclosed pages 11, 13, 22 and  23  of  my  asylum  interview
         notes in my original application which has not been  addressed.   I
         had given full information about my son's birth and the  fact  that
         we had been living with my mother ever since his birth.  I had also
         stated that I left [SJ] with my mother when I left  Gambia.   There
         was also information on my statement which was submitted along with
         [SJ]'s visa application about the contact and support that  I  have
         with my son.  On the 15/08/17 at 15:02 I sent copies of  my  asylum
         interview notes to the Tribunal by recorded delivery.  Please  find
         a copy of proof of delivery of these  documents  from  Royal  Mail.
         Copy attached.

         Paragraph 22, the judge has stated that I the sponsor of  [SJ]  did
         not stay for the rest of the hearing and did not send the documents
         he requested for.  From what I understand, the judge wanted a  copy
         of my asylum interview where I had mentioned my son [SJ] and  given
         his name.  When he spoke to me, I understood that it was  all  that
         was expected of me, to send copies  of  the  asylum  interview.   I
         understood that the hearing was not  necessary  because  the  judge
         said 'I have your DNA test and two letters, the only thing  I  need
         now is a copy of the asylum  interview  where  you  mentioned  your
         son'.  There was no instruction for me  to  stay  in  the  Tribunal
         building after the hearing on the 14/8/2017.  I did what I  thought
         the judge wanted.  I came back home and looked for the documents he
         asked for and sent them on a recorded delivery.   I  have  enclosed
         the  proof  of  this  documents  delivered  and  signed  for.   The
         documents I sent were included in original  application  which  the
         judge had or should have had.

         Paragraph 23, the judge had made an error in stating  that  I  have
         not given reasons  why  my  son  [SJ]  should  not  live  with  his
         grandmother.  I explained at my asylum interview  the  main  reason
         why my son was not with me which is because I could not  bring  him
         with me at the time.  I did not leave my son with my mother because
         I wanted to but because I did not have a choice.

         I have provided DNA test to prove  that  [SJ]  is  my  son  and  my
         interview notes give details of his birth  and  the  fact  that  he
         lived with me in my mother's house when I was in Gambia.  The judge
         is wrong to state that there is no reason  why  my  son  should  be
         allowed to live with me.  I am his mother.  It is my duty  to  look
         after my son [SJ].  I have proven that [SJ] is my son  and  that  I
         was living with him before I left  Gambia.   It's  been  five  good
         years now since I last saw my son.  My son and I have  a  right  to
         enjoy our family life.  The judge did not consider the evidence  in
         front of him in arriving at his decision.

         For these reasons I ask that the judgment be set aside."

 5. Judge Beach granted permission to appeal on 1 February 2018 inter  alia
    as follows:

         "3.  The grounds (which are drafted by the sponsor) state that  the
             sponsor believed that she had to  file  her  asylum  interview
             notes with the Tribunal but that she did not need to remain in
             the Tribunal building whilst that was done.  The  sponsor  has
             provided evidence to show that  documents  were  sent  to  the
             Tribunal and received by them on 16th August  2017  (only  two
             days after the date of the hearing which  is  consistent  with
             the sponsor's explanation that she believed she was  meant  to
             file the evidence with the Tribunal after the  hearing  rather
             than remain at the hearing centre for  it  to  be  filed  that
             afternoon).  The sponsor has provided a copy of an extract  of
             her asylum interview with her grounds and  states  that  these
             were the documents sent to the  Tribunal  after  the  hearing.
             There is evidence contained with the  asylum  interview  which
             arguably would have addressed the remaining issue  before  the
             judge as to whether the appellant  formed  part  of  the  pre-
             flight  family  unit.    It   appears   that   there   was   a
             misunderstanding by the sponsor as to when that  evidence  had
             to be filed.  The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. The appellant, represented by the sponsor, his mother, relied upon  her
    grounds I have set out at  [4]  above.   Mr  Tufan  accepted  that  the
    documentation lodged subsequent to the hearing showed reference to  the
    appellant as the sponsor had claimed.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. It is worthwhile setting out  the  relevant  sections  of  the  judge's
    decision:

         "8.  The appellant's  representative  elected  not  to  attend  the
             hearing.  DNA evidence  has  been  filed  but  this  does  not
             address the remaining issue of the  appellant's  inclusion  in
             the sponsor's pre-flight family unit.

         9.   The sponsor confirmed that she recalls that she  declared  the
             appellant within her screening  interview  during  her  asylum
             claim.  The appellant's  current  representatives  represented
             the sponsor during her asylum claim and  they  will  have  the
             screening interview on file.

         10.  I informed the sponsor that the appellant's  inclusion  within
             her screening interview  would  address  the  remaining  issue
             conclusively.  The matter was put  back  for  the  sponsor  to
             contact the representative to file the screening interview.

         11.  By 2pm no communication had been received from the appellant's
             representatives.  Nor could the sponsor be located despite the
             clerk's repeated attempts to find her inside and  outside  the
             hearing centre building."

 9. I find there was clearly a misunderstanding between the sponsor and the
    judge.  They each assumed a different outcome.  The judge  assumed  the
    sponsor would go straight to her solicitors to obtain the corroborative
    documentation and come back to court.  The sponsor understood  she  was
    to obtain the documentation and send it to the Tribunal, which she did.



10. I find in the circumstances that the judge erred if only because it was
    incumbent upon him to ensure the sponsor understood his expectations of
    her and that failure to effectively communicate those instructions  led
    to a procedural unfairness.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error of law.  I set aside the decision and remit  the  appeal
    for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 12 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
