
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19047/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 August 2019                     |On 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              MR MD RASHEL MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M A Muid Khan (Lincoln's Chambers Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of  Judge  Lucas  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    promulgated on 24 May 2019. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge
    Boyes of the First-tier Tribunal on 24 June 2019.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 1  January  1988.  He
    had appealed against a decision of the Secretary of State, taken on  24
    August 2018, to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the UK.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the application on  the  basis  that  an
    English-language  certificate,  TOEIC,  from  ETS  submitted  with  his
    October  2012  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  was
    fraudulently obtained.

 4. Having been granted leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  that  English
    language certificate until October 2015, the  appellant  then  at  some
    point left the country and re-entered in July 2013 and had his leave to
    remain reinstated.

 5. In August 2014 his leave was  cancelled,  and  he  was  served  with  a
    removal notice against which he lodged a  judicial  review  application
    but permission to proceed was refused.

 6. In March 2015 he made a  human  rights  claim  which  was  refused  and
    certified.

 7. The decision under appeal before the First-tier Tribunal related to  an
    application made in July 2017

 8. In addition to refusing the application  on  the  basis  of  the  TOEIC
    certificate, the Secretary of State also  considered  there  to  be  no
    reason to grant the appellant leave on the  basis  of  his  private  or
    family life nor were there any compassionate reasons to warrant a grant
    of leave outside the Rules.

 9. Before the First-tier  Tribunal  both  appellant  and  respondent  were
    represented. The judge dealt firstly with the  question  of  the  TOEIC
    certificate and found that the Secretary of State had provided  generic
    evidence only  and  provided  no  direct  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant himself  had  deployed  deception  in  relation  to  his  own
    individual test.  The judge noted that the appellant appeared  to  have
    passed a variety of examinations and obtained certificates  in  English
    and that he conducted the appeal in English.  The judge concluded  that
    he was not satisfied that there was sufficient evidence  to  show  that
    the appellant had deployed or would have deployed deception in relation
    to the acquisition of the certificate and to  that  extent  his  appeal
    succeeded (paragraph 17 the First-tier Tribunal's decision).

10. The judge then went on to note that the appellant had no other basis to
    be in the UK. Having entered as a student in 2010 he remained,  despite
    his leave having been curtailed in 2014. He had provided no evidence of
    private life in the UK apart from his  eight-year  presence.  He  found
    also that there was no evidence of family life acquired in the UK since
    2010. On the basis that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules under appendix FM or under  the  private  life
    provisions, the judge dismissed the appeal.

11. The appellant's grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that  having
    found in the appellant's favour with regard to the  TOEIC  certificate,
    the judge ought to have allowed the appeal.

12. The judge granting permission to appeal did not do so on the  basis  of
    the grounds, but rather granted permission on the basis that the  judge
    had given no  analysis  of  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the  TOEIC
    certificate nor applied the correct test and there was no  analysis  of
    the law to be applied.

13. We would say first of all that  the  grant  of  permission  was  wholly
    wrong. That has been made clear by this tribunal in AZ (error  of  law:
    jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UK UT00245 (IAC) and  we  quote
    from the head note:-

         "(3) Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should  be  granted
         on a ground that was not advanced by an applicant  for  permission,
         only if:

             (a)  the judge is satisfied that the  ground  he  or  she  has
             identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:

                  (i)  for the original appellant; or

                  (ii) for the Secretary of State, where the ground  relates
                  to a decision which,  if  undisturbed,  would  breach  the
                  United Kingdom's international Treaty obligations; or

             (b)  (possibly) the ground relates  to  an  issue  of  general
             importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to address."

14. The grant of permission in this case grants permission in  relation  to
    an aspect of the appeal  determined  in  the  appellant's  favour.  The
    Secretary of State made no cross application for permission to appeal.

15. Before us Mr Khan sought to reiterate the  arguments  in  his  grounds.
    Those grounds contain a recitation of the various cases in relation  to
    how the tribunal should approach the ETS cases. What they do not do  is
    provide any indication of where the  judge  has  erred  in  finding  an
    absence of evidence of private or family life.

16. Indeed, before us Mr Khan acknowledged that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules on the  basis  of  his  private  or
    family life.

17. This was a human rights appeal and the appellant put forward  no  basis
    upon which that could succeed.

18. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in dismissing the appeal and
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal therefore must  be  dismissed  and  we
    would reiterate that permission to appeal ought never to be granted.

Decision

19. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

Signed [pic]  Date 2 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
