
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19474/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 20 December 2019                  |On 27 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                            BETELHEM TADEGE BELAY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance by sponsor or on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birrell promulgated on 9 July 2019 dismissing her appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 22 August 2018  to
    refuse her application made on 27 July 2018 pursuant to  paragraph  319
    of the Immigration Rules for entry clearance to the UK as a  child  and
    on the basis of family life with her sponsoring brother Muluken  Tadege
    Belay who has limited leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  refugee  valid
    until 21 August 2021.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission  to  appeal  on  4
    November 2019.

 3. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal there was no attendance by  or  on
    behalf of the appellant or sponsor.  The appellant of course is out  of
    the country, this being an entry clearance application.  I am satisfied
    from consideration of the Tribunal's case file that notice  of  today's
    hearing  was  sent  to  the  appellant  and  to  her   representatives,
    Immigration Advice Service, by post on 15 November 2019,  addressed  to
    the appellant at the only address known for her in Manchester.   On  10
    December 2019 the appellant's representatives responded to  the  notice
    of hearing by informing the Tribunal and the Home Office that  they  no
    longer act as legal representatives for the  appellant.   They  do  not
    suggest that the appellant was unaware of the  hearing  and  one  might
    have expected them to have previously notified the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor of the date of the hearing.  It follows that the appellant  now
    has no legal representation and the sponsor has failed  to  attend  the
    hearing.  However, I am satisfied that it is in the public interest  to
    proceed with the hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  sponsor,  and  the
    appellant and the sponsor had been given adequate notice of the hearing
    and ample time to obtain alternative representation if desired.   I  am
    satisfied that therefore the sponsor has decided not to attend and that
    the appellant has decided not to obtain further representation.  On the
    basis of the overriding objective to deal with cases fairly and  justly
    I am satisfied that it is appropriate to proceed without representation
    or participation on behalf of the appellant.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons I will set out below I am satisfied that there  was  no
    material error of law in the making of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such as to require it to be set aside.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant could  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 319X.  She was not satisfied  that  there
    were serious and compelling family or other  circumstances  which  made
    the appellant's exclusion as a child undesirable.  The  judge  set  out
    her careful  consideration  as  to  what  was  meant  by  "serious  and
    compelling" and gave anxious scrutiny to the appellant's  circumstances
    in Ethiopia.  Neither was the judge satisfied that the appellant  could
    be accommodated adequately in accommodation which the relative  in  the
    UK owns or occupies exclusively, as required by the Rules.  The sponsor
    lives in a one bedroom flat and proposed  that  he  would  look  for  a
    larger flat after the appellant had arrived.

 6. It is clear that the appellant could not meet the  strict  requirements
    of the Rules and therefore the key issue for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was the proportionality of the decision, balancing the public  interest
    in enforcing immigration control against the rights of the appellant to
    develop Article 8 family life in the UK with  her  sponsoring  brother.
    Ultimately, the judge found no  compelling  circumstances  to  justify,
    exceptionally, a grant of entry clearance  outside  the  Rules  on  the
    basis that the decision would be  otherwise  unjustifiably  harsh,  and
    thus concluded that the decision was entirely proportionate.

 7. Frankly the grounds are  little  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's decision and an attempt to re-argue the appeal.   Such  factual
    errors as there may have been  within  the  decision  were  not,  I  am
    satisfied, material to the outcome of the appeal.

 8. For example, it is argued that the judge  misdirected  herself  on  the
    issue  of  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations.
    However, whether or not the appellant's parents had passed away  before
    the sponsor came to the UK was of marginal relevance.  The focus in the
    grounds on alleged factual errors in this regard fails  to  demonstrate
    that the appellant could have met the requirements of the  Rules.   The
    important  issue  was  not  the  appellant's  family  history  but  her
    circumstances in which she  was  currently  living  in  Ethiopia.   The
    grounds fail to identify any serious and compelling  considerations  in
    those circumstances.

 9. I am also satisfied that there was no error as alleged, in relation  to
    the maintenance requirement.  The issue of adequate maintenance was not
    addressed by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  because  the  respondent's
    representative at the hearing conceded both the biological relationship
    and the issue of maintenance.  In the circumstances no error of law  is
    disclosed in the judge's not dealing with that issue.  What remained at
    issue was the issue of adequate accommodation, in respect of which  the
    judge found against the appellant at paragraph 54 of the decision.  The
    grounds  entirely  fail  to  address  this  issue  at  all.    In   the
    circumstances it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  appeal  could  have
    succeeded.

10. The focus in the grounds  on  alleged  factual  errors  diverts  proper
    attention from the key issue as  to  whether  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which made exclusion  of  the
    appellant from the UK undesirable.  Merely  to  identify  some  factual
    errors in the decision is insufficient; to be  material  the  appellant
    has to demonstrate that without those errors the appeal had a  prospect
    of  success.   Considered  as  a  whole,  there  was  nothing  in   the
    appellant's  circumstances  that  could   even   arguably   amount   to
    justification to grant entry clearance  to  the  UK  either  within  or
    without the Rules.

11. At paragraph 49 of the decision the judge considered the best interests
    of the appellant, a child at the date of application but now an  adult,
    and did so taking the appellant's claim at its highest.  This  is  also
    clear from paragraph 53 of  the  decision.   At  paragraph  55  of  the
    decision the judge considered the  Article  8  aspect  of  the  appeal,
    bearing in mind that the only  right  of  appeal  is  on  human  rights
    grounds.   However,  the  appellant's  representative  was  unable   to
    identify any gap between the Rules and Article 8 in this  case  or  any
    circumstances beyond those due for consideration under the  Rules.   It
    follows  that  the  fact  that  the  application  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Rules was a matter that was highly  significant  to
    any  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  outside  the  Rules.   In
    essence, the judge found that the Article 8 human rights  consideration
    stood or fell with those specific requirements under the Rules and thus
    the judge concluded that there was nothing disproportionate in applying
    the Rules in accordance with their  terms  with  the  effect  that  the
    appellant's application failed.

12. In the grant of permission I note that  Judge  Simpson  suggested  that
    there was an overall inadequacy of consideration of  the  evidence  and
    internal reasoning on material matters.  With  respect  I  disagree.  I
    also point to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Durueke [2009] UKUT
    00197 (IAC), where the Upper Tribunal gave guidance to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in deciding whether to grant permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  At (ii) of the headnote the Upper Tribunal indicated  it  is
    necessary  to guard against the temptation to characterise as errors of
    law what are in truth no more than disagreements about the weight to be
    given to different factors, particularly if the judge who  decided  the
    appeal had  the  advantage  of  hearing  oral  evidence.   Further,  at
    headnote (iii) of the decision the Upper Tribunal stated:

         "Particular care should be taken before granting permission on  the
         ground that the judge who decided the appeal did not  'sufficiently
         consider' or 'sufficiently analyse'  certain  evidence  or  certain
         aspects of a case.  Such complaints  often  turn  out  to  be  mere
         disagreements with the reasoning  of  the  judge  who  decided  the
         appeal because the implication is that the  evidence  or  point  in
         question was considered by the judge who decided the appeal but not
         to the extent desired by the author of the  grounds  or  the  judge
         considering the  application  for  permission.   Permission  should
         usually only be granted on such grounds if it is possible to  state
         precisely how the assessment of the judge who decided the appeal is
         arguably lacking and why this is arguably material".

13. This is such a case. Neither the grounds nor the  grant  of  permission
    identify with any precision or particularity in what way  the  decision
    arguably displays an inadequacy of consideration or reasoning.

14. In all the circumstances it follows that I am driven to the  conclusion
    that no material error of law has been identified.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.

                    No anonymity direction is made.

     [pic]
                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                  Dated                  20 December 2019

To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award because the appeal has been dismissed.





                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 20 December 2019

