
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19099/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2019                  |On 27 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  Lorna [C]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Uchenna Okoroh, Counsel instructed by Gromyko
                    Amedu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 11 July 2019 dismissing her
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse her leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.



Factual matrix

 2. The appellant is a Jamaican citizen who visits  her  daughter  and  the
    daughter's four children, her  grandchildren,  in  the  United  Kingdom
    regularly for 6  months  a  year  on  a  multi-entry  visit  visa.  The
    appellant has been coming and going, on visit visas, for several years.
     When in Jamaica, she lived with her own mother until her  mother  died
    in July 2018.

 3. On the last occasion, the appellant entered on 8 May 2017 but failed to
    embark when her visa expired on 8 November 2017 and overstayed,  making
    an application for leave to remain on health grounds  in  October  2017
    following  a  hospital  admission  for  various  chest  problems.   The
    appellant did not seek to return to Jamaica and  recover  her  passport
    from the respondent in July 2018, when her own  mother  died,  but  her
    daughter did go to Jamaica for a visit then, leaving the  grandchildren
    in the appellant's care.

 4. The daughter has four children, of whom  the  youngest,  born  in  July
    2016, is autistic.   The daughter has not returned to  work  since  his
    birth, and her relationship with the children's father  seems  to  have
    broken down at about the same time.  She took  a  formal  career  break
    from December 2017 which has been extended to expire on  1  July  2019.
    At the date of hearing, therefore, she was not at work.

 5. The children's  father  lives  in  Southall,  about  a  mile  from  his
    children's home, and he visits Jamaica about twice a year, for a  month
    each time.  The father  does  not  pay  regular  maintenance,  but  the
    daughter has made no claim against him because  'he  provides  whenever
    she asks him to do so'. The children see their father, several times  a
    year.  The Judge regarded the daughter's evidence as vague and  evasive
    on the frequency of visits and the appellant's account that she did not
    see him or know where  he  was  living  to  be  mendacious,  since  the
    daughter said that her mother knew he lived in Southall.

 6. The daughter likes having the appellant care  for  her  children.   She
    could afford to hire a carer for them but feels more  comfortable  with
    her mother doing it.  The appellant's own mother had been  assisted  by
    her grandmother in the same way, when the appellant was herself a child
    in Jamaica, following a cultural tradition.

 7. The children are very fond of the appellant, who sometimes  takes  them
    to school and doctors' appointments, as well as to church  on  Sundays.
    The appellant would miss her grandchildren if  she  had  to  return  to
    Jamaica.

Refusal letter

 8. The appellant's application on 31 October 2017 for leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds was advanced on the basis of the  appellant's  ill
    health, and her alleged parental relationship with  her  daughter,  who
    lives in the United Kingdom with her four children and is an adult, not
    with the children.   That  is  the  application  which  the  respondent
    considered.

 9. The respondent refused leave  to  remain  in  a  refusal  letter  of  4
    September 2018.  The respondent noted that the appellant  had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for just 5 months when the application was made. The
    respondent did not  consider  that  EX.1  was  applicable  because  the
    relationship of mother and adult daughter is  not  one  of  parent  and
    child.  There was no suggestion  that  the  appellant  had  a  parental
    relationship with her grandchildren at this stage.

10. The respondent  did  not  consider  that  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances for which leave to remain ought to be granted outside the
    Rules.  The appellant relied upon her admission to Hillingdon  hospital
    in October  2017  with  a  severe  chest  infection  and  a  peripheral
    pulmonary embolism, which on investigation proved to be connected to  a
    papillary  carcinoma.   The  respondent  considered  that   there   was
    treatment in Jamaica for the appellant's health.

11. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, asserting  that  she
    was the parent, not of her daughter but of her grandchildren.  She  did
    not challenge any element of the respondent's decision  but  sought  to
    advance a different case.  The respondent has  not  objected  to  this,
    either at the First-tier Tribunal or before the Upper Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. The First-tier Judge concluded that the role played by the appellant in
    her grandchildren's lives was that of any other grandparent,  and  that
    she had not undertaken parental responsibility as claimed:

         "26. ... I find that [the parental status] aspect of the  case  has
         simply been added on to the  case  as  a  desperate  measure.   The
         little help that [the appellant] does give, and I find it is not  a
         great deal, is one of a carer rather than parental role. ...

         28.  The appellant [said that] she  and  her  daughter  had  talked
         about the fact what may happened [sic] if this appeal failed.   Her
         daughter said that they had not talked about it, but it is excepted
         [sic] that [the] appellant would have to return to Jamaica  if  her
         appeal failed.  The appellant's daughter has not worked  since  the
         birth of her youngest child in December 2016.  I find that she  has
         been,  and  continues  to  be,  there  for  her  children  and  the
         appellant's role in the children's life has been little or nothing.
          She has simply been there as a helper and no more.   I  find  that
         this situation can continue in [the] absence of the  appellant.  If
         the appellant's daughter decides to return to work, she can hire  a
         carer, as she stated in her evidence before me.

         29.  I find that whatever role the appellant has played so  far  in
         the lives of  her  grandchildren  has  been  [that  of]  any  other
         grandparent and [she] has not undertaken parental responsibility as
         claimed. The oral evidence of the appellant  and  her  daughter  is
         extremely vague and evasive, not credible or consistent. ..."

13. There was no challenge in submissions before the First-tier Tribunal to
    the exceptional circumstances health-related case which  had  been  the
    subject of the refusal letter.



Permission to appeal

14. The grounds of appeal  advanced  were  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    credibility  findings;  that  he  failed  to  make  a  best   interests
    assessment under Section 55 of the 2009 Act; that he failed  to  answer
    any of the five Razgar questions; and finally, that he erred in fact in
    concluding that the appellant as  the  grandmother  to  her  daughter's
    children was in the role of their father.

15. First-tier Judge Fisher granted permission, but excluded from his grant
    the  appellant's  challenge  to  the  credibility  findings  which   he
    considered to have been open to the judge on the evidence.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fisher also noted that the  judge's  decision  contained
    many grammatical errors but that was not a ground of appeal and appears
    to an observation, rather than an additional ground.

16. I am seised therefore only of three issues: the claimed error  of  fact
    in relation to the appellant's parental role  with  her  grandchildren,
    the section 5 best interests assessment,  and  the  First-tier  Judge's
    failure to answer the Razgar questions.

Is the appellant a 'parent'?

17. The finding that the appellant is not a parent is a finding of fact.  I
    remind myself that the First-tier  Judge  is  the  fact-finding  Judge,
    having had the benefit of all the evidence, oral and documentary,  when
    reaching his decision.   The  Upper  Tribunal  may  only  go  behind  a
    finding of fact by the First-tier Tribunal in the limited circumstances
    set out in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke at [90] in  R  (Iran)  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
    that is to say where the finding is perverse, Wednesbury  unreasonable,
    contrary to the weight of  the  evidence  or  incomprehensible  to  the
    reviewing judge.

18. In this appeal, the First-tier Judge did consider the claimed  cultural
    role for grandmothers in Jamaican society, where  there  is  an  absent
    father, to step in as an additional parent.  However, on the  evidence,
    the Judge found that these children have both a mother and a  separated
    but involved father and accordingly there was no  empty  parental  role
    for the grandmother to fill.  That was a finding which was open to  him
    on the evidence that he heard and received.

19. The effect of that finding is that this appellant is  not  entitled  to
    assert that she has family life with her grandchildren, as  opposed  to
    private life, absent any Kugathas dependency by her on her daughter, or
    vice versa.  The evidence before  the  Judge  did  not  meet  the  high
    standard required for Kugathas dependency and I do  not  consider  that
    family life is engaged here.

Section 55 best interests

20. The First-tier Judge did not make an express section 55  finding  about
    the best interests of the grandchildren.  That was an error of law, but
    I do not find that it was material.  There  was  very  sparse  evidence
    before him about the best interests of  the  grandchildren.   There  is
    nothing from the school.  There is very  little  medical  evidence:  at
    page 18 of the bundle which was before the First-tier Judge it is noted
    that one of the children was overdue for a dental examination and  that
    is all, apart from some appointment letters about the youngest, who has
    autistic spectrum disorder.

21. At page 17 there is a letter from the Reverend Lloyd Crossfield at  the
    Freedom Worship Centre to the  effect  that  the  appellant  takes  her
    grandchildren regularly to his church on a Sunday and is  a  woman  who
    lives by Christian principles.  The Reverend Crossfield says:-

         "The appellant's family means  the  world  to  her  and  she  makes
         herself available to them in every  way  possible;  especially  her
         grandson who has autism as he requires more attention".

    He describes the appellant as a lady of good character.   He  does  not
    appear to be aware that she is a long-term  overstayer  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

22. That is the highest that the best interests case could have  been  put,
    even had the judge directed his attention to it.  His omission to  make
    a reasoned section 55 decision is not material to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal, given the sparseness of the evidence advanced.

The Razgar questions

23. I turn next to the broader Razgar point.  The judge set out the  Razgar
    questions at paragraph 30 and it would have been more  appropriate  had
    he then continued to deal with them, which he did not.  The Judge found
    that there was no family life, and that the family  would  be  able  to
    cope in  the  appellant's  absence.   There  would  undoubtedly  be  an
    interference with  the  family's  private  life,  capable  of  engaging
    Article 8(1) of the ECHR but such interference is  in  accordance  with
    the law.

24. The real question is whether  the  interference  with  the  appellant's
    private life and that of her grandchildren would be proportionate.   In
    that respect, any judge considering the appellant's private life  would
    be required to consider the statutory presumptions in part  VA  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

25. The appellant's family visits gave her only precarious status, and  for
    the rest of the time her private  life  developed  when  she  was  here
    unlawfully. The Judge would be bound to  give  little  weight  thereto,
    pursuant to subsections 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act.

26. Accordingly, the conclusion that the judge  would  have  reached  would
    have been the same.

Conclusions

27. Having regard to the Judge's findings of fact  and  credibility,  I  am
    satisfied that even had the judge considered section 55, or applied the
    wider Razgar test, he would have reached the same conclusion.

28. Neither error is material.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
    upheld.



DECISION

29. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law, but such error was not material to the outcome  of  the
    appeal.

    I do not set aside the previous decision but order that it shall stand.






Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     22 November 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

