


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19985/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                                |                                     |
|On: 11th October 2019                 |On: 05th November 2019               |
|                                              |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                Waseem Akhter
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Hashmi, Mamoon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 22nd November 1986.
     He appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Foudy) to dismiss his appeal against a decision to deport him.






    Error of Law


 2. The first matter in issue in this  appeal  is  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal applied the correct legal framework in reaching its  decision.
    The Judge applied the Immigration Rules and Part 5 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Appellant submits that  as  he  is
    the family member of  an  EEA  national,  his  case  should  have  been
    considered under Regulation 27 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 ('the EEA Regs').

 3. The pertinent history is as follows. The Appellant was given  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant in 2009.
    He overstayed that visa. On the 2nd  July  2014  he  was  convicted  of
    conspiracy to defraud and sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. On  the
    18th July 2016 he was  convicted  of  conspiring  to  convert  criminal
    property and on two counts of possessing articles for  the  purpose  of
    fraud. He got four years. A deportation order was  signed  on  the  8th
    August 2017, pursuant to s5(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971  and  with
    reference to s32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Appellant appealed
    against that decision.   The  appeal  form  is  left  blank  under  the
    headings 'protection decision', 'human rights decision', 'revocation of
    protection decision' and 'deprivation  of  citizenship  decision'.  The
    only ground of appeal that the Appellant appears to rely upon  is  that
    headed 'EEA decision'. In his grounds of appeal he submitted:

              i)  That  he  is  the  durable  partner  of  an  EEA  national
                 exercising  treaty  rights  in  the   United   Kingdom,   a
                 Lithuanian woman whom I shall refer to as P;


             ii) P and the Appellant have a daughter together, born in 2015,
                 and it would be contrary to her best interests if  he  were
                 to be deported.


 4. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    relied on evidence demonstrating his relationships with his partner and
    child, including live evidence from P.  He further relied  on  a  third
    relationship, with his step-son: this is P's child born  in  2010.  The
    First-tier Tribunal noted that the Appellant had  applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card on the 12th April 2018 but that this had been refused on
    the 30th April  2018.  The  Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  family
    relationships were as stated, but measured against  the  "considerable"
    public interest in deporting him, found  them  to  be  outweighed.  The
    determination makes specific reference to sections 117A and 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and makes findings on  the
    best interests of the children. There is however no mention of the  EEA
    Regs, or the framework set out therein at Regulation 27.


 5. The Appellant contends that it was an error of law for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to apply this framework.  Its first task should have  been  to
    make a finding on whether the Appellant  was  an  extended,  or  family
    member, of an EEA national, and from there consider the factors set out
    in Regulation 27.  At a hearing before me on  the  17th  June  2019  Mr
    Bates for the Secretary of State accepted that this was so and  invited
    me to set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside and remake  the
    decision in the appeal.

 6. The matter was then adjourned in order that probation reports could  be
    produced.





    The Re-Made Decision

      The Evidence and Submissions

 7. The Appellant has been an overstayer since 2010 when his  student  visa
    expired. He claimed asylum and that  was  refused  and  certified.  The
    Appellant made no arrangements to leave the  country  as  he  was  then
    required to do. Instead he embarked  on  a  campaign  of  fraud,  aimed
    against the some of the most vulnerable members of our society,  namely
    elderly people living alone: the eldest of the  known  victims  was  92
    years old.


 8. Between April  2013  and  April  2014  the  Appellant  was  part  of  a
    conspiracy known as a 'courier fraud'.   The methodology  is  described
    by the trial judge, HHJ Field QC, as follows:

         "The plan started with a call from a bogus Police  Officer  to  the
         intended victim to tell him or her that their card was  being  used
         fraudulently.  It  continued,  or  the  pretence  continued,   with
         inviting the individual to cancel the card with the  bank,  another
         conspirator  posing  as  a   bogus   bank   employee.   And   then,
         demonstrating a high degree of planning and organisation  that  was
         necessary to make this fraud effective...once the victim  had  been
         persuaded  to  give  up  the  card  and  the  associated   Personal
         Identification Number a taxi would be sent to collect the  card  so
         it could be delivered, ostensibly to the Police but, in fact, as we
         all know, to willing conspirators who  were  primed  and  ready  to
         extract as much cash and money's worth  from  the  cards  by  using
         ATMs, betting shops or buying high value goods and gift cards  from
         shops in shopping centres in and around Manchester."

 9. This is where the Appellant's involvement would begin:


         "Your role was as a user  of  the  stolen  cards,  and  you  proved
         yourself to be an accomplished fraudster and brazen with it. Indeed
         you were not deterred by your arrest on the  9th  August  2013  and
         continued to use the cards and to  assist  others  to  do  so.  You
         played a very active role, indeed, I have particularly in mind  the
         spending spree on the 6th August 2013 when, almost single handedly,
         using [a 92 year-old victim's] card you managed to clock  up  bills
         on that credit card exceeding �20,000"


10. HHJ Field went on to note the devastating impact that the crime had  on
    the victims, who were left suffering "enormous emotional distress" at a
    time of life when they were entitled to be enjoying some  independence.
    The sentencing remarks also record that whilst on bail  in  respect  of
    these charges, the Appellant was arrested  again  for  further  crimes,
    namely the possession  of  articles  for  the  purpose  of  fraud,  and
    conspiring to transfer criminal property.  In total he was sentenced to
    4 years' imprisonment, Judge Field remarking that this  was  the  least
    possible sentence that she could impose.


11. I have 3 documents  produced  by  the  National  Probation  Service  in
    respect of the Appellant.

12. The first was the 'pre-sentence' report prepared for Judge Field on the
    16th June 2016. Pertinent information  to  note  therein  is  that  the
    Appellant was convicted after trial, and that the probation officer was
    highly sceptical about his explanation that he  had  been  duped  by  a
    family friend who had asked him to spend some money on the card  of  an
    'investor'. The officer concluded  that  in  his  commission  of  these
    offences the Appellant had displayed a lack of  consideration  for  the
    consequences of his actions.  Mr  Bates  asked  me  to  note  that  the
    Appellant appears to have been less  than  frank  with  that  probation
    officer, who notes that he portrayed himself as  having  only  a  basic
    education  and  little  command  of  English:  in  fact  the  Appellant
    completed a degree in  Mechanical  Engineering  at  the  University  of
    Glasgow.  Having had regard to the fact that this was  the  Appellant's
    first  conviction,  and  there  being  no  evidence  of   any   violent
    tendencies, the officer concluded that the Appellant posed a 'low' risk
    of harm.  Mr Bates submitted that this was a rather bizarre  conclusion
    given that the officer was at that time aware that  the  Appellant  was
    already awaiting trial for the second set of  fraud  related  offences,
    committed after his arrest for his part in the 'courier fraud'.


13. The second document is a letter dated the 16th August 2018.   This  was
    written 'to whom it may concern' by a probation officer who visited the
    family home prior to the Appellant's release from prison,  as  well  as
    meeting with  the  Appellant  himself.   The  officer  noted  that  the
    assessment of the Appellant as being 'low risk' was made  applying  the
    service's strict definition of "serious harm can be defined as an event
    which is life threatening and/or traumatic  and  from  which  recovery,
    whether physical or psychological can be expected to  be  difficult  or
    impossible".  It was on this basis that the Appellant was  assessed  as
    being of 'low risk of serious harm  to  the  public'.  He  was  further
    assessed according to the 'Offender Group  Reconviction  Scale',  which
    similarly came out as 'low', or  more  specifically  at  14%  within  2
    years.  At the date of writing the author was able to confirm that  the
    Appellant had attended all seven of the probation meetings  he  had  so
    far been offered. He had been deemed unsuitable  to  take  a  'Thinking
    Skills' course in prison: as Ms Hashmi explained this is because of his
    'low' risk assessment and because he has only  been  convicted  on  one
    occasion.  The fact that he had not undertaken this work should not  be
    weighed against him.  The author of the report was unable to comment on
    whether the Appellant's attitude or behaviour had  improved  since  the
    date of the pre-sentence report, because  his  contact  with  probation
    services had been over such a short time.


14. The third document  was  the  most  recent:  a  letter  from  probation
    services dated the 29th June 2019. This explains that the Appellant was
    released from his prison sentence on the 27th April 2018, but was taken
    into immigration custody where he was held until he was bailed  on  the
    28th June 2018. Later that year he  was  taken  back  into  immigration
    detention for two months whilst P - his  surety  -  was  away  visiting
    family in Lithuania.  At the time of writing the author confirmed  that
    the Appellant had attended all 26 of his probation  meetings  bar  two,
    which were authorised absences (he was in immigration detention at  the
    time).  The Appellant had completed work on a one-to-one basis to  look
    at  his  offending  behaviour,  victim  awareness,  his  attitude   and
    consequential thinking skills. The officer commented: "I think he would
    benefit from further work on his victim awareness".

15. In his oral evidence before me the Appellant was asked why he committed
    the crimes that he did. He said:

         "I was under pressure I had no work. I was used by  my  friends.  I
         told the police the whole story and gave the same statement to  the
         court".


    He said that he had learned his  lesson  and  had  behaved  himself  in
    prison. He will do everything  probation  asks.   Mr  Bates  asked  the
    Appellant how he thought  that  his  crimes  might  have  impacted  the
    victims. He replied:


         "I know it affected them. I know what I did was wrong but my friend
         he used me. Since I got arrested I have never spoken to him  -  5-6
         years now I never speak with those people"


    Mr Bates also asked him about the other offences that were 'taken  into
    consideration' by the trial court (possession of articles  for  use  in
    the commission of fraud/disposing of criminal property). The  Appellant
    said that this was nothing to do with him. A friend had left a  bag  at
    an old house of the Appellant's in Stockport and when he had  moved  he
    had brought that bag with him. It turned out to have the  incriminating
    evidence in it and when the police came to the new property they  found
    it and the Appellant got the  blame.   He  said  that  the  charge  was
    dropped.

16. The Appellant states that he now a dedicated family man. P  works  long
    hours and so he takes responsibility for the  house  and  children.  He
    takes them to school/nursery, collects them,  cooks  and  cleans.    He
    wants to remain in the United Kingdom with his children and partner.


17. The Appellant told me  that  his  family  in  Pakistan  are  ethnically
    Pathan, and that their home village is near  Abbotabad.   They  have  a
    house in that village but they also live, however, in Karachi where the
    Appellant was brought up.  His sister is divorced and  she  lives  with
    his mother. They live off the rent of some markets in Karachi that  his
    father had bought when he was alive. The Appellant said that his mother
    knows about P and the children but she is not very  happy.    She  does
    not know that the children are being brought up in P's Christian  faith
    and when she finds this out, she will not accept them. This will  cause
    problems for the Appellant.

18. I heard oral evidence from P, who adopted her witness statement. P  was
    an emotional and powerful witness. She spoke movingly of how  difficult
    it was for her son (her eldest child) when the Appellant  was  sent  to
    prison and how strong their relationship is now. Her  previous  partner
    (the child's biological father) was not a good husband -  he  beat  her
    and was very abusive.   It therefore means a lot to her  that  her  son
    now has a father figure in the Appellant and she knows that he looks to
    the Appellant for support and guidance. Nobody helps her in  the  house
    except him - he does cleaning and cooking etc when she  is  tired  from
    work.   P said that for her family  the  prospect  that  the  Appellant
    could be deported seems "impossible". She does not know  how  she  will
    live without him. If he were to be removed it  would  break  all  their
    lives.  P was adamant that she will not be moving to Pakistan with  her
    children. She does not speak the language, she  does  not  share  their
    faith and she will not wear hijab. She fears that his family  will  not
    accept her or the children.   Similarly she fear that they would not be
    able to settle together in Lithuania. The  people  there  do  not  like
    Muslims and her family are not happy that she chose him.  She  stressed
    that she and the Appellant and the children are  'everything'  to  each
    other. They do not have friends or a support network  apart  from  each
    other.


    The Legal Framework


19. The relevant part of the Regulations is Regulation 27:
           27.-(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means  an  EEA
           decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public  security
           or public health.

           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

           (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person
           with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except on
           serious grounds of public policy and public security.

           (4) A relevant decision may not be taken  except  on  imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

            (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
            at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

            (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in
            the best interests of the person concerned, as provided for in
            the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General
            Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.

           (5) The public policy and public security  requirements  of  the
           United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred  by
           these Regulations in order to protect the  fundamental  interests
           of society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of
           public policy or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-

                 (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
              proportionality;

                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;

                 (c) the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                 genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                 one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
                 account past conduct of the person and that the threat does
                 not need to be imminent;

                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;

                 (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                 themselves justify the decision;

                 (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
                 in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                 the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

         (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of  public
   health-

           (a) a disease that does not have epidemic potential as defined
           by the relevant instruments of the World Health Organisation or
           is not a disease listed in Schedule 1 to the Health Protection
           (Notification) Regulations 2010(18); or

           (b) if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
           disease occurring after the three month period beginning on the
           date on which the person arrived in the United Kingdom,

         does not constitute grounds for the decision.

         (8) A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy,  public  security  and   the   fundamental   interests   of
         society etc.).



20. The relevant part of Schedule 1 is paragraph 7:


         7.  For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

         (a) preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration
         laws, and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the
         immigration control system (including under these Regulations) and
         of the Common Travel Area;

         (b) maintaining public order;

         (c) preventing social harm;

         (d) preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

         (e) protecting public services;

         (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of an
         EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that
         person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused, public offence)
         and maintaining public confidence in the ability of the relevant
         authorities to take such action;

         (g) tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an
         immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where
         there is wider societal harm (such as offences related to the
         misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border dimension as mentioned
         in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
         Union);

         (h) combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in
         relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
         unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);

         (i)  protecting the rights and freedoms of others, particularly
         from exploitation and trafficking;

         (j) protecting the public;

         (k) acting in the best interests of a child (including where doing
         so entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or
         otherwise taking an EEA decision against a child);

         (l) countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared
         values.


    Findings


21. By her undisturbed finding  of  fact  Judge  Foudy  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  P,  a
    Lithuanian national. Before me  Mr  Bates  accepted,  having  seen  the
    evidence produced, that P is exercising treaty  rights.    The  parties
    invited me to dispose of the appeal with reference to the Regulations.


22. The Secretary of State accepts  the  burden  to  demonstrate  that  the
    expulsion of the Appellant would be proportionate and necessary on  the
    grounds that the Appellant's personal  conduct  represents  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interest  of
    society, namely the preservation of law and order and the protection of
    the public from crime. Mr Bates submits  that  he  can  discharge  that
    burden by reference to two matters: to the nature  of  the  Appellant's
    criminal  offending,  and  to  the  lack  of  evidence   that   he   is
    rehabilitated.

23. The offending  was,  I  find,  of  the  most  serious  nature.  It  was
    premeditated, callous and repeated.  The  Appellant  had  already  been
    arrested for his part in the courier fraud when he was picked up again.
    It is clear that the victims  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  their
    particular  vulnerability.  As  older  members  of  society  they  were
    targeted because the conspirators knew that they would be  more  likely
    to comply with requests from a 'police officer' or  a  'bank  official'
    for them to hand over their security details.

24. The impact upon the victims is not hard to imagine.   An  older  person
    living alone has not always been elderly. Each of those victims has, at
    one time in his or  her  life,  been  a  fully  functioning  member  of
    society, visible and valued, going to work, bringing up their families.
    As they grew older their role in society has slowly diminished;  he  or
    she no longer works, or looks after children, but he or she can  retain
    the pride and dignity of having played those roles.  The  elder  person
    can hope to live life in retirement with the  respect  of  others,  and
    with the  security of the savings that he or she has accumulated.  What
    this particular crime does is completely undermine  that  security  and
    dignity. Yes, it leaves the victim without his or her hard-earned cash,
    but more than that it  leaves  them  feeling  foolish,  vulnerable  and
    unvalued. Many of them will not recover from that humiliation.

25. It is not hard to understand the impact of this crime, and yet that  is
    something that the Appellant has singularly failed to show himself able
    to do. In 2016, prior to sentence, the Appellant tried to persuade  his
    probation officer that it was somehow he that was the  victim  of  this
    enterprise, having been tricked by a friend into participating  in  the
    conspiracy; despite having served his sentence, and having engaged with
    probation services over many months, by June 2019 his offender  manager
    still considered that he needed to do more work  on  victim  awareness.
    Before me the Appellant displayed a shocking disregard for the  victims
    of his crime. He repeatedly tried to minimise his role  in  the  fraud,
    blaming his further convictions on a friend who 'left  a  bag'  at  his
    house, and when specifically asked  by  Mr  Bates  to  reflect  on  the
    victims, simply spoke about himself.  I am not satisfied, on the  basis
    of the evidence before me, that the  Appellant  has  learned  from  his
    mistakes at all. Any remorse he has verbalised is lip service.

26. I have given some weight to the fact that the  Appellant  has  attended
    all  of  his  appointments,  and  that  the   probation   service   has
    consistently classed his risk of reoffending as 'low'. I bear  in  mind
    however, that this assessment has been made applying specific scales. I
    accept that the Appellant is, for instance, at a low risk of committing
    violent crime. I agree with Mr Bates that  there  must  be  some  doubt
    about the initial assessment, made in 2016, that the Appellant posed  a
    low risk of reoffending after the index offences:  he had at that point
    already been charged with more.  I also bear in mind that the Appellant
    had to attend those appointments, otherwise he would be  in  breach  of
    his licence  conditions  and  risk  returning  to  jail:  as  such  his
    compliance only attracts limited  weight.   Having  taken  all  of  the
    evidence into account,  in  particular  the  detail  of  the  probation
    service opinion, and the testimony of the Appellant himself, I  am  not
    satisfied that there has been  any  successful  rehabilitation  of  the
    Appellant thus far.  I am satisfied that he represents  a  genuine  and
    present and sufficiently serious threat to law  and  order  to  justify
    expulsion action.

27. I fully accept P's evidence that she loves the Appellant, and wants him
    to stay in this country to help her bring up their children.  I  accept
    her evidence that at  present  she  relies  upon  him  emotionally  and
    practically. I utterly reject the suggestion that P  and  the  children
    could relocate to Karachi or a  village  in  the  Khyber-Pukhtunkwa.  I
    accept that this would be extremely difficult, and  possibly  dangerous
    for her, and that it is very unlikely that the Appellant's family would
    accept her decision to bring the children up  as  Christians.   I  also
    accept that the wholesale relocation of this  family  to  Lithuania  is
    unlikely, since the Lithuanian authorities would be entitled to rely on
    this decision to refuse the Appellant entry.  The reality is  that  the
    consequence of the Appellant's deportation will be that this family  is
    split up, and the children will be deprived of meaningful contact  with
    their father.

28.  Even  having  regard  for  those  very  serious  consequences   I   am
    nevertheless satisfied that the decision to  deport  is  proportionate.
    P has shown, throughout the time that the  Appellant  spent  in  prison
    and/or immigration detention, that she is able to care for the children
    and work. The evidence does not suggest that either child suffered  any
    profound or lasting harm when he was away. I accept of course that they
    would miss him, and feel sad that he was not there,  but  this  is  the
    price that family members must, unfortunately, pay when someone commits
    a crime.  This is not a decision that is taken lightly, and I am  sorry
    that this decision will impact upon P and the children. They played  no
    role in the Appellant's offending.  It is however a consequence of  his
    criminality, and his utter failure to demonstrate  insight  or  remorse
    for the very serious harm that he has inflicted on numerous  vulnerable
    victims.



    Decisions

29. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains material error of
    law and it is set aside.


30. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

    "the appeal is dismissed under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2016"

31. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  18th
                                October 2019
