
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19957/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 20th June 2019                    |On 9th July 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mr M A H
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For  convenience  I  shall  employ  the  appellations  "Appellant"  and
    "Respondent" as  at  first  instance.   The  Appellant  is  a  Jamaican
    national whose appeal was allowed on Article 8  grounds  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro in a decision promulgated on 25th April 2019.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals  that  decision.   It  is  said  in  the
    grounds that the Appellant is a Jamaican national who has been found to
    be a persistent offender and who seeks to avoid  deportation  on  human
    rights grounds.  Reference is made to AS [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1284.   The
    grounds note that because the Appellant could not meet the requirements
    of Exception 2 the judge considered very compelling  circumstances  and
    as confirmed in Hesham Ali  the  threshold  is  not  merely  compelling
    circumstances but very compelling circumstances to  a  level  over  and
    above the factors and exceptions in Section 117C and paragraphs 399 and
    399A.  It was submitted that the Appellant's offences did not fall into
    the  category  of  juvenile  delinquency  and  that   the   Appellant's
    persistent offending differentiates the Appellant's circumstances  from
    those considered in the authority of Maslov.   It  was  submitted  that
    little or no weight should be given to the  Appellant's  rehabilitation
    as this had only occurred while the threat of deportation was  present;
    reliance is placed on well-known case law.  It was submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to give clear reasons as to how the high threshold  of
    very compelling circumstances was met or how this was one of  the  very
    small minority  of  cases  where  the  Rules  are  not  met  where  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights would outweigh the public interest.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buchanan
    in a decision dated 22nd May 2019.  Thus, the matter came before me  on
    the above date.

 4. For the Secretary of State Mr Tufan relied on his grounds.   The  judge
    had been wrong to find that there were  very  compelling  circumstances
    and the decision should be reversed  in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It was notable that in paragraph 66 of the decision  the  judge
    had found the circumstances to be compelling but had not said that they
    were very compelling and had therefore not applied the right test.

 5. For the Appellant Ms Brown relied on her skeleton argument.

 6. It was submitted that  the  Secretary  of  State's  Grounds  of  Appeal
    disclosed no error of law material or otherwise and amounted to a  mere
    disagreement with the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    were an attempt to reargue the appeal.  It was submitted that the judge
    properly directed herself that the circumstances you considered  to  be
    very compelling (see paragraphs 59 to 65).  The  points  to  note  were
    that the deportation proceedings commenced when the  Appellant  was  17
    years old and had been residing in the UK since the age of 3 years.  He
    was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2010.  Save for the  offences
    of robbery/attempted robbery and burglary most of the  offending  could
    be classified as  juvenile  delinquency.   His  offending  was  not  so
    serious as to trigger automatic deportation under the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  A prison sentence had never been imposed  on  the  Appellant  in
    respect of any of the offences.

 7. There had been no serious offending since the date of the offences  for
    which he was convicted in December 2014  and  which  were  particularly
    relevant in causing the Respondent to commence deportation  proceedings
    against him.  He was a reformed person  and  "very"  involved  in  this
    family life with his partner and child.  Reference is then made to well-
    known case law.  In all the circumstances the Tribunal was requested to
    dismiss the appeal against the Appellant.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. The judge set out full reasons for his decision.  It  is  not  disputed
    that in paragraph 56 he applied the correct test saying that  he  "must
    consider  if  there  are  very  compelling  reasons  to  outweigh   his
    deportation".  He went on to refer to Hesham Ali and to  the  words  of
    Lord Reed.  The judge made the point (paragraph 61) that  most  of  his
    offending could be classified as juvenile delinquency.  In paragraph 63
    he noted that although his criminal activities did raise concern due to
    involvement with local gangs and the impact his criminal lifestyle  had
    on the public he had never been given a custodial sentence and this had
    to be  taken  into  account  in  considering  the  seriousness  of  his
    offending.  In paragraph 64 he  took  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had had no serious offending since the deportation order  was
    made some five years ago.  He was older, more mature, very involved  in
    his family life with his  partner  and  child  and  a  reformed  person
    evidenced  by  his  non-engagement  with  local  gangs  or  in  serious
    offending.

10. The judge found that his rehabilitation must be given due weight in the
    balancing exercise.  It could not be overlooked (paragraph 65) that all
    his social and family ties were in the United Kingdom.  He had a strong
    family and private life here and this is where all  his  close  friends
    and relationships are including his partner and child with whom he  has
    a subsisting and loving relationship.  The judge accepted  that  family
    relationship  is  of  particular  importance.   He  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had no ties with Jamaica.  Looking at everything in the round
    he found that the Article  8  rights  of  the  Appellant  prevailed  on
    account of his particular circumstances.  In paragraph 66  he  says  he
    found the circumstances to be compelling and criticism was made of that
    finding because he did use the word "very".  However, I  consider  that
    this expression was no more than a slip and I  accept  and  agree  with
    what Ms Brown said that this does not undermine the fact that the judge
    was applying the test of very compelling circumstances - which is  what
    he said he was doing.

11. The judge considered all the facts in this case with care and  clarity.
    He set out full reasons for coming to his decision.  In my  view  there
    is no error of law in the judge's decision which must stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

I shall continue the anonymity order.



Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      JG Macdonald                         Date   3rd July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
