
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19459/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 February 2019              |On 13 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                            Mr THUR BAHADUR THAPA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, Counsel (instructed by Howe & Co)
For the Respondent:    M J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 19 June 1967.   He
         had sought leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  to
         rely on the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department's  Gurkha
         dependants policy, among other matters.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Vincent Fox found that there was no right of appeal as  the  First-
         tier Tribunal  lacked  jurisdiction,  in  a  decision  and  reasons
         promulgated on 18 April 2018.    The  subsequent  somewhat  complex
         history of the present appeal is set out in detail in the grant  of
         permission to appeal prepared by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson, dated
         12 December 2018, which I respectfully adopt.

    2.     Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson when granting permission  to  appeal
         identified several potential arguable errors of law.   He  proposed
         that if the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  and  the
         Appellant's advocate agreed,  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  by
         consent to the First-tier Tribunal, for the appeal to be reheard by
         another First-tier Tribunal judge, other than Judge Vincent Fox, on
         the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had  jurisdiction  and  that
         the appeal lay under Article 8.

    3.     Although the 14 days fixed by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson for  a
         response was not complied with, by an email dated 6 February  2019,
         Mr P Deller,  Senior  Presenting  Officer  in  summary  waived  any
         further jurisdictional arguments and confirmed that the application
         made by the Appellant had raised sufficient Article 8 ECHR  matters
         to warrant being treated as a human rights claim by the Respondent.
          It was accepted that the  original  determination  should  be  set
         aside for error of law and the appeal remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

    4.     At the hearing Ms Jaja for  the  Appellant  confirmed  that  the
         Appellant consented to the set aside and remittal.

    5.     In the  light  of  the  Respondent's  concession,  the  tribunal
         accordingly finds that  there  were  the  material  errors  of  law
         identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson when granting  permission
         to appeal., principally the failure to identify a valid  Article  8
         ECHR  ground  of  appeal  which  gave   the   First-tier   Tribunal
         jurisdiction over the Secretary of State for the Home  Department's
         decision dated 28 July 2016.

    6.     The onwards  appeal  is  allowed.   The  original  decision  and
         reasons is set aside.  An early date for the  rehearing  should  be
         found if at all possible, given the delays to which this appeal has
         been subject.

    DECISION

    The appeal is allowed

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of  a  material
    error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.

    The appeal is to be reheard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge except
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Vincent Fox.




    Signed                             Dated 7 February 2019
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
