
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19628/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2019                   |On 15 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                            KALAVATHI RAMAN PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Ms. J. Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cameron ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 15  May  2019  by
    which the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  respondent  to
    refuse to grant her leave to remain on human rights (article 3  and  8)
    grounds was dismissed.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  1
    October 2019.

 3. The appellant provided medical evidence confirming  that  she  was  too
    unwell  to  attend  her  appeal  hearing  before  this  Tribunal.   Her
    granddaughter, Ms Zerana Patel, attended the hearing in the company  of
    Mr. Farrouk Ahmed, who aided her as a McKenzie  friend.  Mr  Ahmed  was
    permitted to sit with Ms. Patel, though his assistance was  limited  to
    supporting Ms Patel as to papers  and  providing  advice.  He  was  not
    permitted to present representations on behalf of the appellant.



Anonymity

 4. The Judge did not  issue  an  anonymity  direction.  I  am  mindful  of
    Guidance Note 2013, No. 1 concerned with  anonymity  directions  and  I
    observe that the starting point for consideration of such directions in
    this chamber of the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts and tribunals,  is
    open justice.  I  observe  that  the  appellant  places  reliance  upon
    evidence concerning her personal health. Careful consideration has been
    given to the appropriateness of issuing an anonymity direction in  such
    circumstances. The principle of open  justice  is  fundamental  to  the
    common law and the rationale for this is to protect the rights  of  the
    parties and also to maintain public confidence in the administration of
    justice. The reporting of the identities of parties and witnesses is an
    important element of open justice. I observe that the appellant is  not
    a child nor a protected person consequent to concerns as to competency.
    Even  in  cases  involving  exploration  of  intimate  details  of   an
    appellant's  private  and  family  life,  including   serious   medical
    conditions the full force of the  open  justice  principle  should  not
    readily be  denigrated  from:  Zeromska-Smith  v.  United  Lincolnshire
    Hospitals NHS Trust [2019] EWHC 552 (QB); [2019] Med LR 250. Revelation
    of the identity of the parties is an important part  of  open  justice:
    re: Guardian News and Media Limited [2010] UKSC 1;  [2010]  2  AC  697.
    Though I have considerable sympathy for the appellant consequent to her
    present medical health, this is not a suitable matter for  the  issuing
    of an anonymity direction.



Background

 5. The appellant is a national of India  and  is  now  aged  85.  She  has
    regularly been permitted to visit her  family  in  this  country  since
    1986. She secured  a  multiple  entry  visitor's  visa  valid  from  28
    February 2013 until 28 February 2018. Her last entry into this  country
    was on 21 June 2017 and so she was required to leave this country by 20
    December 2017. Whilst  in  this  country  she  became  unwell  and  was
    diagnosed in October 2017 with right  breast  cancer.  The  tumour  was
    localised  permitting  her  to  be  treated  without  surgery  and   by
    radiotherapy. She was prescribed Letrozole,  a  hormonal  therapy  drug
    that is used to treat breast cancer. She sought to extend her leave  to
    remain and by means of a covering letter accompanying her  application,
    dated 12 December 2017, she observed:

         'I am responding well to the ongoing treatment, albeit not  without
         side reactions of the drug I am taking. I have become very  fragile
         and am barely able to walk or sit even for short  durations.  I  am
         also suffering from  persistent  nausea  and  low-grade  fever.  My
         doctor is of the view that my condition is likely  to  persist  for
         another three months followed by some time to recover fully. He has
         therefore requested that I am allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  for
         another six months on medical grounds.

         ...

         As is evident from my immigration history I am (sic)  no  intention
         to remain in the UK for an extended period of time  and  have  been
         forced into an unfortunate situation due to  my  medical  condition
         where my doctor believes that for [the] time being I am  not  in  a
         situation to undertake an extended journey  all  the  way  back  to
         India. I can assure you that I will return to India as  soon  as  I
         have gained sufficient strength.'

 6. The appellant provided corroborative evidence that as at  the  date  of
    the application her medical expenses had been paid privately  and  that
    her son and daughter-in-law were capable  of  continuing  to  meet  her
    private medical fees.

 7. The appellant submitted her application by means of Form FLR(HRO) which
    is the appropriate form to be used  for  extensions  of  stay  in  this
    country for human rights claims, leave outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    and other routes not covered by other application forms. Upon receiving
    the application, the  respondent  treated  it  as  an  application  for
    further leave to remain in this country on human rights (articles 3 and
    8) grounds. The application was refused by way of a decision  dated  10
    September 2018. The respondent concluded that the appellant  could  not
    satisfy the relevant Immigration Rules concerned with both private  and
    family life  rights.  As  for  exceptional  circumstances  it  was  not
    accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into India  upon  return  and  that  she  would
    receive financial assistance from her family present in  this  country.
    The decision concluded  that  sufficient  treatment  was  available  at
    specialised cancer treatment hospitals throughout India that  could  be
    accessed by the appellant.  It  was  determined  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances did not meet the high threshold for medical claims  under
    article 3 as confirmed in the judgment of N v. Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31; [2005] 2 AC 296.

 8. During the course of her treatment and consequent  to  her  application
    for leave to remain the appellant was further diagnosed  with  advanced
    heart  failure  with  multiple  episodes  of  decompensation  requiring
    hospitalisation. In 2018 she was provided with vasodilators, to  dilate
    her blood vessels, and antiarrhythmics to relieve  cardiac  arrhythmia.
    She was reduced to being breathless on undertaking  only  a  few  paces
    when walking and in 2018 was primarily chair or bedbound.

 9. By way of letters dated 18 August 2018 and  25  August  2018  Mr  Rajiv
    Vashisht, consultant surgeon and  senior  lecturer,  Imperial  College,
    London and Professor Jaspal Kooner, consultant  cardiologist,  Imperial
    College, London opined that the appellant was not fit to travel.





Hearing before the FtT

10. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House  on  26  March
    2019.  He heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  granddaughter,  Miss
    Zerana Patel. The Judge observed at [26] - [27] and at [29]:

         'The appellant is an 84-year-old  lady  who  is  clearly  suffering
         severe medical issues in relation to her heart and also has  breast
         cancer. It is however the case that she has spent  essentially  her
         whole life in India only coming to this country  as  a  visitor  in
         June 2017. The appellant has family in India including her daughter
         who she was living with prior to coming to this country.

         It is clear from the evidence of Ms Patel that  the  appellant  was
         supported prior to coming to this country by family members in  the
         USA and also by her daughter in India. The family in  this  country
         have assisted her in relation to her medical costs  while  she  has
         been here but there is no evidence  that  the  previous  assistance
         would not be available to the appellant  were,  she  to  return  to
         India.

         ...

         'Although it is stated that  she  is  not  fit  to  travel  neither
         Professor Kooner nor Mr Vashisht have  addressed  the  respondent's
         contention that suitable  safeguards  could  be  put  in  place  to
         mitigate any risk during travel. The appellant does not  appear  to
         be on any treatments which could not be continued in India.'

11. As to article 3 the Judge concluded, at [31]:

         'The issue of article 3 was raised by the respondent in the reasons
         for refusal. It is clear that  the  appellant  is  suffering  major
         medical issues and that she has a diagnosis  of  12  to  18  months
         life. I do note however that facilities are available in  India  to
         treat both of  the  appellants  conditions  and  that  the  medical
         evidence does not indicate that she would  be  significantly  worse
         off in India. I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  medical
         conditions are sufficient  to  reach  the  necessary  threshold  to
         engage article 3.'

12. He further refused the article 8 appeal both under and outside  of  the
    Rules. As to the latter he determined, at [35] - [43]:

         'In relation to article 8 outside of the  rules  in  Razgar  [2004]
         UKHL 17 Lord Bingham set out at paragraph  17  the  five  questions
         which  should  be  asked.  I  also  take  into  account  that  s.19
         Immigration Act 2014 now applies where article 8(2) is engaged  and
         that paragraph 117B now sets out the public  interest  requirements
         to be taken into account.

         The public interest is in general in the removal of those here  who
         have no lawful right to reside. The court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11
         reiterated that the test  was  whether  a  fair  balance  had  been
         struck. The public interest is clearly  a  relevant  consideration.
         The appellant's status is relevant to the weight to be given as set
         out in section 117B.

         The public interest clearly is in the  removal  of  those  in  this
         country who have no right to be here however that  is  tempered  by
         the fact that those who have established a family and private  life
         here can make applications to remain.

         The appellant came to this country with lawful leave  however  this
         was as a visitor.

         I  have  had  an  opportunity  to  hear  oral  evidence  from   the
         appellant's granddaughter. I have  no  doubt  that  she  has  given
         credible and truthful evidence.

         I accept the evidence that the appellant has received treatment  in
         this country for both a heart condition and also for breast  cancer
         and that she is currently still  receiving  treatment.  Although  I
         take note of the fact that both doctors say that she is not fit  to
         travel they have not addressed facilities  that  could  be  put  in
         place to ensure that she could return to  India.  Although  she  is
         receiving treatment and requires regular medical surveillance  both
         the treatment and surveillance would be available in India which is
         of course her home country.

         There is no doubt that the appellant's position was precarious  and
         that in normal circumstances those who come here on  a  visit  Visa
         would be expected to return and the public interest  clearly  would
         be in the maintenance of an effective immigration control.

         The appellant applied for an extension of her Visa within  time.  I
         take note of the reasons  for  this  in  relation  to  her  medical
         conditions however I am not satisfied that she  could  not  receive
         adequate treatment in India.  The  appellant  spent  her  formative
         years and in fact essentially her whole life apart  from  the  last
         two years in India and has  family  support  there  who  she  could
         return to. She could maintain  contact  with  her  family  in  this
         country in the same way as previously.

         After taking  into  account  all  of  the  evidence  available  and
         balancing the factors  in  favour  of  the  appellant  against  the
         respondent's legitimate  aim  of  the  maintenance  of  immigration
         control I come to the conclusion that in the  appellant's  specific
         circumstances the balance falls in favour of the respondent  and  I
         am not satisfied even taking into account  the  appellants  medical
         conditions  that  there  are  exceptional  circumstances   in   the
         appellant's case which would outweigh the public  interest  in  the
         appellant's removal. I find that the decision of the respondent  is
         therefore proportionate to the respondent's legitimate aim.'




Grounds of Appeal

13. The grounds of appeal were drafted  by  a  member  of  the  appellant's
    family. The core of the challenge is that the Judge failed to  consider
    her appeal under the Immigration Rules, as detailed at [2]  -  [3]  and
    [5] of the grounds:

         'SSHD and the FtJ Cameron dealt [with] the  Immigration  matter  of
         the appellant specifically under "Human  Rights"  and  not  on  the
         "humanitarian" grounds. The appellant applied  for  [an]  extension
         for her visitor's visa to receive private medical treatment in  the
         UK on Form HR(O) and as such [she] did not make any claim on  Human
         Rights grounds. Form HR(O) was the Application Form used for  human
         rights claims, leave outside the rules and other routes not covered
         by  other  forms.  At  the  time  of  appellant's  application  for
         extension of her visitor's visa there was no  other  specific  form
         used for extensions of  visitor's  visa  and  hence  she  used  the
         appropriate form for her application.

         FtJ Robertson has made an incorrect reference to  Paragraph  V8  of
         Appendix V that the appellant must be in  the  UK  as  specifically
         [as] a "Visitor for Medical Purposes" to  get  an  extension  as  a
         "Visitor for Medical Purposes". There are  no  requirements  for  a
         visitor to apply for  an  extension  of  their  visitor's  visa  to
         receive private medical treatment in the UK only if they are in the
         UK as a visitor for private medical treatment. There  has  been  an
         error of law in Judgement of FtJ Robertson ...

         ...

         The matter before SSHD, the FtJ Cameron and FtJ  Robertson  in  its
         simplest form was [an] extension of a Visitor's Visa for  receiving
         Private Medical Treatment in the UK and there  was  ample  evidence
         before SSHD, the FtJ Cameron and FtJ Robertson that  the  appellant
         is critically ill and receiving Private Medical  Treatment  in  the
         UK, which was ignored or overlooked. There are  provisions  in  the
         law for an extension of Visitor's Visa  which  was  denied  to  the
         appellant and hence the decision is unlawful.'

14. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Kopieczek observed:

         Whilst it is understandable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         ("FtJ") dealt with the appeal as a human rights appeal, I  can  see
         the argument advanced  in  the  grounds  to  the  effect  that  the
         respondent and the FtJ ought to have dealt with the  matter  as  an
         application for an extension of stay as a visitor for  the  purpose
         of receiving medical treatment, under Appendix V 8.6.

         Whereas it may be that the  appellant  needed  to  have  had  entry
         clearance as a visitor for medical treatment in the first place, it
         seems to me at this stage at least, that the Rules are not entirely
         clear on the point. Therefore, the grounds are arguable.

15. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.



Decision on Error of Law

16. I am mindful that  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  were  drafted
    without the support and advice  of  a  legal  representative.  However,
    their starting premise is erroneous. It is submitted that Form FLR(HRO)
    was used because at the time of  the  appellant's  application  for  an
    extension of her visitor's  visa  there  was  no  other  specific  form
    capable of being used to extend leave for a person  enjoying  leave  to
    enter as a visitor. The true position is that  Form  FLR(IR)  was,  and
    remains, the correct form for extending leave to stay in  this  country
    and is to be  used  by  visitors  seeking  such  extension  except  for
    transit, Approved Destination Status  and  Permitted  Paid  Engagements
    visitors. The appellant does not fall  into  any  of  these  restricted
    categories. This form was published in December 2016  and  so  was  the
    correct form to be used by the appellant for an application for further
    leave to remain on medical grounds under part V8 of Appendix V  of  the
    Immigration Rules at the date of application. Paragraph  34(1)  of  the
    Rules sets out  that  an  application  must  be  made  on  a  specified
    application form and  there  are  specified  forms  for  all  types  of
    applications for leave to remain. The respondent  cannot  therefore  be
    criticised  for  having  acted  unlawfully  by  not   considering   the
    application under  Part  V8  of  Appendix  V  of  the  Rules  when  the
    application made was for consideration on human rights grounds and  not
    as a visitor under the Rules.

17. The Judge proceeded to consider the human rights appeal before him  and
    as to Article 8 he  lawfully  adopted  the  approach  identified  in  R
    (Razgar) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL  27;
    [2004] 2 AC 368, namely whether (I) the proposed removal  would  be  an
    interference with the appellant's right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life; and if so  whether  such  interference;  (ii)  would  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    article 8; (iii) was in accordance with the law; (iv) was necessary  in
    a democratic society; and  (v)  was  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved.

18. It is implicit that the Judge considered the underlying merits  of  the
    initial application, noting at [19]:

         'It is relevant to note that in a letter from the appellant herself
         dated 11 December 2017  in  support  of  the  application  she  had
         indicated that with regard to the breast cancer she anticipated the
         condition persisting for a further three months and that she  would
         then require time to recover. She was therefore asking to remain in
         the United Kingdom for a further six months on medical grounds.'

19. The Judge was reasonably entitled to take into account  that  time  had
    moved on since the application in December 2017 when the applicant  was
    seeking further leave only until the summer of 2018 by the latest.  The
    Judge was hearing the appeal a year after this time.

20. He was also reasonably entitled to take into account in his  assessment
    that the appellant had taken no steps to secure further evidence as  to
    her fitness  to  travel  in  circumstances  where  the  respondent  had
    observed that Mr Vashisht had failed to address by means of his  letter
    as to whether she would be  fit  to  fly  in  circumstances  where  the
    respondent would put in place suitable safeguards to mitigate any  risk
    during travel.

21.  Ultimately,  whilst  being  sympathetic  to  the  appellant's  medical
    condition the Judge gave cogent and lawful  reasons  for  refusing  her
    appeal under article 3 and also under article 8 both within and outside
    of the Immigration Rules. I consider below as to whether the  appellant
    would have enjoyed a meritorious application under Part V8 of  Appendix
    V at the date of application but whether it may have  been  meritorious
    or not does not adversely impinge upon  the  Judge's  consideration  of
    matters as they stood at the date of his decision some eighteen  months
    later. He lawfully took into  account  that  the  time  sought  by  the
    appellant to remain in this country had long passed and his conclusions
    as  to  the  proportionality  of  the  proposed  interference  in   the
    appellant's article 8 private  and  family  life  rights  were  cogent,
    reasonable and lawful in all the circumstances. Therefore,  the  appeal
    must fail.



Postscript

22. The appellant is now required to leave the country. It may be that  she
    will seek to make further  representations  for  the  reasons  I  shall
    address below. There is a possibility that she may return to India  and
    wish to reapply to visit her family in this country. Ultimately,  these
    decisions  are  for  the  appellant  and  not  the  Tribunal.   It   is
    appropriate,  however,  that  I  observe  the  following.   Until   her
    application in December 2017 the appellant had not previously sought to
    remain in this country beyond her permitted  leave  and  enjoyed  until
    that date an unblemished immigration record. If the application for  an
    extension of leave had been made by  use  of  the  correct  application
    form,  the  respondent  would  have  been  required  to  consider   the
    appellant's  circumstances  under  Part  V8  of  Appendix  V   of   the
    Immigration Rules. The appellant was in the country as  a  visitor  and
    continued to meet all the suitability and eligibility requirements  for
    a visit visa. She was not in the country in breach of Immigration Rules
    as the application was made before the expiry of her  permitted  leave.
    The respondent therefore would  have  been  required  to  consider  the
    matter under Paragraph V8.6 which details:

         'If the applicant is applying for an extension of stay as a visitor
         for the purpose of receiving private medical  treatment  they  must
         also satisfy the decision maker they:

             (a)  have met the costs of any medical treatment  received  so
                  far; and

             (b)  provide a letter from a registered  medical  practitioner
                  at a private practice or NHS hospital, who  holds  an  NHS
                  consultant post or who appears in the Specialist  Register
                  of the General  Medical  Council,  detailing  the  medical
                  condition requiring further treatment.'

23. Paragraph V1.5 of Appendix V confirms that a visitor (standard) may  be
    given up to eleven months initially if they come to  this  country  for
    private medical treatment. This is a specific subcategory of  visitors,
    as are academics and visitors under  the  Approved  Destination  Status
    Agreement. The wording of paragraph V8.6 appears  to  have  misled  the
    appellant and her family members into believing that she  could  extend
    her stay as a visitor so as to receive private medical treatment,  such
    treatment not being the basis for her initial grant of entry  clearance
    as a visitor. I am in agreement with UTJ Kopieczek that this  paragraph
    of the Rules is difficult for a layperson to understand, being  drafted
    in a manner that lacks the requisite clarity and permits at  least  two
    reasonable interpretations, one of which  is  that  understood  by  the
    appellant and her family. However, paragraph V8.8 throws light upon the
    true position when  addressing  the  length  to  be  granted  for  such
    extension, as it details that a  visitor  (standard)  who  is  in  this
    country for private medical treatment may be granted  an  extension  of
    stay as a visitor for a  further  six  months,  provided  this  is  for
    private medical treatment. The requirement that the previous  grant  of
    leave to enter be  as  a  visitor  for  private  medical  treatment  is
    confirmed to be an express requirement. The appellant  could  not  from
    the outset  of  her  application  satisfy  this  requirement.  She  was
    therefore required to make an application for leave  to  remain  for  a
    short period of time on human rights grounds.

24. I further observe that at the date of application in December 2017  the
    appellant was very unwell consequent to cancer and was  suffering  with
    an undiagnosed cardiac condition. She enjoyed limited  mobility.  I  am
    satisfied  that  the  respondent  could   have   reasonably   exercised
    discretion in her  favour  for  a  short  variation  of  leave  if  the
    application had been considered expeditiously, rather than  ten  months
    later as proved to be the case. The appellant pursued the appeal having
    adopted a coherent though erroneous reading of paragraph V8.6 which  is
    not a well drafted paragraph of the Rules and throughout such time  the
    appellant and  her  family  acted  without  legal  representation.  The
    respondent has accepted that the appellant's immigration  history  over
    the course of some 30 years has been  without  blemish  until  she  was
    overtaken by  serious  ill  health  whilst  present  in  this  country.
    Consequently, this Tribunal observes that both the application and  the
    appeal were not abusive in nature.

25. I have addressed the appellant's understanding of  her  position  under
    the Immigration Rules by way of this  postscript  because  her  medical
    position has deteriorated since the Judge heard  her  appeal  in  March
    2019. I have been provided with a further letter from Professor Kooner,
    dated 13 October 2019, which post-dates the hearing before the FtT  and
    so therefore is not a document I  am  permitted  to  consider  in  this
    appeal. It makes for very sad reading as  it  confirms  an  experienced
    medical professional's opinion that the appellant is terminally ill and
    is  currently  on  palliative  therapy.  Professor  Kooner  has   again
    identified the appellant as not being fit to  travel  and  her  overall
    survival  is  limited  to  some  twelve  months.  Ms   Isherwood,   who
    represented  the  respondent  with  her  usual  care  and  sensitivity,
    acknowledged  that  the  respondent  may  well  have  to  consider  the
    appellant's position in light  of  this  unfortunate  diagnosis  if  an
    appropriate application is made.



Notice of Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law. The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld, and the appeal is dismissed.

27. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 November 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 November 2019


