
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19715/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2019                       |On 2 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CUTTS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE),
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                ZULFIQAR [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Young, Counsel, instructed by Birth Tree Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Shergill  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  10  April  2019,
        dismissing for want of jurisdiction the appeal of Mr  Zulfiqar  [K]
        (the appellant) against the decision of the Secretary of State  for
        the Home Department (respondent) dated 8 August 2018  refusing  his
        application for Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR)  as  a  victim  of
        domestic violence, upheld  in  an  Administrative  Review  dated  6
        September 2018.

   Procedural history


     2. It is necessary to set out in some detail the events leading to the
        appeal before us. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan  born  in
        1980, entered the UK  with  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse  on  25
        November 2016. On 29 January 2018 he applied for  Indefinite  Leave
        to Remain under the domestic violence provisions of Appendix FM  of
        the  immigration  rules.  His  application  was  accompanied  by  a
        statement, dated 26 January 2018,  in  which  he  claimed  to  have
        become depressed and suicidal through the shame  and  embarrassment
        of being a  male  victim  of  domestic  violence.  He  additionally
        claimed to fear ill treatment from his brother-in-law if removed to
        Pakistan. A covering letter accompanying  the  application  briefly
        referred to the appellant having suicidal  thoughts  following  the
        domestic violence and that there had been threats to his life if he
        returned to Pakistan.


     3. In his decision of 5 August 2018 the respondent  refused  to  grant
        the appellant ILR and curtailed his leave so  that  it  expired  on
        that date. The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  spousal
        relationship broke down  due  to  domestic  violence  and  did  not
        consider  that  the  appellant  provided  sufficient  evidence   to
        establish  the  same.  The  respondent  did  not  engage  with  the
        appellant's claim to be at risk of suicide or his claimed  fear  of
        ill-treatment from his brother-in-law in Pakistan. At  the  end  of
        his decision the respondent stated,

             "Any submissions you may have  made  relating  to  your  Human
             Rights have not been considered as an application for ILR as a
             victim of Domestic Violence. ILR is not  considered  to  be  a
             Human Rights-based application. If you wish to apply for leave
             to remain, based on your Human Rights or  other  compassionate
             factors it is open  to  you  to  apply  using  an  appropriate
             application form. Please see our website for further details."

     4.  The  appellant  requested  an   Administrative   Review   of   the
        respondent's decision. An Administrative Review  decision  dated  6
        September  2018  upheld  the   earlier   decision.   Although   the
        Administrative Review  repeated  the  appellant's  claim  regarding
        threats from his estranged wife should he return to Pakistan  there
        was  no  substantive  engagement  by  the  respondent   with   this
        assertion.


     5. The appellant lodged an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a
        decision issued on 31 October 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
        Shanahan held that the decision the appellant was seeking to appeal
        was not one against which there was an exercisable right of appeal.
        Judge  Shanahan  referred  to  the  decision  in  AT,  R  (On   the
        Application Of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
        EWHC 2589 (Admin), upon which the appellant relied in  lodging  his
        appeal, and noted that the decision provided by the  appellant  was
        the refusal of an Administrative Review rather than a  decision  to
        refuse a human rights claim. As such there was no right of  appeal.
        The First-tier Tribunal issued a decision under  rule  22(2)(a)  of
        the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration &  Asylum
        Chamber) Rules 2014  on  the  basis  that  the  appeal  lodged  was
        invalid.

     6. The  appellant's  representatives  requested  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal reconsider its decision. On 22 November  2018  the  First-
        tier Tribunal issued directions to the  parties  in  an  effort  to
        clarify whether the appellant also made an application for Leave To
        Remain on human rights grounds. On 17 December 2018  Judge  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal Herlihy decided that the appellant's  statement
        accompanying his application to the Home Office did include a human
        rights claim under Articles 2 and 3 based on his fear of harm  from
        his brother-in-law in Pakistan. Judge Herlihy  concluded  that  the
        respondent's decision was also a refusal of the human rights  claim
        and that the appellant had a right of appeal.

     7. The matter was listed for a substantive hearing and came before the
        judge on 19 February 2019. This hearing was adjourned  because  the
        Presenting Officer sought to rely on a letter  purportedly  written
        by the appellant's estranged  wife  and  the  appellant  needed  an
        opportunity  to  deal  with  this  new  evidence.  In  response  to
        directions issued by  the  judge  the  appellant's  representatives
        wrote to the First-tier Tribunal on 29 March 2019  indicating  that
        the appellant was not pursuing any protection issues at the hearing
        and would only pursue the domestic violence matter and the  related
        private and family life issues under Article 8.

     8. At the  start  of  the  adjourned  hearing  on  1  April  2019  the
        Presenting Officer raised, for the first time since the appeal  had
        been listed, the issue whether there was jurisdiction to  hear  the
        appeal. The judge explained, at [6],

             "... given the late reliance on  this  issue,  and  the  mixed
             issues of fact and law that  usually  arise  when  looking  at
             jurisdiction, I decided that the  appeal  would  be  heard.  I
             noted that the appellant could not be in a worse position than
             for example a visit visa appeal where someone might be able to
             argue particular human  rights  infringements  notwithstanding
             the curtailment of visit visa appeal rights."

     9. The judge heard extensive  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  two
        supporting  witnesses   and   both   representatives   made   their
        submissions.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    10. For reasons that will become apparent it is not necessary for us to
        consider the judge's decision in  detail.  In  brief  summary,  the
        judge referred to paragraph 56 of AT, which in turn considered  the
        definition of a human rights  claim  in  the  Administrative  Court
        decision of Alighanbari, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 1818 (Admin). AT  decided
        that,  while  some  applications  under   the   domestic   violence
        provisions were also human rights claims, others  were  not.  Given
        the content of the solicitor's letter dated 29 March 2019 the judge
        found that the appellant had  not  made  a  stand-alone  Article  8
        claim. The judge considered the evidence of the appellant's Article
        8 claim to be "wafer thin" and that  he  failed  to  make  out  the
        minimum elements of a  family  or  private  life  case.  The  judge
        concluded that the appellant's "obliquely pleaded Article  8  case"
        did not meet the minimum elements of a  section  113  human  rights
        claim. The judge also considered the appellant's  Article  3  claim
        based on self-harm to be weak and that the minimum elements of such
        a claim were not established. The judge considered that if  he  was
        wrong in respect of his assessment under AT then  his  findings  in
        respect of Article 3 and Article 8 would, in any event, lead  to  a
        negative result for the appellant.


    11. At [26] the judge concluded,

             "There is no valid appeal  before  the  tribunal  because  the
             appellant has not shown that his appeal  was  a  human  rights
             claim which could constitute either an existing or prospective
             Article 3 or 8 claim; or show any interference with those ECHR
             rights  based  on  the  pleadings  and  evidence  before   the
             tribunal. This matter is, therefore,  dismissed  for  want  of
             jurisdiction."

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

    12. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds. The first
        ground contended that the judge  acted  in  a  procedurally  unfair
        manner by hearing the appeal on the basis that he had  jurisdiction
        without  then  giving  the  parties  an   opportunity   of   making
        submissions on the issue of jurisdiction.


    13. The second ground of appeal contended that the judge erred  in  law
        in concluding that  Article  8  was  not  engaged  given  that  the
        appellant had lived in the UK for over 2 years at the date  of  the
        hearing and had an adult siblings and friends in the UK.

    14. Both parties produced skeleton arguments  in  preparation  for  the
        'error of law' hearing.

The 'error of law' hearing

    15. At the outset of the 'error of law'  hearing  we  raised  with  the
        parties our concern that there had never been a refusal of a  human
        rights claim such as to give rise to a right of appeal. We drew the
        parties' attention to the decision of 5 August 2018 which expressly
        disavowed any consideration of human rights submissions made by the
        appellant, and we noted that the Administrative Review decision did
        not engage with any human rights claims made by the  appellant.  We
        gave  the  parties  an  opportunity  to  respond  to  our   initial
        observations. Ms Young sought to persuade us that AT provided for a
        right of appeal and that the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal
        proceeded on the basis that the Tribunal had jurisdiction. Mr Avery
        submitted that our initial observations were correct and that there
        had been no decision capable of leading to a right of appeal.


    16. Having heard from both representatives we concluded that there  had
        never been a decision  refusing  a  human  rights  claim  and  that
        neither  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  the  Upper  Tribunal   had
        jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

Discussion

    17. The definition of a human rights claim is contained in section  113
        (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the  2002
        Act), as amended by paragraph 53 (2) (a) of Schedule 9 (4)  to  the
        Immigration Act 2014. A human rights claim is,

             '... a claim made by a person to the Secretary of State  at  a
             place designated by the Secretary of State that to remove  the
             person from or require him to leave the United Kingdom  or  to
             refuse him entry into the United  Kingdom  would  be  unlawful
             under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority
             not to act contrary to the [ECHR]).'

    18. Section 82 of the 2002 Act identifies the circumstances in which  a
        person has a right of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Section
        82(1)(b) reads,


             'A person  ('P')  may  appeal  to  the  [First-tier]  Tribunal
             where... the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a  human
             rights claim made by P....'

    19. The right of appeal therefore attaches to the "refusal" of "a human
        rights claim."


    20. Appendix FM of the immigration rules is headed 'Family Members' and
        contains Section DVILR setting out the requirements for a grant  of
        ILR for victims  of  domestic  violence.  Appendix  AR  covers  the
        availability and application of the Administrative  Review  remedy.
        AR3.1 establishes that  Administrative  Review  is  only  available
        where an 'eligible decision' has been made. AR3.2(c) states that an
        'eligible decision' is a decision made on or after 6 April 2015  on
        an application for leave to remain made under the immigration rules
        unless it is an application as a visitor, or where  an  application
        or human rights claim is made under...

             '(viii)  Appendix  FM  (family  members),  but  not  where  an
             application is  made  under  section  BPILR  (bereavement)  or
             section DVILR (domestic violence)'

    21. We did not  hear  any  oral  argument  on  the  issue  whether  the
        representations in the appellant's statement  and  covering  letter
        accompanying his ILR application were capable  of  amounting  to  a
        human  rights  claim  as  understood  in  Alighanbari  or  in   the
        Presidential decision of Baihinga  (r.  22;  human  rights  appeal:
        requirements) [2018] UKUT 00090 (IAC). We therefore proceed on  the
        basis that the combination of the statement and the covering letter
        were sufficient to establish the elements of a human  rights  claim
        based on Article 3.

    22. In order to trigger a right of  appeal  the  respondent  must  have
        refused the human rights claim. The difficulty for the appellant is
        that the decision  of  5  August  2018  expressly  stated  that  no
        consideration had been given to any of the submissions made by  the
        appellant relying on his human rights and there  was  no  attempted
        engagement with the human rights claim elements that  he  advanced.
        Nor could the Administrative Review decision constitute  a  refusal
        of a human rights claim. There was  simply  no  engagement  in  the
        latter  decision  with  the  core  elements  of   the   appellant's
        application that constituted  an  Article  3  human  rights  claim.
        Although the respondent refused to grant the  appellant  ILR  as  a
        victim of domestic violence we are satisfied, having regard both to
        that decision and the  Administrative  Review  decision,  that  the
        respondent did not refuse a human rights claim.

    23. We draw further support in our conclusion from the  first  part  of
        headnote 3 of Baihinga, which reads,

             "The issue of whether a human rights claim  has  been  refused
             must be judged by reference to the decision said to constitute
             the refusal."

    24. We can find nothing in either the decision of 5 August  2018  or  6
        September 2018 capable of constituting a refusal of the appellant's
        human rights claim, as opposed to a refusal of his application  for
        ILR as a victim of domestic violence.


    25. The appellant relies on the decision of Mr Justice Kerr  in  AT,  a
        judicial review challenge to the removal of a right of appeal  from
        those refused leave to remain as the victims of  domestic  violence
        and its replacement with a right to Administrative Review only. The
        issue in AT was whether, on  the  facts,  the  claimant's  domestic
        violence claim was a claim that removal  would  be  unlawful  under
        section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1988  [54].  Mr  Justice  Kerr
        rejected the submission made on behalf of  the  claimant  that  all
        domestic violence claims were necessarily also human rights claims.
        "Some are, others are not" [65]. He found that the defendant  could
        not, without primary legislation, remove the right  of  appeal  for
        domestic violence claims that were also human rights claims as this
        would be contrary to s.82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act [67].  He  did  not
        however consider it appropriate to quash AR3.2(c) as proper  effect
        could be given to  s.82  by  adopting  "a  purposive  and  strained
        construction." At [69] he explained that the  sub-paragraph  should
        be read as if it included the following words  which  he  added  in
        brackets and italicised,

             '(viii)  Appendix  FM  (family  members)  but  not  where   an
             application (not being a human rights claim) is made  under...
             Section DVILR (domestic violence).'

    26. AT did not however deal  with  the  issue  of  what  constituted  a
        refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of  an  ILR
        application under the domestic violence  provisions.  The  elements
        that constitute  a  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of  the
        appellant's application are separate or severable. We do  not  read
        the decision in AT  as  authority  for  the  proposition  that  the
        refusal of an application under the  domestic  violence  provisions
        that contains elements  constituting  a  human  rights  claim  must
        itself  constitute  a  refusal  of  a   human   rights   claim   in
        circumstances where the respondent has both failed to substantively
        engage with those elements and has expressly indicated that he will
        not deal with those elements.


    27. In our judgment the elements that make up the  human  rights  claim
        can and should be distinguished from the  domestic  violence  claim
        itself. This  follows  from  the  recognition  that  some  domestic
        violence claims will not contain any human rights elements. On  the
        facts of this case the respondent expressly refused to engage  with
        the human  rights  elements  contained  in  the  domestic  violence
        application. In circumstances where no consideration has been given
        to the human rights elements  of  the  appellant's  application  we
        conclude that there has been no refusal of a human rights claim.

    28. For the reasons we have given we disagree with the  brief  decision
        of Duty Judge  Herlihy  who  concluded  that,  as  the  appellant's
        application under the domestic violence provisions included a claim
        under Articles 2 and 3 based on his fear of harm in  Pakistan,  the
        refusal of the domestic violence  application  also  constituted  a
        refusal of a human rights claim.

    29. As there was no refusal of a human rights claim, the judge did  not
        have jurisdiction to hear the appeal. Although we have reached  our
        decision by a different route to  that  taken  by  the  judge,  the
        consequence of our analysis is that neither the First-tier Tribunal
        nor the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

    30. The appellant would not be without a remedy in these  circumstances
        as the respondent's failure to  consider  the  human  rights  claim
        aspect  of  the  domestic  violence  application  could  have  been
        challenged by way of judicial review. Although the appellant is now
        out of time to challenge that decision  an  application  to  extend
        time may be sympathetically viewed by the Upper Tribunal given  the
        procedural history.


    31. Although not directly relevant to  his  decision  Mr  Justice  Kerr
        observed that a requirement for domestic violence victims  to  make
        two separate applications in  circumstances  in  which  the  victim
        considers their application to also constitute a human rights claim
        would be unlawful as this  would  discriminate  indirectly  against
        women and would impose a potentially onerous financial barrier.  We
        additionally note that unrepresented applicants may not  understand
        which form is most appropriate for their  application.  Mr  Justice
        Kerr indicated that the victim  of  domestic  violence  application
        form should be revised to include an option enabling the  applicant
        to assert that the claim is also a human rights claim (see [48] and
        [49]). We are disappointed and concerned that the  respondent  does
        not appear to have acted upon this  recommendation.  Had  the  form
        been amended in the manner suggested the present difficulties faced
        by the appellant may have been avoided.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed for want of jurisdiction


D.BLUM                                  24 July 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
