
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Numbers:
HU/19921/2018

                                               HU/19925/2018

                                               HU/19926/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 September 2019                    |On 1 October 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                     miss DHURATA BERA (FIRST appellant)
                     miss anila brea (SECOND appellant)
                     miss leonela bera (THIRD appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Marsh &
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 13 June 2019 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Traynor  which  refused  the  appeals  brought  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds by the appellants.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Albania. They are  sisters.   The  first
    appellant was born on 7 March 2000.  The second appellant was  born  on
    15 July 2002.  The third appellant was born on 3 September  2003.   The
    exact date of the appellants' arrival in  the  UK  is  not  clear,  the
    evidence referring to both 2016 and 2017. It is not disputed that  they
    entered the UK illegally.

 3. The appellants maintain that they came to the UK to join their  father,
    Mr Lulzim Bera, born on 1 July 1972, also an  Albanian  national.   The
    appellants made an application for leave to remain on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds on 22 February 2018.  The appellants maintained that  they  had
    felt obliged to come to the UK illegally in order to join their  father
    as they were abandoned by their  mother  in  Albania  in  approximately
    February 2016.

 4. That application was refused in a decision  dated  19  September  2018.
    The appellants' appeals were heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  10
    April 2019 and the appeals dismissed in the decision of  Judge  Traynor
    dated 13 June 2019.  Permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was granted on 25 July 2019.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor did not find the evidence before him,
    including the oral evidence of the first appellant and Mr Bera,  to  be
    in any way credible.  In paragraph 64, when considering the evidence of
    the father on how the appellant's came to the UK, the Judge states  "in
    this regard, I find the Appellants'  father's  evidence  to  be  highly
    inconsistent". Later in the same paragraph the  Judge  states  "I  find
    what the Appellants' father had to say in  this  regard  to  be  wholly
    implausible and unlikely".  In paragraph  68,  again  referring  to  Mr
    Bera's evidence on how the appellants came to the UK, the  Judge  found
    "that his evidence  in  this  regard  is  both  highly  incredible  and
    implausible and I give no weight to it".

 6. Further, in paragraph 70, when assessing  the  evidence  of  the  first
    appellant and Mr Bera, the First-tier Tribunal found:

         "Essentially, I find that the evidence  presented  in  the  witness
         statements has varied so dramatically from the oral testimony  that
         I am unable to give any weight to what the First Appellant and  her
         father said misrepresenting the truth of  their  circumstances  and
         how the Appellants arrived in this country".

 7. In paragraph 72, assessing the evidence of the first appellant  on  the
    family home in Albania, the judge found as follows:

         "I find that based upon this evidence it is reasonable to  conclude
         that upon  a  balance  of  probabilities  the  home  in  which  the
         Appellants resided prior to them coming to the UK remains available
         to them and that there is no evidence to suggest that  they  cannot
         return to live there".

 8. In paragraph 73 the judge makes further findings rejecting the evidence
    that there were difficulties on arrival and finds the evidence  of  the
    appellants' father as to having been threatened by  people  traffickers
    to be "nothing more than nonsense".




 9. In paragraph 74 the judge states "I find  that  there  are  fundamental
    inconsistencies between the First Appellant and her  father's  evidence
    regarding the  circumstances  in  which  they  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom".


10. In paragraph 75 the judge states:

         "I find that all of the Appellants, as well as their  father,  have
         been  entirely  economical  with  the  truth  in  regard   to   the
         circumstances in which they came to this  country,  the  timing  of
         their arrival and the presence of other  family  members  here.   I
         find that this seriously damages the reliability of their  evidence
         and their claim that the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  their
         applications would amount to a breach of their Article 8 rights  to
         protect their private life".

11. In paragraph 78 of the  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor
    finds "that the Appellants have been thoroughly dishonest".

12. In paragraph 79 of the decision, the Judge addresses the claim  of  the
    appellants that their mother disappeared and that their father has sole
    responsibility for them.  He states:

         "Whilst I am told that the Appellants' mother  has  disappeared,  I
         again find that this is only part of the story.  I find it  utterly
         unbelievable  that  neither  the  Appellants'   father,   nor   the
         Appellants themselves, attempted to make  any  contact  with  their
         maternal relatives in order to  try  and  establish  whether  their
         mother was visiting and had not returned.  The fact that I was told
         in oral evidence that she left at the same time as the brother, who
         had  never  been  mentioned  previously,  and  that  he  has  again
         materialised in the United Kingdom, leads me to conclude  that  the
         Respondent's submission that in all probability their mother is  in
         the United Kingdom is one which can be drawn from  their  evidence.
         I find there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Appellants'  mother  has
         disappeared as claimed, or that the Appellants  were  abandoned  in
         circumstances where it was necessary for their father to make these
         alleged arrangements to bring them to the United Kingdom".

13. Having made these extensive adverse credibility  findings,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not find that the appellants  had  shown  that  there
    would be a disproportionate breach of Article  ECHR  arising  from  the
    respondent's decision to refuse leave on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

14. The grounds of appeal concede in paragraph 4 that there is no error  in
    the credibility findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  They  maintain,
    however, that in the Article 8  ECHR  proportionality  assessment,  the
    First-tier Tribunal was asked to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    claim that they met the provisions of paragraphs 297 of the Immigration
    Rules. That paragraph allowed for a dependent child to be granted entry
    clearance to come to the UK to be with a  parent.  The  appellants  had
    submitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  their  father  had  sole
    responsibility  for  them  and  could  maintain  and  accommodate  them
    adequately but the decision did not show that  the  Judge  had  made  a
    finding against them on these issues. Failing to do so when  the  point
    was clearly put before him was an error of a point of  law.  The  point
    was material as, if they were found to meet the provisions of paragraph
    297, it was not proportionate for the  appellants  to  be  expected  to
    return to Albania. They relied on  the  principles  from  the  case  of
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and SSHD v Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ  1054.



15. Certainly, in paragraph 60 of the decision,  the  Judge  was  asked  to
    assess whether the appellant's met paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and to take that into account in the proportionality  assessment.
    In paragraph 61 of the  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor
    declined to carry out an assessment of whether paragraphs 297 was  met,
    stating:

         "I give no weight to the submission that Part 8 of the Rules should
         play any part in my assessment of the evidence in this case".

16. This challenge has no merit.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shows very clearly  that  the  evidence  of  the  appellants  on  their
    circumstances in Albania, including  having  been  abandoned  by  their
    mother or being unable to contact her, was not accepted.  Their account
    of their circumstances in Albania and in the UK was rejected  entirely.
    Where those findings stand, it is  not  arguable  that  the  appellants
    could have been  found  to  have  shown  that  their  father  had  sole
    responsibility for  them  or  met  the  maintenance  and  accommodation
    requirements. It was for the appellants to make out their case on these
    provisions and as nothing they said on them was  credible,  it  is  not
    arguable that there was  any  basis  on  which  the  Judge  could  have
    proceeded  to  make  a  Chikwamba/Hayat  assessment  when   considering
    proportionality.

17. For these reasons, I do not find an error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and stands.

Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  30  September
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
