
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19724/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2020                            |On 15 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               BELINDA OPPONG
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal brought with permission from Upper Tribunal  Judge
       Martin sitting as a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
       appellant against a decision of the Secretary of State (by an  Entry
       Clearance Officer) refusing her leave to enter the United Kingdom as
       the child of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.

    2. The application was made with reference to paragraph  279(i)  of  HC
       395  but  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  on  human  rights  grounds.
       Obviously a person who satisfies the requirements of  the  Rules  is
       well on the way to showing that  there  is  no  public  interest  in
       keeping her out of the United Kingdom and there  is,  generally  and
       subject to many qualifications, a public  interest  in  promoting  a
       relationship between a minor child and a parent.

    3. The appellant was born in June  2000.   She  has  now  achieved  her
       majority but she was very nearly  18  when  she  applied  for  entry
       clearance in April 2018.

    4. It is the second time that she has applied for  entry  clearance  as
       the child of  a  person  present  and  settled  there.   An  earlier
       application was made  with  her  elder  brother  and  was  similarly
       unsuccessful.  An appeal against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou in a decision promulgated  on  7
       February 2017.

    5. Judge Martin's main reason for giving permission is:

  "It is arguable that the judge erred in assessing sole responsibility  by
  relying very heavily on an earlier determination, when the appellant  had
  not been represented and failed to give adequate  reasons  for  attaching
  little weight to the considerable volume of evidence before him that  was
  not before the previous judge".

    6. Although reference was made to the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Onoufriou it was not in my papers and I am embarrassed that  I
       did not discover that in the hearing room and I am very grateful  to
       those who assisted me by providing a  copy  the  following  day.   I
       begin by considering Judge Onoufriou's Decision and Reasons  because
       that is the necessary starting point.

    7. Judge Onoufriou noted that there were appeals  by  two  citizens  of
       Ghana against a decision of the respondent in  February  2015.   The
       respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellants'  sponsor,  their
       mother  Agnes  Agyir,  had  had  sole   responsibility   for   their
       upbringing.

    8. Judge Onoufriou summarised the evidence that  was  before  him.   He
       confirmed that the appellant was not  legally  represented  although
       her sponsor and mother had come to speak for her and, after  setting
       out suitable guidance for a lay person representing the interests of
       the appellant, Ms Agnes Agyir gave evidence.  She said that she  had
       had the sole care of the children  including  their  "schooling  and
       upkeep".  She said that their biological father did  not  contribute
       anything to their upbringing at all.  She spoke to her  son  (he  is
       not involved in the present proceedings) nearly every day and to her
       daughter (the present appellant) regularly every Saturday.

    9. She was cross-examined.  She was shown a  letter  from  a  Ms  Hagar
       Annan dated 15 January 2017 which, it was suggested,  asserted  that
       it was Ms Annan who was responsible for the day-to-day care  of  the
       children together with "Mr Oppong".  Ms Agyir  does  not  appear  to
       have answered the question directly but  she  said  that  they  were
       looking after her children in her absence and when the children were
       ill she would send money for medical  treatment  and  that  she  had
       visited Ghana to see her children some  four  or  five  times  since
       arriving in the United Kingdom in 2007.

   10. She said that Hagar Annan was married to one Isaac Oppong.  Ms Annan
       was part of Ms Agyir's extended family but she was not related to Mr
       Isaac Oppong.

   11. There was some evidence from the children's school  suggesting  that
       their father, rather than Mr Isaac Oppong,  was  involved  with  the
       school on their behalf.

   12. Judge Onoufriou's findings are mainly set out at paragraph 15 of the
       Decision.  There he said that the  appellants'  sponsor,  Ms  Agyir,
       came to the United Kingdom in 2007 leaving behind the children  then
       aged 9 and 7 with extended family relatives.  He  noted  it  was  Ms
       Agyir's case that she was maintaining  the  children  and  had  sole
       responsibility regarding their education and general  welfare.   The
       judge found there was no documentary evidence to show any funds were
       sent to Ghana before the date  of  decision.   He  noted  there  was
       evidence of numerous money transfers since the date of decision  but
       he said they could not be taken into account.

   13. Judge Onoufriou noted  there  was  a  letter  of  consent  from  the
       biological father but nothing that confirmed or even  asserted  that
       he had had nothing to do with their upbringing and maintenance.

   14. It was the evidence before Judge Onoufriou that Mr Isaac Oppong  was
       the husband of Ms Annan and was not the  biological  father  of  the
       appellants.  Judge Onoufriou noted that, unsurprisingly,  there  was
       nothing in the DNA evidence that showed that it was Mr Isaac  Oppong
       who attended the school rather than the biological  father.   Indeed
       he noted there was no independent evidence to  show  that  Mr  Isaac
       Oppong and Ms  Annan  were  in  fact  married  or  that  they  lived
       together.  The addresses on the Visa Application Form showed that Ms
       Annan had the  same  address  as  the  appellants  but  on  the  DNA
       declaration forms Mr Isaac Oppong's address was clearly different.

   15. The judge said that he was not satisfied that Mr  Isaac  Oppong  was
       the husband of Ms Annan or that it was Mr Isaac Oppong who  attended
       the appellants' school rather  than  their  biological  father.   He
       regarded this as a "fundamental aspect of the  case"  and  something
       with which the appellants had not dealt.

   16. In summary, although Judge Onoufriou accepted that  the  appellant's
       mother was involved in her life he was not persuaded  that  she  was
       solely responsible for the appellant.   His  main  reason  for  that
       finding is that something from the children's school indicated  they
       had dealings with their  father  and  this  alleged  error  was  not
       explained away to his satisfaction.  There was clear  evidence  that
       Mr Isaac Oppong was not the appellants' biological father but  there
       was also quite clear evidence that he did not  live  with  Ms  Annan
       causing him to doubt that they were married as alleged and to  doubt
       the evidence as a whole.

   17. The application leading to the present appeal was made on  24  April
       2018 and refused on 27 July  2018.   The  reasons  for  refusal  are
       short.  The Entry Clearance Officer was satisfied that  the  sponsor
       did play a part in the appellant's life.  She  sent  her  money  and
       visited her but the Entry Clearance Officer found that the appellant
       had not "established your mother has had and continues to have  sole
       responsibility for your care and upbringing".

   18. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  noted  the  birth  certificate  named
       Maxwell Oppong as the appellant's father and no explanation had been
       provided of his whereabouts or involvement in her life.  Annan Hagar
       was identified as  her  "guardian"  but  the  relationship  was  not
       explained and the Entry  Clearance  Officer  noted  the  Immigration
       Judge's findings and found that concerns in the previous application
       had not been addressed satisfactorily  and  the  appellant  had  not
       established her case.

   19. This decision was upheld on administrative review.

   20. An appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shiner  whose
       Decision and Reasons was promulgated on 19 August 2020. It  is  that
       decision that was challenged before me.

   21. Unremarkably, given the history,  Judge  Shiner  accepted  that  the
       sponsor  has  frequent  contact  with   the   appellant.    He   was
       particularly led to that conclusion by  the  evidence  of  telephone
       contact.

   22. Nevertheless, the judge found it in the appellant's best interest to
       remain in Ghana where she had grown up and understood the culture.

   23. At paragraph 41 of his Decision and Reasons, Judge  Shiner  reminded
       himself expressly that Judge Onoufriou's decision followed a hearing
       where the appellant was not represented.  He noted the major  reason
       for Judge Onoufriou's decision including letters from Ms  Annan  and
       from Isaac Oppong (not the appellant's father).

   24. Judge Onoufriou was not persuaded that Maxwell Oppong  was  not  the
       man who had been identified by the school as  the  person  attending
       there to support the appellant.  There was really nothing before the
       Judge Shiner that addressed that point.

   25. Judge Shiner did consider the evidence  that  was  before  him.   He
       accepted there was evidence  of  money  being  paid  that  "strongly
       supports that the appellant is beneficiary of the monies or some  of
       it and that she lives with Ms Annan".

   26. The judge looked at the invoices from the school where the appellant
       presently attends (not the one whose earlier correspondence may have
       caused difficulties) and noted  that  the  invoice  relates  to  the
       appellant but the receipt does not refer identity Ms Agyir and  does
       not confirm that Ms Agyir paid  the  school  invoices,  merely  that
       money due was paid.  The appellant was identified as the person  who
       paid the money.

   27. The judge looked at the letter from Mallam Church but said  that  it
       was apparent from the letter that it  was  written  to  support  the
       appeal on information from Ms Annan and he regarded  that  as  self-
       supporting.

   28. It is convenient here to look more carefully  at  that  letter.   It
       appears at page 22 in the bundle and comes from Pastor David  Amoani
       of the Christ Apostolic Church International.  It  is  addressed  to
       "Madam Agnes Agyir". The letter  describes  the  appellant's  carer,
       Hagar Annan, as a "devoted member" at Mallam Central Assembly of the
       Christ Apostolic Church International.  He said that Ms Annan  plays
       an active role in the church and it came to the  church's  attention
       that Ms Annan was struggling financially and this  impacted  on  her
       role in the church so the church made enquiries.  The  church  found
       out that Ms Annan  had  five  children  including  "your  biological
       daughter" in the person of Belinda Oppong.  Her husband had left, it
       was making it difficult for them and he was pleading for her to make
       the necessary steps to bring the appellant to  the  United  Kingdom.
       The letter is dated 19 June 2019 and is addressed to the sponsor  in
       the United Kingdom Ms Agnes Agyir.

   29. I find it  surprising  that  the  author  of  the  letter  found  it
       necessary to explain Ms Annan's role in the church if the letter was
       written to someone who was closely involved in the appellant's life.
       She would surely know where the appellant's care attended church if,
       as alleged, it was an important part of her life.

   30. The fourth paragraph of the letter is confusing. It states:

  "The Church Management upon confrontation  comprehended  at  Madam  Hagar
  Annan is having five children including your biological daughter  in  the
  person of Belinda Oppong, making a total number of six children".

   31. I can make no sense of the numbers and again I  find  it  surprising
       that the author of the letter thought  it  appropriate  to  tell  Ms
       Agyir the name of her daughter.

   32. I have to disagree with the judge's synopsis  to  a  limited  extent
       because it does not acknowledge that it  is  the  assertion  in  the
       letter that there was something about Ms Annan's behaviour that made
       the church concerned but it is clearly right  that  the  explanation
       came entirely from Ms Annan and was not something the church was  in
       any position to endorse or comment upon and the problem was lack  of
       money  following  the  break-up  of  Ms  Annan's   marriage.    Read
       carefully, this really does not say very much  about  whether  there
       was sole responsibility exercised by the sponsor which is what  this
       appeal is all about.

   33. Judge Shiner noted there was money transfer to  the  appellant  from
       her brother Christian Oppong and this did not illuminate  the  issue
       of sole responsibility.

   34. The judge then considered a letter from Dr Edusa saying the  sponsor
       settled  the  medical  bills  for  the  appellant.   The  judge  was
       surprised that that was not before the first Tribunal  and  directed
       himself to "treat with circumspection" a letter that could have been
       produced earlier.  However, this is a letter which on the face of it
       confirms that the sponsor has been involved in the appellant's life.
        It says that the appellant has reported occasionally for  treatment
       and that Agnes Agyir pays the bills.  This is  evidence  that  Agnes
       Agyir is involved in the life of the  child  which  has  never  been
       doubted as far I can see.  It is not evidence that  she  was  solely
       responsible, merely that from the vantage point  of  a  job  in  the
       United Kingdom she picked up the medical bills.

   35. The judge then looked at the letter  from  the  most  recent  school
       where the appellant attended.  This is at page 19 of the bundle  and
       comes from the Methodist Girls High School.   It  is  dated  28  May
       2019.  This says that Agnes Agyir  has  been  paying  for  Belinda's
       education and contacts the school.  She also contacts the school  to
       discuss her daughter's progress.  The judge found that it "conflicts
       with the invoice receipt" because the receipt does not identify  the
       sponsor but nevertheless accepts that the sponsor is involved in her
       daughter's life.  This is clearly what the judge means by  accepting
       the "general tenor" of the evidence.  This is evidence showing  that
       the sponsor is involved in  the  life  of  the  child.   It  is  not
       evidence showing that she is solely responsible.

   36. The  judge  also  looked  at  a  report  to  the  police  about  the
       disappearance of Maxwell Oppong.  Not very much can be deduced  from
       this.  It is clearly evidence of a report but it is  not  supportive
       or corroborative evidence that the person Maxwell Oppong has in fact
       disappeared.  The judge explained at paragraph 49 that  he  was  not
       persuaded that Maxwell Oppong is not a  significant  figure  in  the
       appellant's life and therefore not persuaded  that  the  appellant's
       sponsor was the sole parent with responsibility.

   37. He dismissed the appeal.

   38. There was no evidence from the school that wrote  the  first  letter
       that caused the trouble offering any explanation for,  it  is  said,
       wrongly identifying the  appellant's  father.   I  am  uncomfortable
       making too much of a document that is not before  me  but  a  school
       will ordinarily know the identity of the parents of children in  its
       care  and  if,  carelessly  or  otherwise,  it  had  given  a  wrong
       impression in important correspondence, the general  professionalism
       of teachers is such that it is something they would want to correct.
        This is a gap in the case.   The  gap  does  not  of  itself  prove
       anything but it does show that there was a problem in  the  original
       appeal that has not been addressed in the obvious way.

   39. I have reflected carefully on this and on Mr Swain's submissions but
       this is not a case where the judge has misdirected himself.  He  has
       made up his mind on the evidence  that  was  before  him  using  the
       previous decision as a starting point.

   40. I do not accept that the judge gave  undue  weight  to  the  earlier
       decision. It had to be considered but the  subsequent  evidence  was
       also considered fairly.

   41. Having reflected on these things I am satisfied that the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge has not erred in law. He was entitled  to  reach  the
       conclusions that he did for the reasons that he gave.

Notice of Decision

   42. I dismiss the appeal against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.





                              Jonathan Perkins


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 November 2020               |








