
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19067/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2020                   |On 28 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MML
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buchanan promulgated on 4 March  2020,  in  which  MML's
    appeal against the decision to refuse a  human  rights  claim  dated  5
    September 2018 was allowed.  For  ease  I  continue  to  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with  MML  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 10 October  2006,  who
    first entered the  United  Kingdom  on  10  November  2009  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 1 dependent, with leave to remain as sycg valid  to
    3 March 2011.  The Appellant was granted subsequent leave to remain  as
    a dependent child of a Tier  1  migrant  on  further  occasions  to  26
    February  2016.   The  Appellant's  father  made  an  application   for
    indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1 migrant, including the Appellant
    as a dependent child which was initially refused on 20  March  2018,  a
    decision which was upheld on Administrative Review on 1  May  2018  but
    subsequently withdrawn following an  application  for  Judicial  Review
    lodged by the Appellant's father on  1 May,  settled  by  an  agreement
    approved on 5 April 2019.  It was anticipated initially  that  a  fresh
    decision would be made within three months but  the  decision  was  not
    taken until 14 August  2020,  to  refuse  the  application  and  it  is
    understood that an appeal against refusal remains  pending  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent's position before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that as a  dependent  on  her  father's  application,  the
    Appellant continued to benefit from section 3C of the  Immigration  Act
    1971 such that she had continuing leave to remain on the  same  grounds
    as previously.

 3. In the interim, whilst the Appellant's father pursued a remedy  against
    the  refusal  of  his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to   remain
    (including the  Appellant  as  a  dependent),  the  Appellant  made  an
    application in her own right  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds 16 May 2018.  The refusal of that application  on  5  September
    2018 is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not meet any of the requirements for a grant of leave to  remain  under
    either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  for  a
    grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Specifically, although
    the Appellant was under the age of 18 and lived continuously in  United
    Kingdom for the last seven years, the  Respondent  considered  that  it
    would be reasonable for her to leave the United Kingdom as she would be
    returning home with her parents and sibling as part of  a  family  unit
    (as at the date of decision, the application for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain had been determined as refused and that  decision  had  not  yet
    been withdrawn) and had resided in  Pakistan  for  three  years  before
    travelling to the United Kingdom.

 5.  The  Respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances for a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration
    Rules, which included a consideration of  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant but did not consider that there were any.  The best interests
    of the Appellant were considered to be to remain with her  parents  and
    to return to Pakistan with them (as above, at the date of decision they
    had no leave to remain and as it was prior to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    refusal of the application for indefinite leave  to  remain,  were  not
    considered to benefit from section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act  1971),
    where she would be able to access education, where  she  had  at  least
    some awareness of the language and culture, speaking  Urdu  and  having
    visited Pakistan in 2014.

 6. Judge Buchanan allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 4  March
    2020 on human rights grounds, primarily on the basis that the Appellant
    satisfied  the  requirements  in   paragraph   276ADE(1)(iv)   of   the
    Immigration  Rules,  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  I  return  below  to  the  more
    detailed reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal in  support  of  that
    conclusion.



The appeal

 7. The Respondent appeals on two grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made a mistake as to a material fact which amounted
    to an error of law.  This was that the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the
    appeal  on  the  factual  basis  that  the  Appellant's   father,   and
    potentially the family, would be forced to return to Pakistan  if  this
    Appellant's appeal were to be dismissed.  However, as recognised by the
    First-tier Tribunal in its decision, the Appellant had continuing leave
    to remain pursuant to section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971,  as  did
    all of her immediate family members in the United Kingdom and would not
    be removed unless and until her father's application, on which she  was
    a dependent,  was  refused  and  he  became  appeal  rights  exhausted.
    Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal made a material misdirection  in
    law in artificially separating the evidence and  consideration  of  it.
    The First-tier Tribunal  proceeded  on  a  misinterpretation  that  the
    Appellant would  be  separated  from  her  family,  without  sufficient
    information as to the Appellant's father's application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain and a failure to  carry  out  a  proper  assessment  of
    proportionality  with  the  assumption  that  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining a fair and just system of immigration had been devalued  by
    the delay in decision making on that other application.   Further,  the
    First-tier Tribunal had made expressly clear within the  decision  that
    it  did  not  have  sufficient  information  relating  to  the   family
    circumstances in Pakistan upon which to assess the likely situation  of
    the Appellant on return there, such that the best interests  assessment
    was not made on a full assessment of the facts.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kekic  on  9
    June 2020, which included directions in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions against the spread of Covid-19 and a preliminary view  that
    it would in this case be  appropriate  to  determine  (i)  whether  the
    making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of  an
    error of law, and (ii) if so, whether that would decision should be set
    aside; without a hearing.  A timetable for responses from  the  parties
    both as to substance and procedure was then set out.   Those  deadlines
    were amended by an Upper Tribunal lawyer on 24 July 2020, requiring the
    Appellant to make written submissions by on the grounds of appeal by  5
    August 2020 and the Respondent to file any written submissions in reply
    by 19 August 2020.

 9. On 17 August 2020, the Appellant's solicitors noted that no submissions
    had been received on behalf of the Respondent and  requested  that  the
    appeal be struck out due  to  non-compliance  with  the  directions  in
    accordance with rule 8 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008.  In the alternative, an extension of  time  was  sought  for  the
    Appellant to make written submissions by 26 August 2020.

10. On behalf of the Respondent it was explained  that  there  had  earlier
    been an administrative difficulty during the adapted working conditions
    pursuant to precautions to prevent the spread  of  Covid-19  such  that
    there was an oversight of the original directions dated  9  June  2020.
    Written submissions were however made by the Respondent  on  18  August
    2020, which although on their face  accept  that  they  are  late,  are
    actually within the amended directions dated  24  July  2020.   On  the
    basis that they were in fact in time in  accordance  with  the  amended
    directions, there is no basis to strike out the  appeal  in  accordance
    with rule 8 as requested.

11. On 31 August 2020, the Respondent filed written submissions in relation
    to the appeal.  I extend time for the same, given the rather  difficult
    procedural history of this matter in the wider circumstances and Covid-
    19 restrictions which have  caused  difficulties  to  all.   It  is  of
    benefit to the Upper Tribunal to take into account written  submissions
    from both parties in this appeal.

12. The written submissions made by both parties deal with the substance of
    the appeal and neither raise any objection to the determination of  the
    error of law issues without a hearing.

13. In my view, this is a case in which it is suitable for  the  issues  of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision materially erred in law  and
    if so, whether the decision should be set aside, to  be  determined  on
    the papers on the basis of the written submissions made.   This  is  in
    light of the unprecedented circumstances surrounding Covid-19  and  the
    need to take precautions to prevent the spread of the  disease;  is  in
    accordance with the overriding objective for the Upper Tribunal to deal
    with cases fairly and justly in rule 2(1), (2) and (4) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  in  circumstances  where
    detailed written submissions have been  made  by  both  parties.   This
    decision has therefore been made under rule 34.

14. The written submissions on behalf of the Respondent continued  to  rely
    on the written grounds of appeal  and  made  the  following  additional
    points.  The Respondent reiterated that in accordance with the  Supreme
    Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53, the assessment of whether it  is  reasonable
    to expect a qualifying child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  must  be
    assessed in the real world situation in which the child  finds  him  or
    herself and that in the present case the First-tier Tribunal has simply
    not done this, instead considering the appeal on the fiction  that  the
    Appellant would be removed alone whilst her father and the rest of  her
    family await the outcome of the application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  This is in circumstances where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    previously  and  appropriately  awaited  the  outcome  of  the  earlier
    decision then proceeded to determine this appeal contrary to the wishes
    of the parties.

15. The Respondent submits that the error  as  to  the  real  situation  is
    perpetuated in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  by  considering
    as part of its assessment on reasonableness,  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant's father having to choose between pursuing his own status  by
    remaining in the United Kingdom pending a decision and any  appeal,  or
    accompanying the Appellant  on  return  to  Pakistan.   The  Respondent
    submits that this is  not  only  speculative  of  the  outcome  of  the
    application but also ignores the fact that the Appellant is a dependent
    on the same application.

16. Further, the First-tier Tribunal assessed the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant in the absence of any information about  what  the  situation
    might be for her on return to Pakistan, such that it was found to be in
    her best interests to remain in the United Kingdom.   It  is  submitted
    that that conclusion was wholly unreasoned, despite  the  reference  to
    the Appellant's father not being called to give  any  evidence  on  the
    situation.  The Respondent suggests that  the  family  have  pursued  a
    strategy to seek status for the Appellant to protect  the  position  of
    the remaining family members, on the unrealistic pretext that she would
    have to return to Pakistan alone.

17. In written submissions on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  the  appeal  is
    opposed.  It is noted that the First-tier Tribunal decided  to  proceed
    to determine this appeal rather  than  delay  it  further  pending  the
    outcome of the Appellant's father's application which had not,  at  the
    time of the hearing, been determined.  The submissions then set out the
    procedural history and challenges brought by the Appellant's father  in
    relation  to  the  application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and
    criticise the delays in that process and what is understood to  be  the
    Respondent's  suggestion  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    delayed consideration of the present appeal, with the consequences that
    the Appellant would potentially be committing a  criminal  offence  for
    overstaying in the United Kingdom for an indeterminate period.

18. The Appellant submits that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    not only an assessment of whether the Appellant may be removed from the
    United Kingdom alone,  but  also  whether  a  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the state of limbo in which she was required to live was
    necessary to protect rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  Reference is made to the Respondent's  position  that
    the Appellant has continuing leave under section 3C of the  Immigration
    Act 1971, but no reference was  made  to  any  of  the  other  negative
    restrictions upon the Appellant that arise from such status,  including
    uncertainty as to her  future.   It  is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that it is clear that the First-tier Tribunal dealt with  the
    case on this basis, which was an eminently sensible  one  in  the  best
    interests of the child.

19. In relation to potential evidence  from  the  Appellant's  father,  the
    Appellant submits that the onus was on the Respondent to establish that
    her decision to refuse leave to remain was a proportionate one  and  if
    the evidence of the Appellant's father about possible circumstances  on
    return to Pakistan was  considered  to  be  important,  the  Respondent
    should herself have called him as a witness.

20. Overall,  when  considering  whether  removal  in  consequence  of  the
    decision would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998, it is not necessary for any  such  removal  to  be  imminent  and
    overall, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  reach  a  conclusion
    that it did as a matter of  law  and  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    decision.

Findings and reasons

 1. In consideration of both grounds of appeal, it is necessary  to  return
    to the detail of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the  basis
    upon which it proceeded to make its assessment not  only  of  the  best
    interests of the Appellant as a child, but also as to  whether  it  was
    reasonable for her to be expected to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    First-tier Tribunal sets out the basic legal framework in paragraphs 10
    to 14 of the decision, including  express  reference  to  authority  on
    whether it is reasonable to expect a  qualifying  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and the expectation that it would normally be reasonable
    for a child to be with his or her parents, with consideration therefore
    needing to be given as to where the parents are expected to be.

 2. In consideration of the best interests of the Appellant, the First-tier
    Tribunal identifies that there needs to be an assessment about  whether
    the Appellant's best interests are to remain in the United  Kingdom  or
    return to Pakistan and notes that there is only limited evidence  about
    the  likely  circumstances  in  Pakistan  on  which  to  determine  the
    question, with little weight being given to the written statement  from
    the Appellant's father as he did not give oral evidence, despite  being
    present at the hearing.  In paragraph 18 of the decision, prior to  any
    detailed analysis of the immigration status of the Appellant or any  of
    her family members and prior to any detailed analysis of the  evidence,
    however limited, that was available, the First-tier Tribunal  concludes
    that there would be  inevitable  disruption  to  the  Appellant's  life
    caused by a move to Pakistan, which would be unwanted  and  undesirable
    for the point of view the whole family, following which it is concluded
    that the Appellant's best interests are to remain as an  integral  part
    of her family as presently constituted and for her  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  No further reasons for this conclusion  are  given  at
    this point in the decision.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal go on  to  consider  the  Appellant's  parent's
    immigration status in paragraphs 19 to 22 of  the  decision,  with  the
    conclusion that they continue to  have  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to
    section  3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   There  is  no   further
    consideration as to whether they are therefore expected  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom or return to Pakistan, or whether it is  simply  not
    possible to be certain either way pending a decision and any subsequent
    appeal (if the decision is adverse) on the application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain.

 4. There is no express recognition at this point that  the  Appellant  was
    also a dependent on the  same  application  and,  as  accepted  by  the
    Respondent (and on behalf of the Appellant in  written  submissions  to
    the Upper Tribunal), would also therefore currently have  to  leave  to
    remain by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971.   Although
    there is reference to the Appellant having always exercised  her  right
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a child  dependent  on  her  parents
    (paragraph 34  of  the  decision),  there  is  no  assessment  or  even
    consideration of whether she continues to be dependent on her  parent's
    application (or the implications thereof) and instead it  is  concluded
    that the real-life context in which the present application is made  is
    that the application is made by a child who depends on the care of  her
    parents for her own personal welfare.  That is not on  all  fours  with
    the real-life context envisaged by the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria),
    which is more of a factual question as to where the family are expected
    to be.

 5. I pause to note at this stage that there does not appear to  have  been
    any consideration by the First-tier Tribunal, or by either party, as to
    whether  in  fact  the  Appellant  can  have  two   simultaneous   live
    applications for leave to remain, first, as a dependent on her father's
    application for indefinite leave to remain and second in her  own  name
    on human rights grounds.  The  parties  appear  to  accept  that  there
    remains a live application as well as the present appeal, but the First-
    tier Tribunal does not express any view or even  consider  it.   It  is
    clear that the situation has arisen that there was apparently two  live
    applications arising  from  the  procedural  history  of  the  separate
    application for Judicial Review  which  led  to  the  quashing  of  the
    original refusal of indefinite  leave  to  remain  to  the  Appellant's
    father and his dependents, including the Appellant, after  the  present
    application on human rights grounds made by the Appellant and after the
    second application was refused.

 6. However, no one appears to  have  turned  their  mind  to  the  obvious
    difficulty that multiple applications are contrary to the  requirements
    of paragraph 34BB of the Immigration Rules (which expressly states that
    a person may have only one outstanding application at a time) and  that
    a person may not vary an application for leave  to  remain  when  their
    leave has been extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration  Act
    1971.  This  and  the  Appellant's  immigration  status  generally  are
    matters which the First-tier Tribunal should have considered  and  made
    findings on as being of significance to the  assessment  both  of  best
    interests  and  reasonableness,   as   well   as   the   wider   family
    circumstances.

 7. Returning to the structure of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    following the section on the Appellant's parent's  immigration  status,
    the   First-tier   Tribunal   considers   the   Appellant's    specific
    circumstances in paragraphs 23 to 31 of the decision.   The  first  two
    paragraphs set out the written evidence  of  the  Appellant's  parents,
    that the Appellant and the  family  are  well  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom, progressing in education and with extremely  limited  ties  to
    Pakistan and the consideration of the United Kingdom  as  home.   There
    are extended family members in both the United  Kingdom  and  Pakistan.
    There follows detailed consideration of an opinion from  Dr  Ul-Hassan,
    which is highly critical  given  the  author's  lack  of  knowledge  or
    reference to the likely circumstances in Pakistan for the Appellant and
    lack of reasons for the opinions expressed; such that little weight  is
    given  to  the  evidence,  found  overall  to  be  lacking  in  factual
    foundation and being speculative.

 8. Upon reading this section of the decision and in  the  absence  of  any
    detailed  evidence  or  reasoning  as   to   the   Appellant's   likely
    circumstances on return to Pakistan, it is impossible to understand the
    earlier conclusion of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  it  is  in  the
    Appellant's best interest to remain in the United Kingdom.   There  has
    simply not been a balanced assessment of where her best  interests  lie
    by reference to the likely circumstances in  one  country  compared  to
    another.  The same can be said  of  the  assessment  of  reasonableness
    which comes later in the decision.

 9. In its conclusion on this section, contained in paragraphs 32 to 40  of
    the decision, the First-tier Tribunal reiterates that little weight  is
    given to the Appellant's father's evidence and also to the  opinion  of
    Dr Ul-Hassan; and confirms the context of the Appellant being  a  child
    dependent on the care of her parents.  In paragraph 35  the  First-tier
    Tribunal poses the question to be answered with regards  to  the  real-
    life context as follows: "would it be reasonable to expect  a  13  year
    old child to leave the UK in circumstances in  which  the  father  (and
    head of the appellant's household) has lived in the UK for more than 10
    years with valid leave to do so; and who, more than three  years  after
    submission,  awaits  the  outcome  of  his  separate  application   for
    indefinite leave to remain?".  There is then reference  to  the  period
    that the Appellant's father's application has  been  outstanding  since
    2016, with the conclusion that no decision is imminent and  recognition
    that the parents continued to  have  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  What  follows,  is  speculation  that  no  decision  will  be
    forthcoming and/or the decision will be refused,  with  an  in  country
    right of appeal and on the assumption that the Appellant is required to
    return to Pakistan now, her father would have to  return  with  her  to
    avoid fracturing the family unit with the  consequence  that  he  would
    probably be denied the chance to appeal refusal of his application  for
    indefinite leave to remain; or that his continuous  residence  for  the
    purposes of indefinite leave to remain would be broken.

10. In paragraph 39 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal concludes: "In
    the  foregoing   circumstances,   taking   the   father's   outstanding
    application alone, I'm not persuaded that it would  be  reasonable  for
    the appellant to leave  the  UK  as  at  the  date  of  this  appeal.".
    Although in the following paragraph, the First-tier  Tribunal  purports
    to weigh the circumstances of the Appellant in terms of her own private
    life developed in the United Kingdom, it is again  said  that  material
    weight is attached to the Respondent's delay in making  a  decision  on
    the Appellant's father's application for  which  it  is  inferred  that
    effective immigration control for  this  family  has  not  warranted  a
    decision in more than three years.

11. These two paragraphs show that the First-tier Tribunal  has  determined
    that it would be unreasonable to expect  the  Appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom for the sole, or at least primary reason, that there has
    been a delay by the Respondent in determining her father's  application
    for indefinite leave to remain, which could not be effectively  pursued
    if the Appellant were required to leave the United  Kingdom.   Contrary
    to the clear authority that any assessment of  reasonableness  must  be
    focused on the position of the child, the reasoning is focused in  this
    case not on the Appellant but primarily on the perceived  interests  of
    her father.   The conclusion is also,  again  on  the  earlier  assumed
    premise, that the Appellant would  be  required  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom if the application/appeal were not successful, alone and  prior
    to the determination of the application for indefinite leave to remain.



12. However, as above, there was no consideration at all that the Appellant
    herself was dependent  on  that  application  with  the  protection  of
    section 3C leave pending any decision and right of appeal  against  the
    refusal.  In these circumstances, the Appellant has a continuing  right
    to remain in the  United  Kingdom  pending  resolution  of  that  other
    application, which if ultimately successful results in a further  grant
    of leave to remain in her favour and if unsuccessful, would lead to the
    situation that none of the family have a right to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and would be returning to Pakistan together as a  family  unit.
    That is the actual real-life factual  situation  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should have considered and not the  hypothetical,  speculative
    one focused on  matters  clearly  relevant  to  but  extraneous  to  an
    assessment focusing on this Appellant's circumstances.

13. The First-tier Tribunal then concludes that  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules at the
    date  of  application  in  May  2018  when  the  Appellant's   father's
    application for indefinite leave to remain had  been  refused  but  not
    lawfully.  The First-tier Tribunal then suggest that the  factors  were
    less cogently applicable after May 2018, but that the requirements were
    still met at the date of hearing.  The decision  ends  with  a  lengthy
    section running to nearly 5 pages relating specifically to  Article  8,
    unnecessarily so given that it is now trite that if a person  satisfies
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, an appeal should be  allowed
    on human rights grounds.

14. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred in  law
    in its assessment of both the best interests  of  the  Appellant  as  a
    child and whether it would be reasonable to expect  her  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom by (i) failing to have regard to the  accepted  position
    between the parties that the Appellant has continuing leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 1 child dependent pursuant to section 3C of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 pending final determination of her  father's  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain which includes her as a dependent;  together
    with speculation about the outcome of that application; (ii) failing to
    balance the lack of evidence about the Appellant's likely circumstances
    on return to Pakistan, despite the express finding that  little  weight
    was to be attached to the Appellant's father's evidence and that of  Dr
    Ul-Hassan,  when  concluding  that  it  was  in  the  Appellant's  best
    interests to remain in the United Kingdom and not reasonable for her to
    leave; and (iii) in focusing on the Appellant's father's  circumstances
    and the Respondent's  delay  in  making  a  decision  on  the  separate
    application for indefinite leave to remain as the sole, if not  primary
    reason for finding that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules were met.  The First-tier Tribunal  proceeded  on
    the wrong factual basis, without a balanced assessment including likely
    circumstances on  return  to  Pakistan,  and  asked  itself  the  wrong
    question about the real life context.

15. I have rejected the written submissions made on behalf of the Appellant
    for the following reasons.   First,  there  is  no  suggestion  of  the
    Appellant potentially committing a criminal   offence  for  overstaying
    whilst awaiting the final outcome of  the  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain because, as accepted by the  Appellant,  she,  together
    with her other family members, benefit from continuing leave to  remain
    on the same basis as before pursuant to section 3C of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.

16. Secondly, there are no identifiable negative restrictions as  a  result
    of her leave to remain continuing on that basis, as she is entitled  to
    continue living in the United Kingdom lawfully  as  before.   The  only
    adverse consequence suggested is uncertainty as to her future, but that
    applies to all of her family in any event and to some extent there will
    be uncertainty following the outcome of this separate appeal  given  at
    most, it could lead to the grant  of  a  limited  period  of  leave  to
    remain.  It is also unclear that the Appellant relied on any such claim
    that her current status was itself  sufficient  to  engage,  let  alone
    breach Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

17. Thirdly, even there was a limbo situation or negative  consequences  of
    section 3C leave, even on a generous reading, it cannot  be  said  that
    the First-tier Tribunal  considered  the  appeal  on  this  alternative
    basis.  To the contrary, for the reasons set out above, they failed  to
    consider the Appellant's immigration status at all  and  there  are  no
    references to any state of limbo or any negative consequences  for  the
    Appellant.

18. Fourthly, in relation in  particular  to  an  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child, there is no strict burden on  either  party  to
    establish matters either way; but it is a fact finding exercise and for
    the purposes of establishing that a person meets  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, the burden is on the applicant.  The  suggestion
    that the Respondent should  have  in  these  circumstances  called  the
    Appellant's father to give evidence (likely  to  be  possible  only  by
    formal application for a witness summons) on the  likely  circumstances
    in Pakistan misunderstands the nature of an appeal  such  as  this  and
    where a person has made a written statement but  chooses  not  to  give
    oral evidence or be tendered  for  cross-examination.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in attaching  little  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    father's evidence in these circumstances.

19. Finally, whilst removal may not need to be imminent for an appeal to be
    allowed on human rights grounds; in this case the  First-tier  Tribunal
    proceeded wrongly on the basis that it was imminent for this  Appellant
    despite the outstanding application for indefinite leave to remain  for
    her and her family members.  As the parties both now accept, there  was
    no imminent prospect of removal and on the facts, no realistic prospect
    at all of the Appellant being removed to Pakistan alone.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    such that it is necessary to set aside the decision and for the  appeal
    to be heard de novo.  Given that since the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  there  has  now  been  a  decision  on  the  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain and  I  understand  an  appeal  now  pending
    against that decision; it is appropriate to remit this  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for further consideration as  to  whether  the  two
    appeals should appropriately be linked and  heard  together  given  the
    overlapping  factual  issues  and   to   prevent   further   divergence
    procedurally between the separate applications and  decisions  relating
    to the same family members; which arguably  led  to  a  number  of  the
    issues in the decision before me and could have been avoided.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before any Judge except  Judge
Buchanan.  As above, it is expected that the First-tier Tribunal  will  give
directions as to the further listing of this appeal,  including  whether  it
should be joined or linked to  the  appeal  against  refusal  of  indefinite
leave to remain.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         23rd October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

