
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN/FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19232/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2021                     |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                             duane justin davis
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken instructed by UK Migration Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Trinidad and  Tobago.   He  appealed  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of   4
    September 2018 refusing a human rights claim.

2.   The judge noted the appellant's immigration history.   He  had  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 28 June 2005 (at which time he  was  22  years
    old) with entry clearance as a working holidaymaker valid  to  27  June
    2007.  He had subsequent periods of leave as a spouse but  applications
    for leave after the most recent grant of leave expired on 28  September
    2002 were refused.

3.   The appellant was convicted at Aylesbury Crown Court on 15 August  2017
    of possessing with intent to supply a controlled drug, class A - heroin
    and possessing with intent to supply a controlled drug, class A - crack
    cocaine, for which he was subsequently sentenced  to  fourteen  months'
    imprisonment.  The judge noted that given the  length  of  imprisonment
    imposed in accordance with paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules  the
    public  interest  required  the  appellant's  deportation   unless   an
    exception to deportation applied.  The judge noted  the  terms  of  the
    exceptions at paragraph 399 and paragraph 399A.

4.   The appellant stated that he had family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with his three children.  It was accepted that he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with them, and that it would be unduly
    harsh for the children to live in Trinidad and Tobago.  The  respondent
    however did not accept that it would be unduly harsh for  the  children
    to remain in the United Kingdom even though the appellant was deported.
     It was not accepted that he was  socially  and  culturally  integrated
    into the United Kingdom due to his  criminal  conviction,  and  it  was
    considered that he still  had  social,  cultural  and  family  ties  in
    Trinidad and Tobago.  Also the respondent did  not  accept  that  there
    were very compelling circumstances  which  would  outweigh  the  public
    interest in seeing the appellant being deported.

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant who also  adopted  his
    statement.

6.   The judge went on then to set out the relevant legal provisions and  to
    make findings of fact.  He noted the test set out in Hesham Ali  [2016]
    UKSC 60 and MF (Nigeria) [2014] 1 WLR 544.  He set  out  the  terms  of
    paragraph 399 and paragraph 399A.  He also reminded himself of the need
    to consider Section 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  He set out the guidance in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53  and
    in PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.  He noted the submission  on  the
    appellant's behalf that it would be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without him and that there would  be  very
    compelling circumstances which would outweigh the  public  interest  in
    his deportation by reference to his relationship with his partner Ms B,
    and her children.

7.   With regards to the appellant's family circumstances, after  coming  to
    the United Kingdom he had married  a  British  citizen  Ms  A-D.   That
    relationship had now broken down and he was now in a relationship  with
    Ms B.  He has three British children with his wife,  born  respectively
    in 2007, 2009 and 2015.  He said in his statement that he  was  heavily
    involved in the lives of his children and had always ensured that their
    needs were met.  He said that prior to his imprisonment  and  when  his
    relationship with his wife was ongoing he resided with them on a  full-
    time permanent basis.  After he left the family home he still saw  them
    daily and would take them and pick the up from school several  times  a
    week, take them out on family trips and even while he was in prison  he
    ensured that his current partner gave them money, purchased items  that
    they needed and gave them presents on birthdays and special  occasions.
    He said that he spoke to his children on a regular basis  although  due
    to an error by the prison services the children  were  not  allowed  to
    visit him while he was in prison.  Since his release he saw  them  more
    or less daily.

8.   The appellant also referred  to  the  behaviour  of  the  eldest  child
    deteriorating during the time when the  appellant  was  in  prison  and
    since  his release he had been spending as much time with him  and  the
    other children as possible and the child's behaviour was now  improving
    although there was a long way to go.  He also referred to the fact that
    Ms A-D had been suffering from a deterioration in her mental health and
    social services had concerns about the care of the  children.   He  was
    concerned that they were living in overcrowded circumstances and stated
    that if he was allowed to remain in the United Kingdom he would  obtain
    full care of his children to ensure they were provided  with  a  stable
    home.

9.   His relationship with Ms B had begun in 2013, although they had  had  a
    break during which he had conceived the youngest child with  his  wife.
    He and Ms B had reconciled and had  been  living  together  since  2014
    until his incarceration.  He was not presently living with her  due  to
    bail conditions, but wished to resume cohabitation with her.   She  has
    two children from a previous relationship for whom he cares.   He  said
    that he supported his partner  and  her  children  and  they  would  be
    unwilling to relocate to Trinidad and Tobago.

10.  The appellant had said that he had resolved to change his ways  and  he
    could not imagine spending  lengthy  periods  of  time  away  from  his
    children again.  He had not been back to Trinidad and Tobago  since  he
    entered the United Kingdom.

11.  In his oral evidence he said he saw  the  children  every  weekend  and
    would go to the cinema or park and sometimes saw them in  the  evenings
    after school.  There was no new court order  but  social  services  had
    given the go ahead for him to have contact.

12.  The appellant  was  sentenced  to  twenty  weeks'  imprisonment  and  a
    restraining order  on  24  October  2016  for  an  offence  of  battery
    committed in May of that year.  This, it appears from paragraph  77  of
    the judge's decision, was in consequence of an assault he made  on  his
    wife  which  resulted  in  the  restraining  order  and  the  appellant
    confirmed that that was still in place and  he  could  not  go  to  the
    children's school although his son now went to a different  school  and
    he was going to go to a forthcoming parents' evening.

13.  The three children currently live with their mother  in  a  one-bedroom
    property with her nephew and her mother and there were serious concerns
    regarding overcrowding.  He said that she did not cope very  well  with
    raising the children due to her medical conditions and her  depression,
    and social services had  been  involved.   He  said  that  if  he  were
    deported this would have a negative impact on the children as they  got
    anxious and worried that they would not see him again and when  he  had
    gone to prison his son had started to act up as he had  no  other  male
    role model.

14.  Ms B was not at court as her eldest daughter was ill  and  she  had  to
    stay home with her.  The appellant said that while  in  prison  he  was
    responsible for the children's financial needs as in 2016 he resumed  a
    relationship with his father and his father sent  money.   He  did  not
    want to leave his children in the United Kingdom without a  father  and
    did not want them to have to be provided for by the  state.   He  still
    had a bank card provided to him by his father and would be able to  use
    this in Trinidad and Tobago.  He saw the children at weekends and  also
    after school if they wanted to see him.

15.  Ms A-D provided a statement of March 2016 stating  that  the  appellant
    had parental responsibility and he would take and collect the  children
    to and from school and attended school plays and parents' evenings.  In
    a letter of 29 November 2019 she said  that  the  appellant  played  an
    important role in the children's lives and they were  working  together
    for the children's best interests and it was imperative for him  to  be
    given the opportunity to continue to provide  financial  and  emotional
    support to raise the children into responsible adults.

16.  She also said that she  had  recently  been  diagnosed  with  a  severe
    medical condition and had been hospitalised  for  a  few  weeks  during
    which time the appellant played an important and  significant  role  in
    the lives of the children.

17.  Ms B stated she was the appellant's  partner  and  mother  of  his  two
    stepchildren and they had been living together since 2014 to  the  time
    when he went to prison and would be living together  now  but  for  his
    bail condition.  She said that he was a devoted father to the  children
    who doted on him and her children's biological father was not around as
    he had been in prison and the appellant was the only father  figure  in
    her children's lives.  She feared what would happen to her  family  and
    her partner's biological children if he was unable  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as her children had already  suffered  emotionally  with
    the separation from her partner, and she believed it would be extremely
    upsetting for all concerned if he were required  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom permanently.  She said that she could care for and support  her
    children but the appellant's biological children did not have the ideal
    family life and  social  services  had  been  informed  and  they  were
    concerned about the children and the mother's mental health.  She  said
    that she would never go to live in Trinidad and  Tobago  or  allow  the
    children to relocate there and it would not be in their best  interests
    to live there or be separated from their  father  and  she  wanted  her
    partner to play an active role in the lives of the children.

18.  The judge also had letters from the appellant's two older children  who
    spoke of their  love  for  their  father  and  the  strength  of  their
    relationship with him.  The judge also  had  a  letter  from  a  social
    worker at the Family  Support  Child  Protection  Team  of  the  London
    Borough of Lambeth.  She said that she was the allocated social  worker
    for the appellant's three  children  who  were  subjected  to  a  Child
    Protection Plan on 30 April 2019 under  the  category  of  neglect  and
    subsequently stepped down to the Child in Need Plan on 5 November  2019
    due to the children no longer being at significant harm.  She confirmed
    that the Appellant had had regular contact with his children  since  he
    came out of prison, valued his relationship and contact with  them  and
    played an active role in their lives.  She said that Ms  A-D  had  been
    open and honest regarding the amount of contact the appellant  had  had
    and said that the children were always on the phone to their father and
    that he had been a positive influence in their lives and had also  been
    a great support to her and the maternal grandmother  when  she  was  in
    hospital.  She said it was clear when working with  the  children  that
    they valued their relationship with their father and often spoke  about
    him and the activities they did together  and  the  appellant  provided
    emotional and financial support for the children and provided them with
    essential things for school and everyday use.

19.  There was also a letter from the  Probation  Services  in  Lambeth  who
    confirmed that the appellant was reporting regularly and there were  no
    concerns or issues with regard to supervision.  She noted that  he  was
    very remorseful about the offence he committed and had  abstained  from
    any form of drug use and had not shown any signs that he  would  return
    to that lifestyle and was very motivated to  keep  a  positive  healthy
    behaviour for the sake of his children and was a positive role model to
    them and had been taking his parental skills seriously and taking  care
    of  the  children.   She  said  that  he  had  shown  great  signs   of
    rehabilitation and readiness and willingness to change his life  around
    for the betterment of himself and  the  children  and  that  given  the
    chance he would continue to do well and in turn  become  an  upstanding
    and productive member of society.

20.   The  judge  noted  that  the  decision  letter  did  not  address  the
    appellant's current partner or her two  children  and  the  appellant's
    relationship with them.  The evidence was that they had nothing  to  do
    with their father but the judge noted that  he  had  not  received  any
    reports in relation to the stepchildren.  He accepted on the balance of
    probabilities  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with Ms B, but although  she  said  the  appellant  had  a
    relationship with her children the judge had  very  little  information
    about them, the appellant did not currently live with them, and he  was
    not satisfied on the evidence he had received that  it  could  be  said
    that he had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with Ms  B's
    children.  He was satisfied that it would be unduly harsh to expect her
    and the children to go to Trinidad and Tobago to maintain  family  life
    with the appellant.

21.  The judge accepted the  evidence  that  the  appellant  played  a  very
    important role in his children's lives and saw them on a  very  regular
    basis and that he had always played a part in their lives  and  it  was
    only due to an administrative issue during his imprisonment that he was
    not able to  see  them  but  he  did  remain  in  contact  through  the
    telephone.  Since his  release  he  had  maintained  essentially  daily
    contact with his children and stepchildren.  He noted also the evidence
    that his ex-wife the children's mother  was  experiencing  difficulties
    both concerning her physical health and her mental health and that  the
    children's living conditions were far from  suitable.   The  child  and
    family assessment report noted that the children lived  in  overcrowded
    accommodation and referred to problems with their attendance at school.
     The judge considered however that it was relevant  to  note  that  the
    author believed that all the children were in good health  and  meeting
    normal milestones.  The report referred to concerns with regard to both
    the mother and grandmother drinking and that the mother  suffered  from
    depression and anxiety and during the assessment her mental health  was
    clearly unstable as she was observed from  going  to  being  elated  to
    quickly becoming tearful.  The report also dealt  with  the  issues  in
    relation to previous domestic violence by the appellant.

22.  The judge remarked that it was clear from the  assessment  that  social
    services were concerned about Ms A-D's emotional  and  physical  health
    and the care she was providing for the children.  The report  confirmed
    that they lived  in  overcrowded  accommodation  and  that  alternative
    accommodation should be sought.  The judge considered however  that  it
    was relevant that the report concluded that there was  no  evidence  to
    indicate that the children were  at  imminent  risk  of  harm  and  the
    children themselves said they felt safe and secure in the care of their
    mother.  The assessment concluded that the family  should  continue  to
    access support under a child protection plan.  It was also relevant  to
    note that the most up-to-date information from the social worker at the
    Family Support Child Protection Team noted that  the  Child  Protection
    Plan made on 30 April 2019 had now been stepped down to a Child in Need
    Plan and obviously the children were still with their mother.

23.  The judge took into account the child and family assessment and  stated
    that on the basis of the current case law it was clear that the  notion
    of undue harshness was intended to introduce a higher hurdle all out of
    reasonableness.  He said that any removal  of  the  father  by  way  of
    deportation  would  cause  difficulties  for  a  partner  or  children.
    Deportation would clearly cause great distress to both the  appellant's
    current partner, his children and stepchildren and he took into account
    the fact that the son's behaviour deteriorated when the  appellant  was
    in prison.  He commented that that was however  again  not  an  unusual
    reaction by a  child  whose  father  was  in  prison  and  absent.   He
    considered that the fact that the children  were  currently  living  in
    overcrowded accommodation was not an additional factor  which  assisted
    the appellant as this had been the position  for  a  number  of  years.
    Although social services were involved with the family,  they  appeared
    to be satisfied that the children were  being  looked  after  by  their
    mother and this would continue in the appellant's absence.

24.  With regard to the stepchildren they would continue to be looked  after
    by their own mother and again there was nothing in  the  papers  before
    the judge which would indicate that either of the stepchildren would be
    at risk or seriously affected without  his  being  present.   This  was
    clearly the case given that he  had  not  lived  with  them  since  his
    imprisonment.

25.  The judge was clear that the  lives  of  the  appellant's  partner  and
    children and stepchildren would undoubtedly be made more difficult than
    as had been stated in cases such as KO (Nigeria) and these  were  sadly
    the likely consequences of a deportation of any  foreign  criminal  who
    had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  partner  and/or
    children in this country.  Taking into  account  all  of  the  evidence
    available to him and notwithstanding that he  accepted  that  the  best
    interests of the children would be to have both their parents in  their
    lives, he was not satisfied that the effect of the appellant's  removal
    would be unduly harsh to the extent that the appellant could rely  upon
    the exception in either paragraph 399(a) or Section 117C(5).

26.  The judge went on to note the relevance of the other factors listed  in
    paragraph 399A and Section 117C(4).  The  appellant  had  been  in  the
    country for approximately fourteen  years  during  which  time  he  had
    formed two substantive relationships and had three  children  from  his
    previous marriage, his eldest son now being 12.   He  had  committed  a
    number of offences including the serious  offence  of  possessing  with
    intent to supply two class A drugs which was a  serious  offence  which
    had an impact on the public.  The judge took into account the fact that
    the appellant was currently doing  well  within  his  probation  order,
    however if he did not do so he would be liable to further action  being
    taken against him.  He took into account the positive  reports  in  the
    appellant's favour in relation to his involvement with the children and
    overall was satisfied that he was socially  and  culturally  integrated
    into the United Kingdom.  The evidence was that his father  and  mother
    now lived in the USA and his grandmother had died but he had spent  his
    formative years in Trinidad and Tobago.  Although he had said he  would
    have nowhere to live and would  not  be  able  to  financially  support
    himself  if returned, he had confirmed that his father had provided him
    with a bank card which he was able to  use  to  provide  money  to  his
    family during his incarceration, he still retained the  bank  card  and
    had accepted during his oral evidence that he  would  be  able  to  use
    those funds if returned to Trinidad and Tobago.  There was no  evidence
    that such  mental  health  issues  as  he  had  could  not  be  treated
    adequately in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  taken  overall  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had shown there would be very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration into society  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.
    The judge noted the clear public interest in  the  removal  of  foreign
    criminals and bore in mind that the appellant had spent  his  formative
    years in Trinidad and Tobago and the financial support he would be able
    to obtain from his father.  He was  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    showed he would not be able to obtain work and therefore  accommodation
    in Trinidad and Tobago.

27.  The judge went on to consider whether there were  any  very  compelling
    circumstances which would  justify  allowing  the  appeal  above  those
    described in exceptions 1 and 2.  He  took  into  account  the  serious
    offence committed and the  impact  on  the  partner  and  children  and
    stepchildren and the weight to be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals and was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    had shown that there were compelling  factors  outweighing  the  public
    interest.  As a consequence the appeal was dismissed.

28.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on  grounds
    which were drafted by Mr Aitken who developed the points made  in  them
    in his oral submissions before me.  He  also  relied  on  the  skeleton
    argument that had been provided.  The  first  point  was  the  argument
    summarised at paragraph 5 of the grant of permission that the judge had
    erred in law in applying a test which  found  that  commonly  occurring
    harshness was not undue harshness and/or effectively  applying  a  test
    which was so elevated as  to  equate  it  with  a  more  exacting  very
    compelling circumstances test as set out in HA (Iraq) [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    1176.  This could be seen at paragraph 103 of the judge's decision.  He
    was correct to direct himself about KO (Nigeria), but had erred in  the
    latter  part  of  the  paragraph  about  the  likely  consequences   of
    deportation.  It was clear from what was said for example at  paragraph
    56 of HA (Iraq) that it was incorrect to treat  "ordinary"  as  meaning
    anything which was not exceptional or in any event rare, also it was  a
    risk that in treating the essential question as being  "is  this  level
    of harshness out of the ordinary?" as a risk of finding that  exception
    2 did not apply simply on the basis that a situation fitted  into  some
    commonly encountered pattern would be dangerous.  How a child would  be
    affected by a parents' deportation would depend on an almost infinitely
    variable range of circumstances and it was not possible to  identify  a
    base line of "ordinariness".  It was also relevant  to  note  what  the
    judge had said at paragraph 100 that any removal of the father  by  way
    of deportation would cause difficulties  for  a  partner  or  children.
    Given these two paragraphs the judge had fallen into error.  Bearing in
    mind the findings at paragraph 90 about the  degree  of  emotional  and
    financial support provided by the appellant and the very important role
    he plays in his children's lives, the judge applied  too  high  a  test
    with regard to undue harshness.  The judge had failed to have regard to
    material evidence.  Attention was drawn to the ex-wife's letter and the
    discharge notification with regard to her medical condition.  The judge
    had noted  that  evidence,  at  paragraph  58  of  his  decision.   The
    appellant  had  explained  in  evidence  that  his  ex-wife  had   been
    struggling with her various health problems.  Her father had died  from
    leukaemia or a similar illness.  The probation officer referred  to  it
    also.  There was an issue of her ability to care for her  children  and
    the judge had failed to engage with this evidence when considering  the
    issue of undue harshness and given that he accepted that the  appellant
    played an important role in the children's  lives  this  had  not  been
    adequately weighed or at all and it was an error of law.

29.  In his submissions Mr Tan argued that with regard  to  HA  this  guided
    judges to make a broad-brush application of undue harshness and to make
    a case-by-case analysis.  Both paragraphs 100  and  103  reflected  the
    reality of the situation as set out in KO concerning  the  consequences
    of separation for family members which was not in dispute.  It would be
    problematic if that was all, but this ignored the preceding  paragraphs
    where the judge had considered accommodation and  social  services  and
    help from other family members and health issues.  It was necessary  to
    read the judge's determination  as  a  whole.   There  was  a  detailed
    consideration of the evidence.

30.  What had been said in HA was not inconsistent.  With regard to the  two
    items of evidence, the  judge  had  noted  these  at  paragraph  3  and
    paragraphs 57 and 58 and also  paragraph  71.   He  had  therefore  had
    regard to the context of that evidence and  there  was  also  reference
    here to paragraphs 92 and 97 concerning the health problems of the  ex-
    wife.

31.  Mr Tan also played reliance on the skeleton argument put in  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State.  Beyond the wife's statement  there  was  no
    further elaboration of her evidence or oral evidence or evidence  about
    her medical conditions and at best this involved monitoring/exploratory
    work  being  referred  to.   There  was  no  reference   to   potential
    deterioration and any unknown medical condition.  It was  a  matter  of
    speculation and it was unclear how the judge could make  a  finding  on
    that so one could not expect a particular finding on it.  The  skeleton
    addressed the real threat otherwise and the grounds and  the  challenge
    were a matter of disagreement.

32.  By way of reply Mr Aitken argued that the judge  had  fallen  into  the
    trap set out in HA (Iraq).  It was a lengthy and detailed determination
    and there were  concerns  about  the  failure  to  weigh  the  evidence
    adequately or at all.  There was no reference to the  evidence  in  the
    judge's analysis of undue harshness at paragraph 89  to  paragraph  104
    and he had  failed  adequately  to  engage  with  the  evidence.   This
    amounted to a material error of law.

33.  I reserved my decision.

34.   I  have  set  out  in  some  detail  the  evidence  and  the   judge's
    consideration of it.  It is necessary also to  address  the  particular
    two pieces of evidence that were referred to by Mr Aitken  with  regard
    to the second ground.  There is a discharge  notification  from  King's
    College Hospital NHS Trust referring to an admission on  9  August  and
    the discharge on 20 August 2019.  It refers to the appellant's  ex-wife
    as having been admitted due to lower abdominal/pelvic pain  accompanied
    by PR bleeding and 2 year hx of  amenorrhoea.   She  had  had  multiple
    investigations.  It was recommended that she was at high  risk  of  PID
    which might contribute to pelvic pain and an unclear cause amenorrhoea.
      There  was  a  recommendation  for  microbiology  triple  swabs,  PID
    antibiotics and analgesia for discharge and outpatient TVUSS.  There is
    reference to a previous colonoscopy with reference to a haemangioma  or
    on a background of hepatic steatosis and examination of the  liver.   A
    colonoscopy was advised and CT abdomen and pelvis  might  be  required.
    There was no reference to further tests  arranged  and  the  follow  up
    arranged was OP gynaecology follow up and a recommendation for  the  GP
    was no more than please be aware of admission and  thanks  for  ongoing
    care of the patient.  Various medicines were provided.

35.  In her letter of 29 November 2019  the  appellant's  former  wife  said
    that she had recently been diagnosed with a  severe  medical  condition
    and was hospitalised for a few weeks.

36.  The discharge notification does not seem to bear that out.  It  appears
    that she was regarded as a high risk for PID, which I take to be pelvic
    inflammatory disorder, and  a  reference  to  a  two  year  history  of
    amenorrhoea which is a medical term for when  a  woman  does  not  have
    menstrual periods.  The cause for that was regarded  as  unclear.   The
    conclusion was that a colonoscopy was advised  and  a  CT  abdomen  and
    pelvis might be  required  and  gastroenterology  referral  was  needed
    particularly as she reported passing a large volume of PR blood.  There
    is  no  medical  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's   former   wife
    subsequent to this document from August 2019.  The hearing  before  the
    judge was in the following month.  The judge noted the reference to the
    appellant's ex-wife's evidence at paragraph  58  of  the  decision  and
    there are  further  references  to  her  physical  health  problems  at
    paragraph 92 and paragraph 97.

37.  It does not appear to me that the judge  erred  in  his  evaluation  of
    this  evidence.   Upon  careful  scrutiny,  as  was  contended  by  the
    Secretary of State in the skeleton and by Mr Tan, it is  evidence  that
    is no more than speculative as to potential  future  difficulties  that
    the ex-wife might experience.  She was in hospital for a number of days
    and a diagnosis was made but there was no follow up of any significance
    recommended and in my view the judge was entitled to conclude as he did
    about the evidence in this regard.  I also consider that he did not err
    his contention with regard to what  may  essentially  said  to  be  the
    guidance at paragraph 56 of HA (Iraq).  The fact that  he  referred  to
    the point that any removal of the father by way  of  deportation  would
    cause difficulties for a partner or children, at paragraph 100, and  at
    paragraph 103 of the likely consequences of deportation of any  foreign
    criminal or a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner and or
    children in this country has to be seen,  as  Mr  Tan  argued,  in  the
    context of the very detailed and careful  consideration  given  by  the
    judge to the particular circumstances of the case which  is  of  course
    exactly the point emphasised in paragraph 56 of HA  (Iraq).   There  is
    reference there to emotional and  financial  support  provided  by  the
    appellant, the role he plays in the children's lives, the updated child
    and  family  assessment,  including  a  reference  to  the  overcrowded
    accommodation and problems with the children's attendance at school but
    bearing in mind that they  were  in  good  health  and  meeting  normal
    milestones.  He took into account the concerns  about  the  mother  and
    grandmother drinking and clearly was fully aware  of  the  difficulties
    experienced by the family that would be augmented  by  the  appellant's
    departure.  The two general comments made at  paragraphs  100  and  103
    have to be seen in the  context  of  the  detailed  evaluation  of  the
    particular facts of this case and the reasons set out  as  to  why  the
    judge concluded on the particular facts of this  case  that  the  undue
    harshness threshold was not crossed.  In my view the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to conclude as he did for  the  reasons  that  he  gave.   The
    challenge to his decision is  one  that  amounts  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement.  The judge set out the legal tests  correctly,  evaluated
    the evidence carefully and came  to  sustainable  conclusions  on  that
    evidence.

38.  As a consequence this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 7th April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


