
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/19018/2018
                                                               HU/18799/2018
                                                               HU/18805/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2019                   |On 16 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UT JUDGES MACLEMAN & DAWSON


                                   Between

                                   THI [B]
                                   [T P N]
                                      &
                                   [T M N]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, VIETNAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Stein, Advocate, instructed by Warwick Vesey,
                    Solicitors, Birmingham
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a mother and two  daughters.   The  husband  of  the
    first appellant, and father of the second  and  third,  is  [TN]  ("the
    sponsor"). They are all citizens of Vietnam.  The sponsor is recognised
    as a refugee in the UK.

 2. The appellants appeal to the UT against the decision of Designated  FtT
    Judge  Murray,  dismissing  their  appeals  against  refusal  of  entry
    clearance based on their family life with the sponsor.   Their  grounds
    are  set  out  in  the  attachment,  dated  5  August  2019,  to  their
    application for permission.

 3. The first point in the grounds (at paragraphs 3  and  4)  is  that  the
    judge went wrong by finding that family relationships which had  broken
    down could not be rekindled.  We indicated at the hearing that we found
    that ground misconceived.  The judge made no such finding.  The crux of
    her judgment was that relationships had not in fact been rekindled.

 4. It has been accepted  throughout  that  the  first  appellant  and  the
    sponsor, had married, and their marriage had not been dissolved.

 5. The live question for the FtT was whether at the date  of  application,
    or at the date of the hearing, in terms of immigration  rule  352A  (v)
    "each of the parties intends to live  permanently  with  the  other  as
    their partner and the relationship is genuine and subsisting."

 6. The second point in the grounds (at paragraphs 5 and  6)  is  that  the
    judge overlooked evidence of  many  communications  from  2016  onwards
    which supported the subsistence of family relationships.

 7. In course of submissions Mr Govan accepted that the FtT had gone astray
    in its approach to rule 352A (v) and had not  given  adequate  reasons,
    given the evidence founded upon in the grounds, for finding there to be
    no genuine and subsisting relationship.

 8. In our view, that concession was correctly made.  The FtT did  not  say
    what it made of that evidence, which required evaluation.

 9. There is also some force in paragraph 7 of the grounds, which  contends
    that there was a failure to apply Devaseelan principles to the evidence
    of the sponsor, who was found credible in his asylum appeal.  The prior
    decision was primarily about other matters, but the favourable  finding
    extended to what he said about his family life.

10. We do not think the rest of the grounds would have led anywhere, but no
    further analysis is required.

11. Ms Stein asked us to remake the decision, based on the  evidence  which
    had been before the FtT and upon submissions.  Mr Govan concurred.   We
    proceeded accordingly.

12. Mr Govan invited us to find from the evidence that family relationships
    had lapsed over the years, and had  not  been  rekindled.   There  were
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account, as the  FtT  had  observed,
    and we should find that there had been  no  contact  between  2007  and
    2012.  Little of the evidence of communications was in English, none of
    the rest was translated, and although some pages did appear to be dated
    in 2016 and 2017, most of it had no clear dates.  The evidence did  not
    show who was talking to whom, or about what.  There were photographs of
    the three appellants, together, separately, and with others,  but  that
    established nothing.

13. Mr Govan reminded us of rule 352D, relating to  the  second  and  third
    appellants - "...  (ii) is under the  age  of  18;  and  (iii)  is  not
    leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a  civil  partner,
    and has not formed an independent family unit; and (iv) was part of the
    family unit of the person granted asylum at the time  that  the  person
    granted asylum left the country of their habitual residence in order to
    seek asylum ...".

14. He submitted that the second appellant is now over 18, a matter we were
    bound to take into account; there was no up to date evidence about  her
    in relation to (iii); and neither of the  children  were  part  of  the
    sponsor's family unit when he left Vietnam.

15. Mr Govan asked us to dismiss all three appeals.

16. Ms Stein submitted that there  might  have  been  periods  when  family
    relationships had weakened or even lapsed, for  which  there  could  be
    many explanations, but there was a  wealth  of  evidence  of  telephone
    calls, screen shots, text and internet messages over at least two years
    up to the date of application.  Although mostly not in  English,  there
    was obviously the interchange of photographs and information typical of
    family relationships.  There was no reason not to think that the  first
    appellant and the sponsor were not in a genuine  marital  relationship.
    It was accepted that the  second  and  third  appellants  might  be  in
    difficulty over the terms of rule 352D but the appeals  were  on  human
    rights grounds.  If the first appellant were to be admitted to  the  UK
    the third, as a child now twelve years of age, had a right to  be  with
    both parents.  As to the second, a bright line should not be  drawn  at
    the age of majority, and she should not be left stranded  as  the  only
    family member in Vietnam.

17. We reserved our decision.

18. Family relationships have had  their  ups  and  downs.   The  sponsor's
    evidence has been inconsistent, particularly over  periods  when  there
    was little if any contact.  However, he has said since he arrived  here
    that  he  has  rekindled  those   relationships.    The   evidence   of
    communications might have been better presented, but we also  have  the
    statements of the parties.  While the criticisms made by Mr Govan  were
    reasonably taken, it is clear that family members have  been  regularly
    in touch over the last few years.

19. The evidence satisfies us that it is more  likely  than  not  that  the
    first appellant, if she enters the UK, intends to live permanently with
    the sponsor as his partner and that their relationship is  genuine  and
    subsisting.  Rule 352A is designed to  comply  both  with  the  Refugee
    Convention and with the ECHR, so the first  appellant  establishes  her
    human rights grounds.

20. It takes strong circumstances  to  extinguish  family  life  between  a
    parent and a child who have lived  together.   We  think  the  evidence
    shows that although ties may then have been at  their  low  point,  the
    third appellant was part of a family unit with the sponsor when he left
    Vietnam; but even if she was not,  as  her  mother  succeeds  on  human
    rights grounds, her right to  family  life,  and  her  best  interests,
    entitle her to live with both parents.

21. The position of the second appellant is not as strong.  We are bound to
    take into account that she is now an adult.  However, we note  that  at
    the date of application and at the date of the FtT hearing,  she  ought
    to have been found to have a right to entry clearance.   We  give  that
    some weight.  She is not far into adulthood.   We  have  no  reason  to
    think that she has begun to lead a life independently from  her  mother
    and sister, has married or become a civil partner,  or  has  formed  an
    independent family unit.  We find it more likely that she has continued
    to live with her mother, as she has done throughout her life, and  with
    her younger sister.  We are not persuaded, for reasons given above,  by
    the submission of Mr Govan that she has formed,  with  her  mother  and
    sister, a family unit independent of the sponsor.  We do not think that
    this is a case where she ceased on her 18th  birthday  to  have  family
    life, for purposes of article 8 protection, with the other parties.  We
    find that it would be disproportionate to deny her entry to the UK with
    the other appellants.

22. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The three appeals, as brought to
    the FtT, are allowed.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      14 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




