
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/19612/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2017                       |   On 03 January 2018            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MS GAURI THAPA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Aujla sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  15  August  2017)
    allowing on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside the Rules the appeal of  the
    claimant against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to  refuse
    to grant her entry clearance for the  purposes  of  settlement  as  the
    adult dependant family member of  a  Gurkha  Veteran.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that the claimant requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper
    Tribunal.





The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    for the following reasons:

         The grounds argue that the Judge had not given adequate reasons for
         finding that there were  more  than  the  usual  ties  between  the
         [claimant] and  her  parents.   Since  the  Immigration  Rules  and
         guidance contain provisions relating to Gurkha families,  the  fact
         that the [claimant] did not meet the rules is significant.  In  the
         circumstances it is arguable that the Judge erred in  finding  that
         there  was  family  life,  given  the  circumstances  between   the
         [claimant] and the sponsor, and the length of time spent apart.

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a national of Nepal, whose date of birth is 22 February
    1979.  Her father is a former member of the  Gurkha  Brigade.   He  was
    enlisted by the  Gurkha  Brigade  on  25  November  1969,  and  he  was
    discharged on 20 September 1984.  On 1 September 2014,  the  claimant's
    parents were granted indefinite leave to enter and remain in the United
    Kingdom for the  purposes  of  settlement.   They  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 29 September 2014.  On 15 June 2016,  the  claimant  applied
    for entry clearance to join her father in the UK as his dependant.

 4. On 2 August 2015, an Entry Clearance Officer  in  New  Delhi  gave  his
    reasons for refusing the claimant's application.  She was 37 years old.
     Under Annex K, an applicant had to be 18 years of age or over, and  30
    years of age or under,  at  the  date  of  application.   She  had  not
    declared any care arrangements or requirements in Nepal.  She  had  not
    mentioned any personal incapacity and she had not declared any  medical
    conditions or disability.  Therefore, he was not satisfied that she was
    wholly financially and/or emotionally dependent upon her UK sponsor  as
    required under Annex K.  She had been living apart from her sponsor  as
    a direct result of her parents' migration to the UK rather  than  as  a
    result of being away from the family unit as a consequence of  pursuing
    educational or other requirements.  So,  she  also  did  not  meet  the
    requirement of paragraph 9(8) of Annex K.

 5. He had taken into account Article 8 ECHR.  She had been  living  abroad
    without her sponsor for over 18 months and would be able to continue to
    live independently.  Family life could continue as  it  may  have  done
    without interference by the refusal  decision.   Even  if  the  refusal
    might be an interference with private life, he was not  satisfied  that
    she had established family life with her parents over  and  above  that
    between an adult child and parent.  This was further evidenced  by  her
    parents' decision to move to the UK without her.  Accordingly,  he  was
    not satisfied that Article 8 was engaged.



The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Aujla.   Mr  Jesurum
    of Counsel appeared on behalf of the claimant.  The Judge received oral
    evidence from the claimant's  parents.   In  his  subsequent  decision,
    Judge Aujla reached the following conclusion at paragraph [40]:

         Having considered the evidence presented to me, I  am  left  in  no
         doubt that  there  was  an  established  family  life  between  the
         [claimant] and her parents.   I  find  that  her  parents  were  in
         regular contact with her and they were sending remittances for  her
         upkeep.  They provided accommodation  for  the  [claimant]  in  the
         family home where they had always lived. On the evidence before me,
         the [claimant] had  no  other  source  of  income  or  support.   I
         therefore find that the claimant was dependent on her  parents  who
         had supported her throughout the period since she  was  born.   The
         dependency in this case is clearly more than the  normal  emotional
         ties between parents and adult children.   I  therefore  find  that
         Article 8 was engaged in this appeal.

Discussion

 7. In this appeal, both parties rely on the guidance given by the Court of
    Appeal in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ  320,
    the facts of which are similar to the facts of this appeal in  that  Mr
    Rai applied for entry clearance as the  dependent  son  of  his  Gurkha
    veteran father when he was well past the age of majority -  being  aged
    26 - and when his father  had  entered  the  UK  more  than  two  years
    previously, and his mother had joined his father in the UK more than  a
    year before.

 8. Giving the leading judgment of the  Court,  Lindblom  LJ  explained  at
    paragraph [16] onwards why the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  had  misdirected
    himself in considering whether  Article  8  was  engaged  in  Mr  Rai's
    appeal.

 9. At paragraph [39], Lindblom LJ noted that the Upper Tribunal Judge  had
    referred repeatedly to the appellant's parents having chosen to  settle
    in the United Kingdom, leaving the appellant  in  the  family  home  in
    Nepal.  Each time he did so, he stressed  the  fact  that  this  was  a
    decision they had freely made.  Lindblom LJ continued:

         But that, in my view, was not to  confront  the  real  issue  under
         Article 8(1) in this case, which is whether, as a matter  of  fact,
         the appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life  with  his
         parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle
         in the United Kingdom and had endured  beyond  it,  notwithstanding
         their having left Nepal when they did.

10. At paragraph [42], Lindblom LJ reiterated that  the  critical  question
    under Article 8(1) was whether the appellant's  family  life  with  his
    parents had subsisted at the time they chose to leave Nepal  to  settle
    in the UK,  "and  was  still  subsisting  at  the  time  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision."

11. Having identified the errors in the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge which were enough to invalidate  it,  Lindblom  LJ  concluded  as
    follows in paragraph [58]:

         I accept that, if the Article 8(1) question had been dealt with  as
         it should have been, the outcome might have been the  same,  but  I
         find it impossible to say that it would inevitably  have  been  so.
         It follows, in my view, that this appeal should be allowed and  the
         case submitted to the Upper Tribunal for redetermination.

12. As I explored with Mr Ahmed in oral argument, the repeated use  of  the
    past tense in the Judge's discussion of family life at  paragraph  [40]
    raises a concern that he was not asking  himself  the  right  question.
    This concern is magnified by  the  Judge's  earlier  self-direction  at
    paragraph [30] where he said:

         The issue before me therefore is whether there  was  (my  emphasis)
         extant family life between the [claimant] and the sponsor  and,  in
         that context, I do take on board the submissions made by Mr Jesurum
         that family life includes the right to develop family life.

13. In order to find that Article 8(1) was engaged, the Judge needed to  be
    satisfied that family life between the claimant  and  her  parents  was
    subsisting at the date of the hearing.  If it was not  subsisting,  the
    claimant could not succeed on the  ground  that  she  had  a  right  to
    develop family life with her parents.

14. In his skeleton argument for the hearing before Judge Aujla, Mr Jesurum
    submitted at paragraph 10(8) that a degree of emotional dependence  was
    required, following R (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR  2546  at  paragraph
    [50]. But the Judge made no finding one way or the other as to  whether
    there continued to be a degree of emotional dependence.

15. As submitted by Mr Avery, the concern  as  to  whether  the  Judge  was
    asking himself the right question is reinforced by a misdirection which
    the Judge made earlier in his decision  at  paragraph  [14].   In  that
    paragraph he said that, in accordance with the Tribunal decision in  GR
    (ECO: Post-decision evidence)  Morocco  [2005]  UKIAT  0038,  "which  I
    consider still to be good law", I may take into account evidence coming
    into existence after the date of the  decision,  if  it  related  to  a
    matter arising on the date of the decision".  In fact,  under  the  new
    statutory regime, the Judge was mandated to  consider  the  appellant's
    human rights claim as it stood at the date of the hearing, and  he  was
    not confined to post-decision evidence which related back to  a  matter
    arising on the date of the refusal decision.

16. I accept that the Judge made reference to the case of DR  (Morocco)  by
    way of a fall-back position, and that his primary position was that  he
    might take into account any evidence placed before him, "including  any
    post-decision evidence relating to the matter in issue."

17. Nonetheless, I can find no clear recognition in his reasoning that  the
    claimant was required not only to show that  she  enjoyed  family  life
    with her parents at the time of their departure  from  Nepal,  but  she
    also needed to show  that  family  life  with  her  parents  was  still
    subsisting at the date of the hearing.  Moreover,  there  is  no  clear
    recognition in his reasoning that it was not enough that  there  should
    be continuing  financial  dependency,  but  that  continuing  emotional
    dependence was an essential requirement for  a  finding  of  subsisting
    family life at the date of the hearing.

18. I accept that in her witness statement  the  appellant  said  that  she
    shared all her thoughts and emotions with her  parents,  and  that  she
    continued to be emotionally reliant on them; and that  in  her  witness
    statement the appellant's mother said that her daughter required  their
    emotional support to keep her morale high. However, the Judge  did  not
    comment on this evidence, and he also did not directly engage with  the
    closing submission of the  Presenting  Officer  that  the  evidence  of
    telephonic contact only started in  July  2016,  and  the  evidence  of
    financial remittances only started in October 2015, whereas the sponsor
    had come to the UK in September 2014.

19. For the above reasons, I consider that the Judge did not give  adequate
    reasons for finding  that  Article  8(1)  was  engaged,  and  that  his
    decision to allow the appeal under Article 8 was thereby fatally flawed
    such that it must be set aside in its entirety and remade.

20. In the event that an error of law was  made  out,  the  representatives
    were in agreement that the appropriate course was for this appeal to be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing, with  none  of
    the findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal being preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions
This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a  de
novo hearing before any Judge apart from Judge Aujla. None of  the  findings
of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 28 December 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge








