
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/19717/2019(V)
                                                            HU/19258/2019(V)
                                                            HU/19263/2019(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On the 22nd June 2021                |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On the 27th May 2021                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                      FATIMA ABDIRAHIM ABUBAKAR SHEIKH
                     ABUBAKAR ABDIRAHIM ABUBAKAR SHEIKH
                       AISHA ABDIRAHIM ABUBAKER SHEIKH
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Malik instructed by Terence Ray Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Somalia and  are  siblings.   They  were
    born respectively on 4 November 2003, 18 October 2002  and  17  October
    2001.

 2. On 18 August 2019, each of the appellants made an application for entry
    clearance under para 297 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395  as  amended)
    to join the sponsor, Abdirahim Abubakar Sheikey, their  father  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The sponsor had come to the UK in 2004  and  had  been
    granted refugee status.  He subsequently became a British citizen.

 3. The appellants had remained in Somalia after the sponsor came to the UK
    but left Somalia to live in Yemen in or around 2008-2010.   They  moved
    to Malaysia in or around 2016.  At the date of  the  applications,  the
    appellants resided in Malaysia with their mother (the sponsor's  wife).



 4. In addition to the sponsor living in the  UK,  the  appellants  claimed
    that their brother, Ahmed Abdirahim Abocar, lived in the UK having been
    granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee in 2020.

 5.  On  31  October  2019,  the  ECO  refused  each  of  the   appellants'
    applications for entry clearance under para 297 and under Art 8 of  the
    ECHR.  As regards para 297, the ECO was not satisfied that the  sponsor
    had "sole responsibility" for the appellants under  para  297(i)(e)  or
    that there were "serious and compelling family or other considerations"
    which made their exclusion undesirable under para 297(i)(f).   Further,
    the ECO was not satisfied  that  the  appellants  met  the  maintenance
    requirement in para 297(v) on the basis of the sponsor's income.

 6. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision sent
    on 5 January 2021, Judge Richard Wood dismissed each of the appellants'
    appeals.  Before the judge, the appellants relied both upon the  income
    of the sponsor and also of their claimed brother.  Judge Wood  accepted
    that Mr Abocar was, in fact, the appellants' brother and the son of the
    sponsor and his wife.  Nevertheless, the judge was not satisfied  that,
    even taking both their incomes into account, they  were  sufficient  to
    meet the maintenance requirement in para 297(v).  In addition, although
    accepting that the appellants enjoyed family life with the  sponsor  in
    the UK, having regard to  all  the  circumstances  including  that  the
    maintenance  requirement  was  not  met,  the  judge  found  that   the
    appellants' exclusion, by the refusal of entry  clearance  to  each  of
    them, was not disproportionate and dismissed the appeals under Art 8 of
    the ECHR.

 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The
    grounds challenge the judge's adverse  finding  under  Art  8  and,  in
    particular  his  finding  that  the  appellants  could  not  meet   the
    maintenance requirements of the Rules because the judge  had  not  been
    referred to, and therefore had not taken into account, the Secretary of
    State's policy  during  the  COVID-19  crisis  that  if  an  individual
    experienced a loss of income due to Coronavirus up to 31 May 2020, then
    their employment income for the period immediately before the  loss  of
    income would be considered, provided the minimum income requirement was
    met for at least six months immediately before the date of  income  was
    lost,.  The grounds contend that as this policy was not  drawn  to  the
    judge's attention by the respondent there was a procedural irregularity
    which  made  the  proceedings  procedurally  unfair  and  unsustainable
    applying the approach in BH (policies/information: SoS's  duties)  Iraq
    [2020] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

 8. On 10 February 2021, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  O'Brien)  granted
    the appellants permission to appeal, in  particular  on  the  basis  of
    procedural irregularity following BH.

 9. Following directions by the Upper Tribunal, the appeal  was  listed  at
    the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre for  a  remote  hearing  by  Microsoft
    Teams.  The appellants were represented by Mr Malik and the  respondent
    by Mr Diwnycz.

10. Having heard Mr Malik's submissions Mr Diwnycz conceded that the  judge
    had erred in law, applying BH, in that he had not been referred to (and
    therefore applied) the respondent's policy concerning income during the
    COVID-19 crisis.  The point being, of course, that the  income  of  the
    sponsor (and the appellants' brother in the UK) while not  meeting  the
    maintenance Rules as such, as a result of the COVID-19  crisis,  should
    have been considered on the basis of the  policy  taking  into  account
    income in the six month period prior to 31 May 2020.

11. Mr Diwnycz conceded that the judge's decision should be set aside and a
    de novo rehearing take place on remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Diwnycz accepted, on the invitation of Mr Malik,  that  the  judge's
    finding that Mr Abocar is the appellants' brother and the  son  of  the
    sponsor and his wife should be preserved as  this  finding  was  wholly
    unaffected by any legal error.

13. Mr Malik indicated that, with that finding preserved, he did not object
    to the appeal being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and he accepted
    that there needed  to  be  a  full-rehearing  with  evidence  given  by
    witnesses, such as the sponsor and appellants' brother  living  in  the
    UK.

14. I accept Mr Diwnycz's concession that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law  through  procedural  unfairness  because   the   relevant   policy
    concerning the assessment of maintenance during the COVID-19 crisis was
    not drawn to its attention and applied by the  judge.   I  also  accept
    that the issue of maintenance was an integral part of  the  assessment,
    outside the Rules, whether the appellants' exclusion (by the refusal of
    entry clearance to each of them) was proportionate and that, therefore,
    none of the judge's findings in  that  regard  can  stand.   I  accept,
    however, that the judge's finding that Mr  Abocar  is  the  appellants'
    brother and son of the sponsor and his wife should be preserved at  the
    rehearing of the appeal.

Decision

15. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss each of the appellants' appeals involved the making of an error
    of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

16. Having regard to the nature and extent of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge  Hone.



17. The only preserved fact is  that  Mr  Abocar  is  the  brother  of  the
    appellants and the son of the sponsor and his wife.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 3 June 2021

