


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/19771/2016

                                             HU/19785/2016

                                             HU/19788/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at UTIAC Birmingham              |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 12 December 2018                   |   On 7 January 2019                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                     KAA
                                     OO
                                     IO
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Idowu of Gans & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Abone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal dismissing the appellants'  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision to refuse their human rights claim, it was found, at  an  error  of
law hearing on 19 October  2018,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made
errors of law in its decision. The decision was accordingly set  aside  with
directions for it to be re-made.

The appellants are citizens of Nigeria, born on 3 March 1973, 6 August  2010
and 16 September 2012 respectively. The first appellant  is  the  mother  of
the second and third appellants, both of whom  were  born  in  the  UK.  The
first appellant entered the UK on 29 September 2008 with leave to  enter  as
a Tier 4 student valid until 31 January 2010. On 17 November  2010  she  was
refused leave to remain as a Tier  4  student  and  unsuccessfully  appealed
against that  decision  in  February  2011.  On  28  March  2014  the  first
appellant was refused an EEA residence card. On 14 December 2015  all  three
appellants were served with removal papers. On 16 March  2016  they  applied
on form FLR(O) for leave to remain outside the immigration rules  under  the
parent and private life route.

The appellants' applications were refused on 28 July  2016.  The  respondent
considered that the first appellant  could  not  qualify  under  the  parent
route in Appendix FM as her children were not British or settled in  the  UK
and had not lived in the UK for over  seven  years  and  that  the  children
could not qualify under the child route under Appendix  FM.  The  respondent
considered that the appellants could not meet the requirements in  paragraph
276ADE(1) on private  life  grounds  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
circumstances outside the immigration rules.

The appellants appealed against the respondent's decision  and  the  appeals
were heard in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  17  April  2018  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Hagan. It was conceded on behalf  of  the  appellants  that
the only issue was whether the test  set  out  in  section  117B(6)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had been made out.  The  second
appellant OO was, by the time of the hearing, a qualifying child and it  was
accepted that the first appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
with her. The issue before the  judge  was  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
expect the second appellant to leave the UK. The judge  considered  evidence
about OO's speech and language delay and the need for therapeutic  input  in
that regard and considered, in regard to  the  first  appellant's  concerns,
that it was unlikely that she was on the autistic spectrum. The judge  noted
that the children's father was in the UK but was not settled  here  and  had
applied for leave to remain but had not received a decision.  There  was  no
written evidence from him and he did  not  attend  the  hearing.  The  judge
considered that it was in OO's best interests for her to be with her  mother
and to remain in the UK but did not accept that it would be unreasonable  to
expect her to leave the UK with her mother. The judge found  also  that  the
second child IO's interests were with remaining with her mother and  sister.
She was not a qualifying child. The judge  considered  that  there  were  no
very significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria and that  the  criteria
in paragraph 276ADE(1) had not  been  met.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
public interest outweighed the private interests of the appellants and  that
the appeals had to be dismissed.

Permission to appeal against that decision was sought, and granted,  on  the
grounds that the judge had failed to consider MA (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R  (on
the application of) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  &
Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and had therefore failed to  undertake  a  complete
assessment of whether it was reasonable to expect the  second  appellant  to
leave the UK.

At an  error  of  law  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson,  the
respondent conceded that, whilst the judge had referred  to  MA  (Pakistan),
he had not followed the guidance in that decision and in the later  decision
in MT and ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT
88. On the basis of the respondent's concession, UTJ Hanson found  an  error
of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and set  it  aside,  preserving
the factual findings  relating  to  the  family's  circumstances  and  those
relating to immigration history. He made directions  for  the  re-making  of
the decision which was limited to considering the test  in  section  117B(6)
of the 2002 Act.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me on 12 December 2018.

Mr Idowu relied upon the grounds of appeal submitted  for  the  hearing,  in
which  it  was  asserted  that  there  had  been  a   material   change   in
circumstances since the refusal decision as the eldest child, OO, was now  a
qualifying child.  Mr  Idowu  relied  upon  the  case  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in submitting  that
the best interests of the children lay in remaining  with  their  mother  in
the UK. Mr Idowu referred to  the  evidence  of  OO's  health  concerns  and
special needs and to the fact that she was born in  the  UK  and  had  never
been to Nigeria. He relied upon the case  of  MA  (Pakistan)  in  submitting
that it would be unreasonable to expect OO to leave  the  UK  and  that  the
appellants should be granted leave to remain.

Mrs Abone relied upon the refusal letter and the preserved findings of  fact
set out in  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson's  error  of  law  decision.  She
submitted that whilst OO was eight years of age and a qualifying  child,  it
would not be unreasonable for her to  leave  the  UK  with  her  mother  and
younger sibling. The first appellant's status in  the  UK  had  always  been
precarious. OO was not at  a  critical  stage  in  her  education.  She  had
required speech therapy but had been discharged. There was  no  evidence  to
support the appellant's concern that OO was on the autistic spectrum.  There
was no evidence from the children's father to support the first  appellant's
claim that he had a relationship with them. He had no immigration status  in
the UK. He had made an application for leave to remain on the basis  of  his
parental relationship  with  the  children  but  his  application  had  been
refused in July 2018 and he had an outstanding appeal listed  for  13  March
2019. There was no reason why he could not return to  Nigeria  and  maintain
any relationship with the children  in  that  country.  The  appellants  had
failed to show that there were any exceptional or  compelling  circumstances
justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

Consideration and findings

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside upon the  respondent's
concession that it contained an error of law in  that  the  guidance  in  MA
(Pakistan) and MT and ET  (Nigeria)  had  not  been  followed.  The  judge's
findings of fact in relation to the family's  circumstances  were  preserved
and the issue before the Tribunal  for  the  re-making  of  the  appeal  was
consideration of section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.

The First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact are set out at [27],  [29],  [31]
to [36] and [45] and can be summarised as follows. There  are  two  children
in the family, OO and IO, the eldest child  OO  being  the  only  qualifying
child. Whilst she has some speech and  language  difficulties,  OO  has  now
been discharged from speech therapy and has not been  found  to  be  on  the
autistic  spectrum  despite  the  first  appellant's  concerns.  There   are
otherwise no concerns about her health. Whilst OO has  established  ties  to
the UK, as set out at  [29]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  her
circumstances are essentially no different to any other child  of  her  age.
As Judge O'Hagan found, OO's  best  interests  lie  in  remaining  with  her
mother, as do those of her sister IO. There was no challenge to the  judge's
finding that it would be in  OO's  best  interests  to  remain  in  the  UK.
However, as the judge observed at [41], this is not  a  case  in  which  the
weight to be attached to the best interests is  greater  than  that  of  any
other child of her age. It was noted by the judge at [35] that the  evidence
of the children's relationship with their father was very limited  and  that
remains the case, with no evidence to support the  first  appellant's  claim
that there is a subsisting relationship and  contact  between  him  and  the
children. Furthermore, as Mrs Abone clarified, the children's father has  no
immigration status in the UK, his application to remain on the basis of  his
parental relationship with the children had been refused and it is  unlikely
that he would succeed in his appeal in the current circumstances.

I therefore turn to the question of reasonableness. I  have  had  regard  to
the principles set out in MA (Pakistan) and the  finding  of  the  Court  of
Appeal that the fact that a child has been here  for  seven  years  must  be
given significant weight when carrying out the proportionality  exercise.  I
have also had regard to the Upper Tribunal decision in MT  and  ET,  and  in
particular the observations and findings at [31] to [34] in that regard.  At
[31] the Upper Tribunal observed that:

"A much younger child, who has not started school or who has  only  recently
done so will have difficulty in establishing that her Article 8 private  and
family life has a material element, which lies  outside  her  need  to  live
with her parent or parents, wherever that may be.  This  position,  however,
changes over time, with the result that  an  assessment  of  best  interests
must adopt a correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position  in
the wider world, of which school will usually be an important part."

That is particularly relevant in two respects. Firstly that the child ET  in
that case was 14 years of age  and  was  well  advanced  in  her  education,
having already embarked on her course of studies leading to  GCSEs,  whereas
OO is 8 years of age and is still in the early stages of primary  education.
Secondly, the reference to the child's position in the "wider  world"  leads
into the most recent caselaw in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State  for
the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53,  where  the  Supreme  Court
considered at [19] that there was no place within section  117B(6)  and  the
concept of reasonableness  for  a  balancing  exercise  which  included  the
criminality or conduct of the parents and that  "There  is  nothing  in  the
section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered otherwise  than
in the real world in which the children find themselves." That followed  the
Court's quotation, at [18], from SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:
    "22.     In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of  whether
    it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK one has to address
    the question, 'Why would the child be  expected  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom?' In a case such as this there can only be one answer: 'because
    the parents have no right  to  remain  in  the  UK'.  To  approach  the
    question in any  other  way  strips  away  the  context  in  which  the
    assessment of reasonableness is being made ..."

It seems to me that, following the same reasoning, there  can  only  be  one
answer in the case of OO, namely that it is  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
leave the UK because her parents have no right to  remain  here.  The  first
appellant has no basis of stay in the UK. There is no evidence,  other  than
the unsupported statement of the first appellant,  of  any  contact  between
the children and their father. As Judge O-Hagan  observed  at  [35]  of  his
decision, the lack of evidence from  him  and  his  failure  to  attend  the
hearing is informative. In any event, as Mrs Abone submitted,  there  is  no
reason why he could not return to Nigeria himself to maintain  contact  with
his children as he has no immigration status in  the  UK.  Whilst  OO  is  a
qualifying child, there is nothing in her circumstances or in  her  ties  to
the UK which would suggest that it would be unreasonable for her  to  return
to Nigeria with her sister and  mother.  There  is  no  challenge  to  Judge
O'Hagan's findings at [36],[45]  and  [46]  in  regard  to  the  appellants'
ability to integrate into Nigeria and, in the circumstances, it seems to  me
that section 117B(6) does not apply in the appellants' case.  The  remaining
parts of section 117B were properly considered by Judge O'Hagan  and  remain
unchallenged. Accordingly I am in agreement with the respondent  that  there
are  no  compelling  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave  to  the
appellants outside the immigration rules. Their removal from  the  UK  would
not be disproportionate and would not breach their Article  8  human  rights
and the appeals are therefore dismissed.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by dismissing the appellants' appeals on Article 8 grounds.


    Anonymity


    The anonymity order made previously in the Upper Tribunal  pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  is
    maintained.


Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 13 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
