
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19563/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Via Business for Skype  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th April 2021                           |On 07 May 2021                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                              Miss Rose Sunday
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adefioye Akindele, instructed by The Legal
                    Resource Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    K M Verghis dated 27th October 2020, dismissing her appeal against  the
    refusal of the Secretary of State made on 31st  October  2019  refusing
    her leave to remain on the basis of her private life in  the  UK.   Her
    application was made on 27th August 2019 and considered under paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.   The  appellant  claimed  to  have
    lived in the UK for eighteen years and eight months to the date of  her
    application.  The Secretary of State did not accept that she had  lived
    continuously in the UK.  The appellant had provided  no  evidence  that
    she had entered the UK in December 2000 as claimed, and, there  was  no
    evidence in their system or records that confirmed that she had entered
    the UK in December 2000 although she had provided evidence that she had
    resided in the UK for the years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008  and
    2019.  She provided no evidence she was resident  in  the  UK  for  the
    years December 2000, 2001, 2002 and from 2009 to 2018.

 2. In relation to exceptional circumstances the appellant  maintained  she
    no longer had any ties with her home country,  which  is  Nigeria,  but
    that she had developed relationships and established a private life  in
    the UK and a close bond and relationship with her nieces  and  nephews.
    The Secretary of State pointed out that she had claimed  she  only  had
    leave to enter as a visitor, had remained unlawfully as  an  overstayer
    and that she still had parents who lived in  Nigeria.   She  was  being
    supported financially by family and friends in the  UK.   It  was  also
    noted that with reference to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
    Immigration Act 2009 (duty regarding the welfare of children) that  she
    did not have parental responsibility for her nephews and nieces.

 3. In her decision, in which the judge set out the elements of the refusal
    letter, she noted that the appellant's parents still lived  in  Nigeria
    and she noted at paragraph 9 that the appellant's case was now that she
    had been encouraged to come to the UK for prostitution but  managed  to
    extricate herself from this situation and had  continually  lived  with
    her sister and helped to look after the sister's children.   The  judge
    noted she was an author and her books aimed to assist and guide younger
    women in their development.  It was recorded that her evidence was that
    she had been enticed to come to the UK with a promise of a  job  and  a
    life opportunity, and went to live with her sister in December 2000 and
    then had a falling out with her sister,  and went to live and  work  in
    Manchester.  She said that her passport was taken from her as  soon  as
    she arrived in the UK in order to exert control over her to engage  her
    in prostitution.  There was  no  police  report  but  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 16 found

         'This evidence to have been given  spontaneously  and  the  account
         plausible.  The Tribunal observes  that  it  is  not  uncommon  for
         people who are subjected to this type of coercive behaviour to find
         it difficult to make disclosure.  If the appellant  has  fabricated
         this evidence, it would  have  been  very  easy  to  make  spurious
         complaints and gain capital from it earlier.  However the situation
         in which the appellant found herself does not excuse her failure to
         regularise her status in the UK over  a  long  period  of  time  in
         addition to working illegally'.

 4. At paragraph 17 the judge found that it was clear  that  the  appellant
    had been aware that  she  was  working  illegally  and  'the  appellant
    disclosed that she did not report the people who took her passport  and
    that the passport did not contain the correct  information'.   She  did
    confirm that the photograph attached to the passport was hers  and  she
    had never used a false name whilst in the UK.  The judge  at  paragraph
    17 onwards found as follows

         '17.     ... The Tribunal finds that the appellant entered  the  UK
             using false details and an invalid passport; this goes against
             the appellant and in particular, her assertion  that  she  did
             not know she was working illegally"

         18.      The  duration  of  the  appellant's  stay  in  the  UK  is
             disputed. It is the appellant's case that she entered  the  UK
             in December 2000. This is confirmed  by  the  sponsor  in  her
             statement and oral evidence.

         19.      The Tribunal found that the sponsor  gave  evidence  in  a
             straightforward  manner,  answering  all  questions  put.  The
             sponsor has been in the UK  for  approximately  27  years  and
             naturalised as a  British  Citizen  some  20  years  ago.  The
             sponsor is very clear that the appellant arrived in the UK  in
             December 2000 when her eldest daughter, the  sponsor's  niece,
             was approximately  6  years  old.  The  appellant  helped  the
             sponsor with childcare for her niece. She had  encouraged  the
             appellant to make a report to the Police about the seizure  of
             her  passport  but  it  was  only  later  that  the  appellant
             disclosed the coercive behaviour she endured and that was  why
             she had not made a complaint.'

 5. The judge also at paragraph 21 recorded

         'The respondent concedes  that  the  appellant  has  provided  some
         documentary evidence to demonstrate her presence in the UK in  2003
         to 2008 and 2019 but in submissions stated the appellant had stayed
         continuously in the UK to accumulate years to assist  her  eventual
         application.  The appellant has provided ample evidence by  way  of
         evidence from a number of  witnesses,  both  oral  and  written  to
         evidence her continuous stay in the UK.  The Tribunal finds  taking
         into account the evidence of the  appellant  and  sponsor  and  the
         evidence in the round, that the appellant entered the UK, albeit on
         an invalid passport, in December 2000'.

    At paragraph 24 the Tribunal judge noted that the appellant had parents
    in Nigeria with whom she was in contact, had provided no evidence other
    than her assertions as to why she could not return to Nigeria,  and  no
    evidence to suggest her condition  of  diabetes  was  other  than  well
    controlled or that her medical needs could not be met  in  Nigeria  and
    recognised that it was for the appellant to  demonstrate  the  required
    standard  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration.

 6. When considering Article 8  outside  the  Rules  the  judge  applied  R
    (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11 and cited in her conclusions the Supreme Court
    authority  of  Rhuppiah  and  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 58 which provided a definitive guidance  on  the
    meaning of precarious for the  purposes  of  Section  117B(5)  and  she
    proceeded to adopt a "balance sheet" analysis setting out the positives
    and negatives.  At paragraph 36 the judge reasoned the positives  which
    included her relationship with the sponsor and children, that  she  had
    been ordained as a church minister and written books.  At paragraph  37
    she reasoned

         '37.     The Tribunal finds the following are negatives:

             a)  The appellant entered the UK with an invalid  passport  in
                  December 2000. That fact weighs against her  but  even  if
                  she  had  entered  on  valid  travel  documents,  she  has
                  overstayed for a significant period  of  time,  making  no
                  attempt to regularise her stay until 2019. The  length  of
                  her  overstay  without  any  attempt  to  regularise   her
                  position until 2019 is a weighty factor.

             b)  The appellant sought work in Manchester, knowing that  her
                  status in the UK  was  not  resolved.  The  appellant  has
                  sought to minimise her illegal employment by stating  that
                  she was na�ve; the Tribunal has found that she sought work
                  in the full knowledge that she was not entitled to do  so;
                  this weighs against her.

             c)  The appellant has not provided any evidence to support her
                  contention that return to her country  of  birth  will  be
                  unduly harsh. She has family in  Nigeria  to  welcome  her
                  home.'

Permission to Appeal

 7. The grounds for application maintained that the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the appellant's case in the light of relevant  case  law.   At
    paragraph 37(a), the judge found that the appellant entered the UK with
    an invalid passport in December 2000 yet failed to attach any weight to
    the totality of the length of the appellant's continuous  residence  in
    the UK of just below twenty years, that was an error of law.

 8. The judge also found the  appellant  had  competence  in  English,  was
    financially independent  and  had  formed  enduring  relationships  and
    friendships and was a "church minister and is an author  of  two  books
    which have been published" which  had  substantially  influenced  young
    people for the  better  through  her  work  in  the  church;  thus  the
    appellant's contributions to society  were  in  themselves  capable  of
    swaying  a  proportionality  assessment.   In  her  assessment  on  the
    evidence the judge fell into error, in that she failed to consider  the
    guidance in Thakrar (Cart JR, Article 8,  Value  to  Community)  [2018]
    UKUT 336 citing the authority of UE Nigeria and the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 975, such that

         'in an appropriate case the weight to be given to the importance of
         maintaining immigration control can be diminished by reason of  the
         effect that the removal of the claimant  from  the  United  Kingdom
         would have upon the community'.

 9. The appellant's circumstances diminished the public  interest  and  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control and did not tilt the  balance  of
    proportionality assessment in favour of immigration control.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Zucker, stating

         "Having found the appellant had, by the  time  of  the  hearing  in
         October 2020, been unlawfully present in the United Kingdom  for  a
         continuous period of nineteen years and ten months, it is  arguable
         that the judge gave insufficient weight to his own finding.  Whilst
         there is no principle of 'near miss' the guidance in  the  case  of
         Patel [2013] UKSC 72 is apposite".

11. At the hearing before me Ms Cunha, accepted there had been no  Rule  24
    nor cross appeal but submitted that there was an error of  law  because
    the judge had not made a clear finding in relation  to  the  continuous
    residence.  I note there were submissions made on  file  in  which  the
    Secretary of State continued to rely on  her  decision  letter  but  in
    effect challengd the judge's  finding  on  continuous  residence.   The
    Secretary of State asserted that  the  evdience  supporting  continuous
    residence was vague, relied only on the sister's evidence and should be
    resisted.  Mr Akindele strongly resisted Ms Cunha's submission that  no
    clear finding had been made on continuous residence.

    Analysis

12. In view of Binaku (s.11 TCEA; s.117C  NIAA;  para.  399D)  [2021]  UKUT
    00034 (IAC), however, it is not open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    appeal at this stage because she was successful in  her  resistance  of
    the appeal. As explained in Binaku at paragraph 45:

         'The outcomes-based approach is  reflected  in  the  conclusion  of
         Underhill LJ in paragraph 27 of Devani that  the  right  of  appeal
         under section 11(2) of the 2007 Act lies only against an aspect  of
         the "order" (or, as we have previously explained, the determination
         of the specific ground(s) relied on, including,  where  applicable,
         different articles of the ECHR) and that a party who  has  obtained
         "the exact outcome" sought cannot, as the "winning party", mount an
         appeal'.

13. Notwithstanding, at paragraph 21 the judge clearly wrote

         'The appellant has provided ample evidence by way of evidence  from
         a number of witnesses,  both  oral  and  written  to  evidence  her
         continuous stay in the UK.  The Tribunal finds taking into  account
         the evidence of the appellant and sponsor and the evidence  in  the
         round, that the appellant entered the  UK,  albeit  on  an  invalid
         passport, in December 2000'.

14. The judge carefully assessed the credibility of the appellant and  gave
    sound reasons for the finding not  least  at  paragraph  23  where  the
    evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her  family   was   accepted.   Mere
    disagreement about the weight to be accorded to the evidence, which  is
    a matter for the judge, should not be characterised as an error of law,
    Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.

15. In my view the finding at paragraph 21 was an unambiguous finding  that
    the judge acknowledged and appreciated the length of time the appellant
    had been in the UK but also that the appellant had evidenced  that  she
    had been in the UK for a continuous period since 2000.    Indeed,  from
    paragraph 14 onwards the judge considered the length residence  in  the
    UK.  It is inconceivable that the judge was  not  aware  of  the  years
    spent here when arriving at her final  conclusion  on  proportionality.
    Indeed at 37 (d) the judge refers in her balance  sheet  to  the  'long
    stay'.

16. The fact is that the judge went on when considering the matter on human
    rights grounds to  specifically  identify  that  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 holds that  little  weight
    should be given to a private life established at a time when  a  person
    is in the UK unlawfully which the judge did find at paragraph 32.

17. Mr Akindele emphasised that the  appellant  had  by  the  time  of  the
    hearing been in the UK for 19 years and 10 months  but  the  point  was
    also made that she had been trafficked into  the  UK  and  this  should
    influence the proportionality assessment.  She had not reported that to
    the authorities because she was suspicious of  them.  It  was  accepted
    that further to paragraph 276ADE she had not been in  the  UK  for  the
    requisite 20 years as required under the Immigration Rules but  it  was
    not proportionate to remove her.

18. The judge recorded that when the appellant came to the UK in 2000,  she
    thought she had had her entry facilitated by those who  wanted  her  to
    engage in prostitution but she extricated herself from this  situation,
    (rather quickly it would seem), as she went to  live  with  her  sister
    almost immediately in 2000.  As the judge noted this  did  not  prevent
    her from working. Only after a 'falling out' with her sister  in  2002,
    did she move out and live and work in Manchester.

19. In terms of the circumstances of her  entry,  the  judge  set  out  the
    appellant's oral evidence of her  account  and  recorded  at  paragraph
    37(a) that, having lived with her  sister,  she  made  no  attempts  to
    regularise her stay until 2019.     It  appears  she  also  helped  her
    sister with childcare after coming to the UK [paragraph 19].

20. However, the issue of being trafficked was not part of the  appellant's
    application to the Secretary of State nor appeal but even  if  it  were
    not considered a 'new matter', it is clear that  the  judge  was  fully
    aware of both the length of the appellant's residence in the UK and her
    account of the circumstances of her entry. I am not persuaded that  the
    judge failed to take the relevant circumstances  of  her  arrival  into
    account and critically this point was not even raised in the grounds of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal albeit the appellant was represented.
    There was no mention of the  circumstances  of  her  entry  to  the  UK
    included in her witness statement nor the submissions  by  way  of  the
    skeleton argument on file.   I  am  not  persuaded  the  judge  can  be
    criticised for her approach to this evidence.

21. The judge legally directed herself properly on relevant caselaw.   With
    regards the Immigration Rules she noted that the appellant had not been
    in the UK for 20 years but just over  19  years  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  By contrast with the grant of permission, Patel  confirms  at
    paragraph 56 and 57 the following:

         '56.     Although the context of the rules may be relevant  to  the
         consideration of proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ that this
         cannot be equated with a formalised "near-miss" or "sliding  scale"
         principle, as argued for by Mr Malik. That approach is  unsupported
         by Strasbourg authority, or by a proper reading of  Lord  Bingham's
         words. Mrs Huang's case for favourable treatment outside the  rules
         did not turn on how close she had come to compliance with rule 317,
         but on the application of the family  values  which  underlie  that
         rule and are at the heart also of article 8.  Conversely,  a  near-
         miss under the rules cannot provide substance  to  a  human  rights
         case which is otherwise lacking in merit.

         57.      It is important to  remember  that  article  8  is  not  a
         general dispensing power.  It  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the
         Secretary of State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside
         the rules, which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The
         merits of  a  decision  not  to  depart  from  the  rules  are  not
         reviewable on appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley
         LJ's call in Pankina for "common sense" in the application  of  the
         rules to graduates who have been studying in the UK for some  years
         (see para  47  above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by
         themselves provide grounds of appeal  under  article  8,  which  is
         concerned with private or family life, not education as  such.  The
         opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in  this
         country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in  itself  a
         right protected under article 8'.

22. Paragraph 276ADE (1)(iii) of  the  Immigration  Rules  (unlike  OA  and
    Others (human rights; 'new matter'; s.120) Nigeria  [2019]  UKUT  00065
    (IAC) which deals with lawful residence) requires the appellant to have
    accumulated 20 years residence in the UK by the  date  of  application.
    The application was made to the Secretary of State on 27th August 2019.
     If the appellant arrived in December 2000 the appellant  had  been  in
    the UK at the date of application for 18 years and 8 months and not the
    20 years stipulated under the Immigration Rules.  Of that the judge was
    fully aware.  In terms of length of residence this was  a  'near  miss'
    which fails to assist the appellant in terms of the Immigration Rules.

23. The judge also  conducted  an  overall  evaluative  assessment  of  the
    appellant's life in the UK and found in relation  to  paragraph  276ADE
    (vi) that there were no very significant obstacles  to  her  return  to
    Nigeria.  The judge stated at paragraph 24

         'The appellant has been firm  in  her  assertion  that  she  cannot
         relocate to Nigeria as she has  lost  all  contact  with  her  home
         country.  She does, however, accept that she has  both  parents  in
         Nigeria and spoke to her mother about a month before  the  hearing.
         The Tribunal has not been assisted on this issue as  the  appellant
         has provided no evidence other than her assertions as  to  why  she
         could not return to Nigeria.  The appellant has diabetes; there  is
         no evidence to suggest her condition is other than  well-controlled
         or that her medical needs could not be met in Nigeria'.

24. Having assessed the Secretary of State's position through the  lens  of
    the Immigration Rules, the judge turned to the essence of the appeal on
    human rights grounds.  She correctly cited R (Agyarko) [2017]  UKSC  11
    which demands consideration of  whether there  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences on removal and a proportionate balance  between  the
    public and individual interest.  The judge also applied Section  117A-B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  created  a
    'balance sheet'.  I have already identified the  relevant  factors  and
    that she was fully aware of the appellant's  claimed  circumstances  of
    entry and subsequent failure to regularise her stay. It was open to the
    judge to find that did not excuse the appellant's failure to regularise
    her status.  Having found  that  the  appellant's  attachments  to  her
    family did not amount to family life (and which  was  not  challenged),
    the judge was entitled to consider that further to Section 117 B

         'Little weight should be given to private  life  established  at  a
         time when a person is in the UK unlawfully or at a  time  when  the
         person's immigration status is precarious' [32].

25. Part of the challenge was that the judge  had  not  factored  into  her
    assessment the contribution the appellant had made through  her  church
    work and writing of books. The judge, it was  asserted,  had  erred  by
    failing to address caselaw. The  judge  however  did  factor  into  her
    equation and on the "positive" side of the balance sheet at 36(b) that

         'the appellant has been ordained as a church  minister  and  is  an
         author of two books which have been published.  These  achievement,
         however laudable, were completed in the  full  knowledge  that  her
         stay in the UK was not only precarious but unlawful'.

26. Mr Justice Lane,  President  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber
    considered in Thakrar (CartJR; Art8: value to  community)  [2018]  UKUT
    00336 the various authorities on the value  of  such  contributions  in
    decreasing the weight to be accorded  to  the  public  interest  in  an
    Article 8 proportionality assessment.

27. In UE v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 975 it was accepted that the weight to  be
    attached to the public interest was not  fixed  or  immutable  and  Sir
    David Keene at paragraph 36 emphasised there would  be  relatively  few
    instances where the positive contribution would be very significant and
    thus reduce the public interest.  In UE he opined

         '36. I would, however, before  concluding,  emphasise  that,  while
         this factor of public value can be relevant in the way which I have
         described, I would expect it to make a difference to the outcome of
         immigration cases only in a  relatively  few  instances  where  the
         positive contribution to this country is very significant,  perhaps
         of the kind referred to by Lord Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh. The main
         element in the public interest will normally consist of the need to
         maintain a firm policy of immigration control, and little  will  go
         to undermine that. It will be unusual for the loss  of  benefit  to
         the community to tip the scales in an applicant's  favour,  but  of
         course all will depend upon the detailed facts which exist  in  the
         individual case and in particular on the extent of the interference
         with his private and/or family life'.

28. Richards LJ in UE added at paragraph 40

         'For those reasons I consider that contribution to the community is
         not a freestanding or stand-alone factor to be put into the Article
         8 balance as an independent consideration in its own right. It  can
         affect the balance only  in  so  far  as  it  is  relevant  to  the
         legitimate aim or the private life claim'.



29. In Thakrar at paragraph 112 Mr Justice Lane set out  the  criteria  for
    considering  the  contribution  to  the  community  in  an  Article   8
    assessment and concluded


         '112. Accordingly, the warnings contained in the judgments  of  Sir
         David Keene and Richards LJ are important.  Before  coming  to  the
         conclusion that submissions  regarding  the  positive  contribution
         made to the United Kingdom by an individual fall to be  taken  into
         account, as diminishing the importance to be given  to  immigration
         controls, a judge must not only be satisfied that the  contribution
         in question directly relates to those controls.   He  or  she  must
         also be satisfied that the contribution is "very  significant".  In
         practice, this is likely to arise only where the matter is one over
         which there can be no real disagreement.

         113. ...

         114. Without in any way intending to be prescriptive, it is  likely
         that one touchstone for distinguishing between instances that  lie,
         respectively, exclusively in the policy realm and in  the  area  of
         Article 8, is whether the removal of the person concerned will lead
         to an irreplaceable loss to the community of the United Kingdom  or
         to a significant element of it'.

30. It was clear that the First-tier Tribunal judge did not  consider  that
    the appellant's removal would be an 'irreplaceable loss'.  At paragraph
    22 the judge referred to the work of the appellant stating:

         'The Tribunal accepts that the appellant has been an active  member
         of her church, has been ordained as a minister and is an author but
         these achievements are set  against  the  settled  point  that  the
         appellant entered the UK in December 2000 with  invalid  documents,
         worked illegally and failed  to  regularise  her  stay  until  this
         application was made on 27th August 2019'.

31. The judge considered the documentation and various character references
    within the bundle recording

         'The Tribunal  accepts  the  regard  and  affection  in  which  the
         appellant is held by these  witnesses  and  other  witnesses  whose
         statements are within the appellant bundle'.

32. The Pastor Same Adetona from the Harvest Mission Outreach, stated  that
    the appellant would be  a  'valuable  asset  in  the  community'.   The
    Reverend Moses Simiyu of the River of Life Christian Fellowship in 2019
    wrote of her

         'upright conduct and transparent heart towards God  and  to  people
         she contact with (sic)'.

33. I do not wish to undermine her  contribution,  but  nowhere  did  these
    ministers refer to the appellant's removal as being  an  'irreplaceable
    loss to the community'.

34. Similarly, Ms Ssemtoogo from Women with a Vision Movement commended her
    published work aimed at helping younger girls 'discover the beauty  and
    talent within them  so  that  they  are  empowered  to  break  free  of
    generational cycles of pain, depression and dependency'.  The appellant
    was described as a 'realist writer who relates well with  her  audience
    and a relevant voice'.    The testimonies were  laudable  but  did  not
    refer to irreplaceability; those books had already been  published  and
    no doubt those books could be read with or without her presence in  the
    UK and further works did not have to be written in the  UK.    Even  if
    the judge did not expand on the contribution this was  not  a  material
    error of law  in  view  of  the  legal  authorities  and  the  evidence
    presented.

35. There was also a reference from  Ms  Danilewiez  dated  2nd  May  2019,
    confirming how the appellant assisted the sponsor when she  arrived  in
    the UK in 2000 with her child when the mother was working.  Again  this
    work is not for the community nor irreplaceable.

36. On a careful reading of the decision as a whole, it is not evident that
    the judge failed in her proportionality assessment to take into account
    the appellant's length of time in the UK nor her circumstances on entry
    or her contribution through her  work.    The  judge  factored  in  her
    contribution to  the  community,  but  in  the  face  of  the  evidence
    presented  and  in  view  of  Thakrar  the  judge's  approach  to   the
    proportionality assessment did not contain any material error  of  law.
    Neither  the  circumstances  of   the   appellant's   entry   nor   her
    'contributions' nullify the effect of Section 117 of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in this instance.    The judge did make
    a clear and  unambiguous  findings  that  the  appellant  had  remained
    continuously in the United Kingdom since December 2000.

37. I find no material error of law and the decision will stand.




Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal shall stand. The  appeal  of  Ms  Sunday
remains dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed           Helen  Rimington                          Date  26th  April
2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

