


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/19344/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Glasgow
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 28th July 2017                                                        On
7th September 2017


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                            MRS. NIMRA ASAD MALIK
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Munawar Ali of Rightway Legal, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:      Mr S.Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction


   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. She applied for leave to
      remain as the wife of a British national and the parent of a British
      child. Her application was refused as she had not supplied her
      husband's wage slip for the month before the application nor was the
      necessary letter from his employer. The respondent had requested these
      by letter dated 9 June 2016 and had also asked for evidence that their
      child, A, mentioned in the application lived with the appellant.
      However, no response was received.


   2. In a decision promulgated on 24 November 2016 Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Shanahan dismissed her appeal. There was a limited right of
      appeal, namely, on human rights grounds. The judge looked at matters
      through the prism of the immigration rules in accordance with the
      established principles. The appellant had given an explanation as to
      why the wage slip had been omitted, stating her husband's employer had
      been taken over. She also explained there were no letters in their
      daughter's name, she being only two years of age. The judge was not
      satisfied with the explanations given and found the suitability and
      financial requirements in the rules were not met. The judge did accept
      there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with her daughter who
      is a British national. However the judge was not satisfied it would be
      unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom with her
      parents. Outside the rules the judge found no breach of article 8.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
      judge erred in law in concluding it would be reasonable to expect the
      appellant's child to leave the country of her nationality.

   4. On 29 June 2017 she gave birth to her son who is also a British
      national. There is a statement from the appellant dated 25 July 2017
      to the effect that her husband is in full-time employment and she
      cares for his disabled mother. Her representative submitted that the
      appellant's presence was necessary in order to look after not only the
      children but her husband's disabled mother. Her husband was in full-
      time employment.

   5. The presenting officer submitted that no material error of law was
      established. At the time the First tier Judge made the decision the
      second child had not been born. The judge had concluded that it was
      reasonable for the appellant's firstborn to leave with her and this
      was open to the judge.

 Consideration

   6. At the time of the judge's decision the appellant second child had not
      been born. The hearing took place in October 2016 at which stage it
      would not have been known she was pregnant. Consequently, no error of
      law can arise from facts subsequent to the decision.


   7. The judge did accept that the appellant's firstborn child was British.
      Mr Ali stated that the appellant lodged the appeal herself. The appeal
      was determined on the papers so the judge did not have the benefit of
      submissions. The judge accepted the appellant's daughter was a British
      citizen and considered EX1.1 (a) (ii) and whether it would be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. The judge
      concluded that given the age of the child, two years of age, she had
      not formed any significant private life and it would be reasonable for
      her to accompany her mother whilst an entry clearance application was
      made. The judge at paragraph 15 stated that they had not been provided
      with sufficient evidence to establish it would not be reasonable to
      expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. In looking at section
      117 B (6) the judge appreciated that the public interest does not
      require the person's removal where there is a genuine parental
      relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to
      expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. However, whilst
      acknowledging the appellant's daughter was a qualifying child the
      judge took the view it would not been established it would be
      unreasonable to expect her to go with her mother.


   8. Notably, there is no reference to the respondent's I.D.Instructions of
      August 2015, particularly in relation to the best interests of the
      child. 11.1 considers the application of EX 1 of appendix FM and
      paragraph 276 ADE(i), meant to reflect the duty in section 55 of the
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The judge had accepted
      there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship. Point 11.2.3
      of the Guide provides that in the absence of criminality the decision
      maker should not make a decision which would have the effect of
      forcing a British child to leave the United Kingdom. Where the
      decision to refuse an application would require a parent or primary
      care to return to a country outside the EU the case must always be
      assessed on the basis it would be unreasonable to expect the child to
      leave. The application of section 117 B (6) was considered by the
      Court of Appeal in MA et al[2016] EWCA Civ 705 and guidance was given
      as to the reasonableness test. Reference is made to the established
      jurisprudence that the best interests of the child are a primary
      consideration. The focus is solely on the child.


Error of law


   9. It is my conclusion that the judge materially erred in law in
      concluding the appellant's child could go to Pakistan either with one
      or both parents. That conclusion does not pay sufficient regard to the
      rights of a British child and ignores the respondent's Guidance. As
      stated, the judge was at a disadvantage in that the appeal was being
      determined on the papers. The judge did refer to limited information,
      including details about her caring responsibilities towards her mother-
      in-law and her husband's work commitments. The reality is that now the
      appellant has a second child which makes a move to Pakistan all the
      more unrealistic. Given the issues arising I am in a position to
      remake the decision without hearing further evidence. I would do so
      and allow the appeal.


Decision.

The appeal is allowed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly                            6TH
September 2017

