

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/19037/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 August 2019                        |On 09 September 2019            |
|                                         |                                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MUHAMMAD UMAR FARAZ
                           (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Semega-Janneh (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  brought
   with the permission of  a  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it  made  on  01
   May 2019. The tribunal decided to allow the claimant's appeal  against  a
   decision of the Secretary of State of 04 September 2018 refusing to grant
   leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2. By way of background, the claimant is a  national  of  Pakistan.  He  was
   born on 25 February 1992. He entered the United Kingdom on 03  June  2011
   in possession of a Tier 4 Student Visa valid  until  21  March  2014.  He
   studied accountancy. Prior  to  the  expiry  of  his  leave  he  says  he
   undertook some Test of English for  International  Communication  (TOEIC)
   tests  in  reading,  writing,  speaking  and  listening  in  the  English
   language. He says he attended the School  of  Economics  test  centre  in
   Manchester on 14 January 2014 to take those  tests.  He  passed  but  the
   Secretary of State has alleged that he used a proxy  test  taker.  On  21
   March 2014, the last day of his leave, he applied for  further  leave  to
   remain but that application was refused. He appealed  that  decision  and
   was initially successful but  the  Upper  Tribunal  then  set  aside  the
   tribunal's initial decision for want of jurisdiction. On 30 November 2016
   the claimant applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds but  the
   Secretary of State refused and, in so doing, relied upon  his  view  that
   the claimant had indulged in deception with respect to the  TOEIC  tests.
   As to Article 8 on the European Convention on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  the
   Secretary of  State  took  the  view  that  there  were  no  'exceptional
   circumstances'  such  as  to  justify  allowing  leave  outside  of   the
   Immigration Rules.

3. The claimant's appeal was heard by the tribunal on 01 May 2019 (the  date
   of its  written  reasons).  Both  parties  were  represented  before  the
   tribunal and the claimant gave oral evidence. The claimant  asserted,  or
   it was asserted on his behalf, that he had not used a  proxy  test  taker
   and that he should, in all circumstances, be granted a  period  of  leave
   under Article 8.

4. The first thing the tribunal had to  consider  was  whether  or  not  the
   claimant had used  deception  as  alleged.  The  tribunal  resolved  that
   important matter in the claimant's  favour.  It  did  so  notwithstanding
   written evidence which had been supplied by the  Secretary  of  State  in
   support of her contention. The tribunal,  in  explaining  its  reasoning,
   said this:

       '17. I find  that  the  appellant  has  provided  a  consistent  and
       plausible account of the steps that he has taken to properly undergo
       testing of his competence in English. The appellant in oral evidence
       gave a detailed account of why he chose the test centre that he did,
       how he got there and its location. I find that his claimed level  of
       English is consistent with the standard of English presented by  the
       appellant in giving oral evidence before me, without the use  of  an
       interpreter; and that he has undertaken other examinations that  are
       also commensurate with his claimed level of English.

       18. I find  that  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the  respondent  is
       insufficient  to  show  that  on  the  balance  of  probability  the
       appellant engaged in deception  in  obtaining  an  English  language
       certificate from ETS. That is because  the  evidence  before  me  on
       which the respondent relies is almost wholly generic in nature  with
       only limited consideration given to the individual circumstances  of
       this appellant.

       19. To the extent that the  respondent  has  adduced  evidence  that
       relates to this appellant, it is limited to a single line entry from
       an ETS database and a summary document known as a Lookup Tool, which
       contains figures with no commentary. I  find  that  limited  dataset
       provided carries  little  probative  weight  in  the  absence  of  a
       narrative explanation of the figures and the absence  of  supporting
       substantive evidence. I find that  the  generic  witness  statements
       provide limited assistance in support of the respondent's claim that
       the appellant  deployed  a  proxy  test  taker  in  respect  of  the
       examination 14 January 2014.

       20. I accept that the respondent's evidence  shows  that  there  has
       been widespread abuse at certain ETS centres but that in  itself  is
       not a sufficient  basis  on  which  to  make  a  finding  that  this
       particular appellant, in relying on test certificates issued by ITS,
       engaged in deception in obtaining them.

       21. In looking at the evidence as a whole, I find that the appellant
       is a credible witness. I therefore find the appellant's narrative of
       events to be reliable.'

5.  The tribunal then turned its attention to Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and
   asked itself whether the claimant could  successfully  benefit  from  it.
   Again, it resolved that matter in the claimant's favour. It said this:

       '24.  In  considering  the   appellant's   circumstances   and   the
       application of the human rights convention, I am aware of  a  number
       of cases  that  give  guidance  as  to  the  correct  approach  when
       considering the  relationship  between  the  immigration  rules  and
       article 8 of the human rights  convention.  I  do  not  consider  it
       necessary to recite that guidance here. It is not disputed that  the
       appellant in any  event  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       immigration rules so far as they relate to article 8 issues.

       25. I also take into account of the guidance provided by  the  Court
       of Appeal in the cases of Ahasan and Khan  which  deal  specifically
       with matters of deception and language testing. I also take  account
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as noted above.

       26. In the present case, I find that the appellant has been  in  the
       United Kingdom since 2011 and that over that period he has developed
       private life of sufficient depth to engage article 8. The  appellant
       has developed his relationships with his family and has a network of
       friends.

       27. I  find  that  the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  leave  has
       consequences of such gravity as to engage article  8  of  the  human
       rights convention and that such interference is in  accordance  with
       the law.

       28. In considering if  such  an  interference  is  necessary,  in  a
       democratic society, and in the interests of maintaining a  fair  and
       effective immigration policy, I take account of the  fact  that  the
       immigration rules together with the amendments to the 2002 act  show
       that considerable weight is to be  attached  the  respondent's  view
       that  removal  is  in  the  public  interest  when  undertaking  the
       balancing exercise inherent in considering article 8.

       29.  In  considering   whether   or   not   such   interference   is
       proportionate,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  not  engaged  in
       deception in obtaining his language test  results.  I  further  find
       that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  wrong  to  have  refused   his
       application for leave to remain as a student on the basis  that  the
       appellant had engaged in deception.

       30. To the extent that it is necessary to consider  section  117  of
       the 2202[sic] Act, I find  that  the  appellant  is  able  to  speak
       English to a satisfactory  level  and  as  such  would  be  able  to
       integrate into society and is less likely to be a burden taxpayer in
       the light of prospects of employment. The appellant in the past  has
       been successful in accessing the job market lawfully and when unable
       to do so has not been a burden on the  taxpayer  by  virtue  of  the
       financial support provided by his family.

       31. I take into account the appellant's immigration history and that
       he arrived in the United  Kingdom  lawfully.  I  attach  significant
       weight to the fact that the appellant arrived the United Kingdom  in
       2011 to pursue his studies and had taken steps  to  ensure  that  he
       complied with the immigrations rules in the light of concerns  being
       raised in 2014 about the reliability of  ETS  certificates.  I  also
       attach significant  weight  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  has
       suffered an injustice at the hands of the respondent who  failed  to
       properly weigh the evidence in  the  appellant's  case  and  wrongly
       concluded that the appellant had engaged in deception  in  obtaining
       his language certificates from ETS.

       32. I find that the appellant has developed a private life which for
       a period of time was enjoyed,  whilst  his  immigration  status  was
       precarious. I attach limited weight to this aspect of the  appellant
       circumstances because the appellant's immigration  status  has  been
       undermined by the respondent's wrongful decision in  this  case  and
       through no fault of the appellant.

       33. I find that in the present case there are compelling reasons  to
       show that the respondent's decision is disproportionate.  Given  the
       respondent's wrongful refusal of leave on the basis of the appellant
       having engaged in deception, I follow the guidance in the  Court  of
       Appeal cases that show that,  in  appropriate  cases,  an  appellant
       should be afforded a reasonable opportunity of securing new leave.

       34. In the circumstances of the present case, I find that refusal of
       the appellant's application, to the extent that it  engages  private
       life  as  noted  above,   would   amount   to   a   disproportionate
       interference. There are compelling reasons showing that leave should
       be granted outside the rules: the appellant has at all times  sought
       conscientiously to comply with the immigration rules;  has  suffered
       unfairness at the hands of the respondent; and if he were  returned,
       the appellant would be deprived of the opportunity  of  seeking  new
       leave to study and of obtaining an accountancy qualification  gained
       in the United Kingdom with all the subsequent advantages that  would
       flow from that in the advancement of his career.

       35. I therefore allow the appeal on the grounds of a claimed  breach
       of article 8 of the human rights convention.

6. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, lodged  by
   the Secretary of State, followed. Essentially, it  was  argued  that  the
   tribunal had failed to 'assess correctly the burden of  proof';  had  not
   properly assessed or understood the Secretary of  State's  evidence;  had
   failed to consider the possibility that a person who spoke  good  English
   might nevertheless have reason to use a proxy test  taker;  had  attached
   too much weight to the claimant's apparent ability to recall  details  of
   his journey to the test centre and the examination process; and had  used
   Article 8 'as a general  dispensing  power'.  Permission  to  appeal  was
   granted on those grounds.

7. Permission having been granted there  was  a  hearing  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal (before me) so that it could be decided whether the tribunal had
   erred in law and, if it had, what should flow from  that.  Representation
   at  that  hearing  was  as  stated  above  and  I  am  grateful  to  each
   representative. I have taken what each  of  them  said  into  account  in
   deciding this appeal.

8. As to the attack  upon  the  tribunal's  decision  with  respect  to  the
   alleged use of a proxy test taker, whilst the tribunal  did  not  clearly
   set out the shifting burden of proof, it clearly did proceed,  correctly,
   on the basis that ultimately  it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
   demonstrate that there had been deception and that that had to be done to
   a balance of probabilities. It did not materially  misdirect  itself.  It
   did not, as the grounds seem to suggest, simply proceed on the basis that
   all it had to be  satisfied  of  was  the  claimant's  ability  to  speak
   English.  It  clearly  appreciated  that   what   it   had   to   decide,
   notwithstanding his competence or otherwise in English, was whether there
   had been deception. It said nothing to indicate that it thought a  person
   who was competent in English would not or might not  have  reason  to  be
   tempted to use a proxy test taker. It simply did not think,  on  all  the
   evidence, that that is what this  claimant  had  done.  It  was  for  the
   tribunal to evaluate the weight to be given to the evidence  relied  upon
   by the Secretary of State and that is  what  the  tribunal  did.  It  was
   entitled not to accord significant weight to the written evidence of  the
   Secretary of State for the reasons it  gave  notwithstanding  a  contrary
   view being expressed in the written grounds. It was  entitled  to  attach
   some weight (which is all it did) to the  claimant's  ability  to  recall
   details of his journey to the test centre and the examination process. It
   did not regard the matter as being determinative or anything close to it.
   In short, it does not seem to me that the various arguments  deployed  by
   the Secretary  of  State  go  beyond  disagreement  with  the  tribunal's
   findings and conclusions as to this aspect of the appeal.

9. As to article 8, Mrs Pettersen initially pursued the 'general  dispensing
   power' point before me. However, during  the  course  of  discussion  she
   accepted that the way the tribunal had expressed itself at  paragraph  34
   of its written reasons suggested that all it had in mind was the granting
   of limited leave under article 8 to enable  the  claimant  to  obtain  an
   accountancy qualification  which  it  appeared  he  was  seeking.  Having
   accepted that she was, it is fair to say I think, much more  reticent  in
   pursuing the particular point  about  article  8  taken  in  the  written
   grounds. In short, she accepted that that weakened the point.

10. It might be that, on one view, the tribunal's conclusions on  article  8
   were generous. But the tribunal has reasoned out how it  arrived  at  its
   decision and I am satisfied its conclusion as to article 8  was  open  to
   it, was otherwise lawful, and has been adequately explained. It does seem
   to me that the tribunal did only have in mind the grant of  a  relatively
   short period of  leave  albeit  sufficient  to  enable  the  claimant  to
   undertake some further studies and, indeed,  Mr  Semega-Janneh  confirmed
   that was all the claimant himself was seeking.  No  doubt  that  will  be
   taken into account by the Secretary of  State  when  considering  how  to
   proceed with respect to any grant of leave which may now follow in  light
   of my decision that the  tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  and  that,  in
   consequence, its decision must stand.

11. It follows from the above that the Secretary of State's  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made. None was sought and there doesn't appear  to
be any reason for making one.

      Signed

            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                   Dated                                    1 September
2019
