
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19269/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 28 October 2020               |04 November 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     TD
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Joshi, instructed Joshi Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffiths (hereinafter referred to as the
         "FtTJ") promulgated on the 6 April 2020, in which  the  appellant's
         appeal against the decision to refuse his human rights  application
         dated 11 November 2019 was dismissed.

      2. I make an anonymity direction under Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  as  the  facts  concern  the  medical
         circumstances of a third party. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
         court directs otherwise, the Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No
         report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
         him or any member of his family. This direction applies both to the
         Appellant and to the Respondent.

      3. The hearing took place on 28 October 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellant who was able to see and hear  the  proceedings  being
         conducted. There were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial
         technical problems were encountered during the  hearing  and  I  am
         satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases
         by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Ms Joshi and  Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of Algeria. There is no record  of  the
         appellant's entry in the United Kingdom, but it is claimed that  he
         entered in 2005 at the age of 20 years. He has remained  in  United
         Kingdom unlawfully since that time. He has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a British citizen with whom he lives.

      6. On the 18 April 2019 he made  a  human  rights  application  in  an
         application for leave to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  his
         family life with his partner and on the basis of his private life.

      7. The application was refused in a decision made on the  11  November
         2019. The decision letter states that  the  appellant  had  made  a
         human rights claim in an application for leave to remain in the  UK
         under Appendix FM to the immigration rules  on  the  basis  of  her
         family life with her partner.

      8. It was accepted that the eligibility relationship  requirement  was
         met (on the basis that that the appellant was a genuine  subsisting
         relationship).

      9. The reasons given for refusing the application can be summarised as
         follows. The respondent considered his application under paragraphs
         R-LTRP of Appendix FM but considered that he  could  not  meet  the
         eligibility immigration requirements (E-LTRP 2.1  of  Appendix  FM)
         because he was  in  the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration  laws  and
         paragraph EX1 did not apply.

     10. The respondent considered whether the  appellant  would  be  exempt
         from  meeting  certain  eligibility  requirements  of  Appendix  FM
         because paragraph EX1 applied. It was accepted that  the  appellant
         had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner who  was
         a British national and it was noted that his partner  was  a  carer
         for her elderly mother  and  therefore  could  not  leave  the  UK.
         However  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were   any
         insurmountable  obstacles  in  accordance  with  paragraph  EX2  of
         Appendix FM which means a very significant difficulties which  will
         be faced by the appellant or her partner in continuing their family
         life together outside of the UK, and which could not be overcome or
         entail  very  serious  hardship  for  her  and  her  partner.   The
         respondent took into account  that  his  partner's  elderly  mother
         could be cared for by the NHS and whilst her care  for  her  mother
         was undoubtedly important, it has not been objectively  shown  that
         this care could not be provided by a trained professional carer  in
         his partner's absence. Further it was considered that the appellant
         could continue to sponsor a donkey from abroad and that he was  not
         required to remain in the UK to do so.

     11. His application was considered under the private life  rules  under
         paragraph 276 ADE, where it was noted  that  the  appellant  was  a
         national Algeria who had entered the UK in January 2005 although he
         had not provided any evidence of entry in 2005 nor of any residence
         in the UK until 2012. If the claimed date of entry was accurate, he
         had lived in the UK for 13 years and it was not  accepted  that  he
         lived in the UK continuously for 20 years,  he was not between  the
         ages of 18 and under 25 having lived in the UK for more  than  half
         his life and was over the age of 18 and therefore  could  not  meet
         the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1 (iii)(iv) and  (v).  As  to
         paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the respondent did not accept that  there
         would be very significant obstacles to his integration into Algeria
         if required to leave the UK because  he resided in Algeria  for  at
         least the first 18 years of his life. He has stated that  he  spoke
         French and Arabic fluently of which Arabic is a recognised language
         in Algeria with French being widely spoken. It was considered  that
         he would have  retained  cultural  and  linguistic  connections  to
         Algeria during his time in the UK. Consequently, he failed to  meet
         the requirements of that part of the rule.

     12. The respondent did not consider that  there  were  any  exceptional
         circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain and  considered
         the issues that had been raised as to why it would be unjustifiably
         harsh for him to  return  to  Algeria.  The  respondent  took  into
         account the basis of the application and  that  his  partner  is  a
         carer for her elderly mother and cannot leave the UK. The  decision
         noted that he had provided a copy of her mother's parking card  for
         a disabled person and that  he  had  stated  his  partner  received
         carer's allowance. However, it was found that insufficient evidence
         had been provided that his partner was critical to the care of  her
         mother. It was not objectively shown that his partner was the  sole
         carer of her mother and that no one else, for  example,  a  trained
         carer could cater for her mother's needs. The decision letter noted
         that it was evident from the provided disabled parking permit  that
         his partner's mother was capable of driving herself and  is  placed
         question the claim that she required a full-time carer in the  form
         of her daughter. Whilst  his  partner's  care  and  attention  from
         mother was welcomed and appreciated by mother, it had not been seen
         that  this  function  could  not  be  performed  by  anybody  else.
         Therefore, it is not accepted that  his  partner  was  required  to
         remain the UK to look after his elderly mother. Furthermore, it was
         considered that if his partner wish to remain in the UK to care for
         her mother she would be able to visit the appellant in  Algeria  if
         he returned.

     13. The decision letter also made  reference  to  entry  clearance.  It
         stated that the appellant had said that his partner  would  not  be
         able to afford the maintenance requirements for entry clearance  if
         he were to leave the UK and apply for entry clearance. However  the
         respondent stated that it had not been objectively shown  that  his
         partner was a required carer for her mother and as  such  would  be
         open to her to return to paid employment and to earn  the  required
         amount to  meet  the  maintenance  criteria  for  entry  clearance.
         Alternatively, it would be open to her to relocate Algeria with the
         appellant negating the need to meet the financial requirements.

     14. The last point raised related to the appellant's sponsorship  of  a
         donkey and that he had a love of horses and animals. Whilst  it  is
         accepted that he sponsored a donkey and a pony, it  was  considered
         that the sponsorships could continue from abroad.

     15. The decision letter considered that the appellant had not  provided
         any evidence of his entry to the UK of any residence  until  around
         2012 - 2013. It was noted that he never had any leave to  enter  or
         remain in the UK and as defined by  paragraph  117  B   (4)  little
         weight should be given to a private life or a  relationship  formed
         with a qualifying partner that is established by person at  a  time
         when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

     16. As to the appellant's claim that he had no ties in Algeria, it  was
         considered that when he left as claimed aged 18, he  did  not  have
         any ties in France and Spain where he claimed he'd resided  nor  in
         the UK. It is considered that it already demonstrated  his  ability
         to adapt to life in another country as when he arrived  in  the  UK
         had no knowledge or previous experience of life here. The appellant
         could do the same in return to Algeria country where he  was  born,
         raised and spent his formative years. The respondent did  not  find
         that there was any evidence to demonstrate  that  there  were  any"
         exceptional circumstances" established in his case.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     17. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Griffith)  on  the
         12 March 2020.

     18. In a determination promulgated  on  the  6  April  2020,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rule in question and on Article 8  grounds.  The  judge
         heard evidence  from  the  appellant  with  the  assistance  of  an
         interpreter in the Algerian language and also heard  evidence  from
         his partner.

     19. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  could
         not meet the requirements for a grant  of  leave  to  remain  under
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules;  specifically  he  could  not
         meet the immigration requirements of the rules as he has never been
         granted leave to enter or remain in the UK.

     20. By reference to  his  relationship  with  his  partner,  the  judge
         accepted that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         his partner who is a British citizen. As to paragraph EX1 the  FtTJ
         set out at [54] the decision in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 and also the
         decision of Lal [2019] EWCA Civ 1925.

     21. The FtTJ then turned to the  factors  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant  which  it  was  stated   amounted   to   "insurmountable
         obstacles". They were as follows; the appellant's lack of  ties  to
         Algeria and the fact that his partner cannot leave the  UK  because
         she is her mother's carer.

     22. At [57] the FtTJ addressed the issue of "insurmountable  obstacles"
         and the main  issue  which  was  the  role  his  partner  currently
         undertook as her mother's carer  and  on  the  basis  that  it  was
         claimed that no one else would be available to  undertake  it.  The
         judge noted that it was understandable that  her  mother,  given  a
         state of health did not wish to go into a home  and  prefer  to  be
         cared for by her  daughter.  The  judge  also  found  that  it  was
         "equally understandable that the appellant's partner would wish  to
         continue caring for her mother, who is  terminally  ill."  However,
         the judge stated "what has not been established, however,  is  that
         there is no  reasonable  alternative  to  the  appellant's  partner
         acting as her mother's carer. For as long as she remains in the  UK
         looking after a mother, it is likely that social services will  not
         intervene. Therefore, as attractive as the options might appear,  I
         am satisfied that if (the appellant's partner) were not in the  UK,
         or decided that of necessity or choice she had to return  to  work,
         suitable alternative arrangements could be made  for  her  mother's
         care ."

     23. At [58] the FtTJ stated that there was "very little other  evidence
         addressing the very significant difficulties  at  the  cover  would
         face in continuing their family life outside the UK beyond  general
         assertions arising from the appellant's lack of ties and his  claim
         that the country is run by a Mafia."

     24. The judge concluded that any claim based on lack of ties to Algeria
         or lack of family support could carry  little  or  no  weight.  The
         judge also observed that there were no  other  issues  raised,  for
         example, about his partner's inability to speak the local  language
         or her unfamiliarity with the culture.

     25. As to whether family life could be established in Algeria, the FtTJ
         referred to the approach as explained  in  Lal  and  there  was  no
         evidence that it would  be  literally  impossible  family  life  to
         continue in Algeria because, for example, his partner would not  be
         able to gain entry clearance. The judge  noted  that  the  evidence
         relied on as amounting to a "very significant difficulty" making it
         impossible family life to continue outside of the UK centred around
         his partner's desire to remain in the UK to look after her  mother,
         but the judge noted  that  there  were  alternatives  available  to
         mitigate that difficulty.

     26. At [60] the FtTJ returned to the issue of his partners  mother  and
         noted that his partner "has a choice, albeit  is  a  difficult  one
         given her mother's state of health, as to whether  she  remains  in
         the UK or accompanies the appellant to Algeria. I am not satisfied,
         however, on the evidence that it would be impossible for the couple
         to continue family life in  Algeria  or  that  living  there  would
         entail very serious hardship for them, sufficient to meet the  high
         test for insurmountable obstacles in paragraph EX1(b) of the  rules
         because there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
         continuing outside of the United Kingdom.

     27. At paragraphs  [61]-[67  ]  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
         proportionality of the appellant's removal under Article 8  of  the
         ECHR  but  concluded  that  it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with his right to respect for private and family life.
         Having adopted the balance sheet approached the judge set  out  the
         factors in favour of the respondent and in support  of  immigration
         control. They were:

           . the appellant and his partner cannot show compliance with  the
             immigration rules and  in  particular  paragraph  EX1  (b)  as
             regards insurmountable obstacles.

           . The appellant has been in the UK  unlawfully  since  2005  and
             will have had no expectation  that  in  the  absence  of  show
             compliance with the rules he would be allowed to remain in the
             UK.

           . His relationship with his partner was commenced at a time when
             he was in the UK illegally.

           . The fact that he spoke English  and  his  financial  situation
             were "neutral factors".

           . He could not meet the immigration rules  in  relation  to  his
             private life or to show  that  there  were  "very  significant
             obstacles to his integration". The judge found  at  [66]  that
             there is little or no  evidence  offered  in  support  of  his
             private life claim beyond general assertions and that the high
             test   required   for   establishing   significant   obstacles
             integration had not been met given that he spoke the language,
             was in good health, had  to  work  experience  given  that  he
             intended to return there five years  ago,  that  was  evidence
             that he felt capable of reintegration.

     28. The factors weighing in favour of family life were as follows:

           . his length of residence in the United Kingdom.

           . He has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner.

           . There were no character issues to be taken into account

         The judge finally  concluded  at  [67]  that  the  "maintenance  of
         effective immigration controls in the public interest. I have  been
         unable to identify any exceptional circumstances  on  the  evidence
         before me to add to the facts in the balance  sheet  in  favour  of
         family and private life. I therefore find the  appellant  has  been
         able to demonstrate exceptional circumstances as  to  outweigh  the
         public interest in his removal that would  cause  the  respondent's
         decision to have unjustifiably harsh  consequences  and  render  it
         disproportionate."

     29. Permission to appeal was issued on the 16 April 2020 and on 15 June
         2020,  permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  FtTJ  Wilson.  The
         application was renewed and on the  20  July  2020  Upper  Tribunal
         judge Rintoul granted permission stating:-

             "It is arguable that the judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of
             whether the appellant's partner could reasonably  be  expected
             to leave  her  terminally  ill  mother  for  whom  she  cares.
             Permission is therefore granted on ground 1.

             Whilst there may be  less  merit  in  grounds  2(iii)  and(iv)
             permission is granted on all grounds."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     30. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the  14 August 2020, inter alia, indicating  that  it
         was provisionally of the view that the error of law issue could  be
         determined without a face to face hearing and that this could  take
         place via Skype. Both parties have indicated that they were content
         for the hearing to proceed by this method. Therefore, the  Tribunal
         listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given  by  each
         of the parties with the assistance of their advocates.

     31. Ms Joshi on behalf of the appellant relied upon the written grounds
         of appeal.

     32. There was no Rule 24 response filed on behalf of the respondent.  I
         also heard oral submission from the advocates, and  I  am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

The grounds:

     33. The appellant appeals on three grounds:-

          1) First, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law by
             making perverse or irrational findings on  matters  that  were
             material to the outcome. Ground one refers to the  appellant's
             partners mother being terminally ill.  The  grounds  refer  to
             paragraph 57 - 65 at the  decision  and  that  the  judge  had
             identified that his partners mother was terminally ill  having
             suffered a stroke from undergoing treatment  for  cancer.  The
             judge in  the  same  paragraph  stated,  "what  has  not  been
             established however is that there is no reason alternative  to
             (the  appellant's  partner)  acting  as  a  mother's   carer."
             However, at paragraph  9  the  judge  found  "the  appellant's
             partner's desire to remain in the UK to look after  a  mother,
             but I found above that there  are  alternatives  available  to
             mitigate that difficulty." Further at paragraph 62  the  judge
             found "the appellant's partners mother will be fully  entitled
             to NHS care and support from social services".

          2) The grounds refer to  the  partners  oral  evidence  that  she
             stated she received carers allowance as a mother's  carer  and
             that there was no replacement by the state. She  further  gave
             evidence at the social services expect the family members look
             after her mother and  that  carers  were  only  to  administer
             medication that they did not provide any written  confirmation
             to this effect. The grounds therefore state was  unclear  what
             evidence the judge was referring to in support  of  a  finding
             that there were alternative to her mother's care  as  the  NHS
             and social services will provide support.

          3) It was also submitted that the respondent provided no evidence
             in the respondent's bundle.

          4) It was disputed that it was not the partners  desire  to  care
             for a mother but that there was no replacement  for  the  care
             she provided by the state.

          5) It was therefore submitted that the judge's finding that there
             are alternatives to  her  mother's  care  in  the  absence  of
             evidence is  an  irrational  finding  on  a  matter  that  was
             material to the outcome.

          6) As to ground 2, entitled "not an x factor",  it  is  submitted
             that:

               i)   the  appellant  and  his  partner  had  an  eight   year
                  relationship and their bond during the currency  of  their
                  relationship strengthened due to exceptional factors  such
                  as her partner's father's death, her mother  falling  ill,
                  mother having to have a full-time carer, partner having to
                  leave  her  job  to  look   after   a   mother,   mother's
                  deteriorating health as the medical condition is terminal.
                  The relationship is therefore beyond normal emotional ties
                  between two partners relying on Kugathas paragraphs  1425.
                  It is asserted that the judge failed to take this material
                  into account which would have  led  to  the  finding  that
                  there are "exceptional factors".

              ii) The appellant is one of his partner and the  partner  have
                  to choose between her  mother's  care  and  a  partner  is
                  contrary to  the  instructions  that  reiterate  that  the
                  barrier must be one which either  cannot  be  overcome  or
                  which it is unreasonable to expect a  person  to  overcome
                  (Agyarko at paragraph 18). The judge found  at  [64]  that
                  she  accepted  that  the  appellant's  partner  could  not
                  currently support an application entry clearance but  that
                  it was not impossible for her to find  full-time  work  in
                  order to do so. The grounds  assert  that  the  burden  of
                  proof is not "impossible" but on  balance  "unreasonable".
                  On  the  facts  of  the  appeal  it  will  be  on  balance
                  unreasonable for the appellant's partner not  care  for  a
                  mother, find a full-time job so as to meet  the  financial
                  and maintenance requirements under appendix FM in order to
                  be  able  to  sponsor  the  appellant's  entry   clearance
                  application. It is asserted that the judge had  failed  to
                  assess exceptional factors under the  "appropriate  burden
                  of proof" and as a result the findings are irrational.

             iii) It is further asserted that there was no finding  relating
                  to the appellant's physical and emotional support  to  his
                  partner's mother. It is asserted that the  appellant  also
                  had an emotional bond with her mother as  he  carried  out
                  tasks for her. Whilst the judge referred to this at [59]'s
                  the ground state that the appellant carries out  household
                  tasks as well as cooked and spends time with her mother in
                  order  to  provide  a  company   and   emotional   support
                  (paragraph 5 of the  witness  statement).  The  judge  had
                  found that the support provided by the appellant in caring
                  for his partners mother  was  not  crucial  and  could  be
                  replaced but in the absence of  supporting  evidence  that
                  was an irrational finding stop the judge therefore  failed
                  to make a finding  relating  to  the  consequence  of  the
                  support provided by the appellant to  the  mother  on  the
                  partners well-being, suggesting that the  partner  is  not
                  alone to  care  for  the  mother  and  has  emotional  and
                  physical  support  in  his  partners  mother's  care.  The
                  grounds assert that there was no finding by the  judge  on
                  the partners well-being in the absence of support provided
                  by the appellant to the mother

              iv) it is further asserted that  due  to  code  19  it  was  a
                  further factor which demonstrated that it was unreasonable
                  to expect the appellant's partner to continue family  life
                  with the appellant in Algeria. It is stated that it  would
                  be unreasonable to place a mother in a care  home  due  to
                  code 19 and the risks that were hiring care homes.  It  is
                  also asserted  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the
                  appellant and partner to travel to Algeria to  join  their
                  family life due to the code 19 risk. The judge  failed  to
                  take into account  the  practicality  of  the  appellant's
                  removal and the domino consequential effect upon two other
                  British citizens.

               v) It  is  submitted  that  the  decision  is  in  error  and
                  conflicts have remained unresolved by the decision.

     34. There was no rule 24 response on behalf of the Secretary of  State.
         Mr Diwnycz submitted that  it  was  a  matter  of  choice  for  the
         appellant's partner spouse to care for  her  mother.  He  submitted
         that he was not aware of any filial duty to undertake such care and
         that despite her decision to care for her mother she was  under  no
         legal duty to do so and therefore it remained a matter of choice.

     35. He submitted there was no error in the judge's  assessment  of  the
         medical evidence and that in relation to the "Covid point" it was a
         valid one when considering removal but would only be relevant if an
         error of law was found.

     36. He therefore submitted the decision of the FtTJ was one open to her
         to make.



Decision on error of law:

     37. The issue under EX1 and whether there were insurmountable obstacles
         to family life outside of the UK was addressed by the FtTJ at [55 -
         59]. There is no challenge to the finding made at  [55]  where  the
         judge attached no weight to the appellant's claim  that  he  had  a
         "scaring experience" in his home country. Nor again the finding  at
         [56] relating to the appellant's assertion as to lack of ties;  the
         judge having found that he had lived in Algeria  until  he  was  20
         years of age.

         Paragraph EX.1. reads as follows (so far as relevant):

             " EX.1. This paragraph applies if

             (a) ...; or

             (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
             settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
             humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside
             the UK.

             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and which could not be
             overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
             applicant or their partner."

     38. The  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko  considered  the  meaning  of  the
         "insurmountable obstacles" requirement  at  [43]  to  [45]  of  the
         judgment as follows:

             "43. It appears that the  European  court  intends  the  words
             "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a practical and
             realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to  obstacles
             which make it literally impossible  for  the  family  to  live
             together  in  the  country  of  origin  of  the   non-national
             concerned. In some cases, the court has used other expressions
             which  make  that  clearer:  for  example,  referring  to  "un
             obstacle majeur" ( Sen v The Netherlands (2003) 36  EHRR  7  ,
             para 40), or to "major  impediments"  (  Tuquabo-Tekle  v  The
             Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798 , para 48), or to  "the  test  of
             'insurmountable obstacles' or 'major  impediments'"  (  IAA  v
             United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19,  paras  40  and  44),  or
             asking itself whether  the  family  could  "realistically"  be
             expected to move ( Sezen v The Netherlands (2006) 43 EHRR 30 ,
             para  47).  "Insurmountable  obstacles"   is,   however,   the
             expression employed by the  Grand  Chamber;  and  the  court's
             application of it indicates that it is a  stringent  test.  In
             Jeunesse, for example, there were said to be no insurmountable
             obstacles  to  the  relocation  of  the  family  to  Suriname,
             although the children, the eldest of  whom  was  at  secondary
             school, were Dutch nationals who had  lived  there  all  their
             lives, had never visited  Suriname,  and  would  experience  a
             degree of hardship if forced  to  move,  and  the  applicant's
             partner was in full-time employment in  the  Netherlands:  see
             paras 117 and 119.

             44. Domestically, the  expression  "insurmountable  obstacles"
             appears in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the  Rules.  As
             explained in para 15 above, that paragraph  applies  in  cases
             where an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route
             is in the UK in breach of immigration laws, and requires  that
             there should be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
             that  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.  The   expression
             "insurmountable obstacles" is now defined by paragraph EX.2 as
             meaning "very significant difficulties which would be faced by
             the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life
             together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
             would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  their
             partner." That definition appears to me to be consistent  with
             the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg case law.
             As  explained  in  para  16  above,  paragraph  EX.2  was  not
             introduced until after the  dates  of  the  decisions  in  the
             present cases. Prior to the insertion of that  definition,  it
             would nevertheless be reasonable to infer,  consistently  with
             the Secretary of State's statutory duty to act compatibly with
             Convention rights, that the expression was  intended  to  bear
             the same meaning in the Rules as in the  Strasbourg  case  law
             from which it was derived. I would therefore interpret  it  as
             bearing the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX.2.

             45. By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles"
             are treated as a requirement for the grant of leave under  the
             Rules in cases to which that paragraph  applies.  Accordingly,
             interpreting the expression  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the
             Strasbourg case law, leave to remain  would  not  normally  be
             granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain  under
             the partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws,
             unless the applicant or their partner would face very  serious
             difficulties in continuing their family life together  outside
             the UK, which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
             serious hardship. Even in a case where  such  difficulties  do
             not exist,  however,  leave  to  remain  can  nevertheless  be
             granted outside the Rules in "exceptional  circumstances",  in
             accordance  with  the  Instructions:  that  is  to   say,   in
             "circumstances in which refusal would result in  unjustifiably
             harsh consequences for the individual such that refusal of the
             application would not be proportionate."

     39. The Supreme  Court  held  that  the  requirements  were  Article  8
         compliant,  recognising  that  the   requirements   reflected   the
         Minister's view of where the public interest lay.

     40. As the Supreme Court also made clear, even where those requirements
         are not met, an  applicant  may  still  be  granted  leave  if  the
         consequences of removal result are "unjustifiably harsh".  However,
         as the Supreme Court went on to say when looking at  the  grant  of
         leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules,  this  will  only  arise  in
         exceptional circumstances.  The  rationale  for  that  approach  is
         explained at [54] and [55] of the judgment as follows:

             "54. As explained in para 49 above,  the  European  court  has
             said that, in cases concerned with precarious family life,  it
             is "likely" only to be in exceptional circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of article 8. That reflects the weight  attached  to
             the contracting states' right to control their borders, as  an
             attribute of their sovereignty, and the limited  weight  which
             is generally attached to family life established in  the  full
             knowledge that its continuation in the  contracting  state  is
             unlawful or precarious. The court has repeatedly  acknowledged
             that "a state is entitled, as  a  matter  of  well-established
             international law, and subject to its treaty  obligations,  to
             control the entry of  non-nationals  into  its  territory  and
             their residence there" ( Jeunesse, para 100). As the court has
             made clear, the Convention is not intended to  undermine  that
             right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control
             by establishing a family life while present in the host  state
             unlawfully or temporarily, and then presenting it with a  fait
             accompli. On the  contrary,  "where  confronted  with  a  fait
             accompli the removal of the non-national family member by  the
             authorities would be  incompatible  with  article  8  only  in
             exceptional circumstances" ( Jeunesse, para 114).

             55. That statement reflects the strength of  the  claim  which
             will normally be required if the contracting state's  interest
             in immigration control is to be outweighed.  In  the  Jeunesse
             case, for example, the Dutch  authorities'  tolerance  of  the
             applicant's unlawful presence  in  that  country  for  a  very
             prolonged period, during which she developed strong family and
             social  ties  there,  led  the  court  to  conclude  that  the
             circumstances were exceptional and that a fair balance had not
             been struck (paras 121-122). As the court put it, in  view  of
             the particular circumstances of the case, it was  questionable
             whether general immigration considerations could  be  regarded
             as  sufficient  justification  for  refusing   the   applicant
             residence in the host state (para 121)."

     41. In the case of Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 at paragraph  35  of
         that decision the Court of Appeal gave its view as to  the  correct
         interpretation of insurmountable obstacles.  The  Court  of  Appeal
         indicated in paragraphs 36 and 37:

             "36. In applying this test, a logical approach is first of all
             to decide whether the alleged obstacle  to  continuing  family
             life outside the UK amounts to a very significant  difficulty.
             If it meets this threshold requirement, the next  question  is
             whether the difficulty is one which would make  it  impossible
             for the applicant and their partner to  continue  family  life
             together outside the UK.  If  not,  the  decision-maker  needs
             finally to consider whether, taking account of any steps which
             could reasonably be taken to avoid or mitigate the difficulty,
             it would nevertheless entail very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner (or both).

             37. To apply the test in what Lord Reed in the Agyarko case at
             para 43 called  'a  practical  and  realistic  sense',  it  is
             relevant and necessary in addressing these questions  to  have
             regard to the particular characteristics and circumstances  of
             the individual(s) concerned. Thus, in the present  case  where
             it was established by evidence  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
             tribunal  that  the  applicant's   partner   is   particularly
             sensitive to heat, it was relevant for the  tribunal  to  take
             this fact into account in assessing the  level  of  difficulty
             which Mr Wilmshurst would face and the degree of hardship that
             would be entailed if he were required  to  move  to  India  to
             continue his relationship. We do not accept, however, that  an
             obstacle to the applicant's partner moving to India  is  shown
             to be insurmountable - in either of the ways  contemplated  by
             paragraph EX.2. - just by  establishing  that  the  individual
             concerned would perceive the difficulty as insurmountable  and
             would in fact be deterred by it from relocating to India.  The
             test  cannot,  in  our  view,  reasonably  be  understood   as
             subjective  in  that  sense.  To  treat  it  as   such   would
             substantially dilute the intended stringency of the  test  and
             give an unfair and perverse advantage to  an  applicant  whose
             partner is less resolute or committed  to  their  relationship
             over one whose partner is ready to endure greater hardship  to
             enable them to stay together".

     42.  In paragraph 41 of the decision the Court of  Appeal  pointed  out
         that the question of  the  difficulties  a  person  might  face  on
         relocation did not necessarily require  objective  confirmation  by
         third party evidence, stating:

             "The question is one of fact and there  is  nothing  wrong  in
             principle with basing a finding about a  person's  sensitivity
             to heat on evidence given by the person concerned and  members
             of their family, as the FtT judge did in this  case,  if  such
             evidence is regarded as sufficiently compelling".

     43. The FtTJ addressed the real issue at [57]. The FtTJ considered that
         carers were available and were in attendance four times  a  day  in
         order  to  give  her  medication.  The  judge  noted  that  it  was
         understandable that her mother, given a state  of  health  did  not
         wish to go into a home and prefer to be cared for by her  daughter.
         The judge also found that it was "equally understandable  that  the
         appellant's partner would wish to continue caring for  her  mother,
         who is terminally ill." However, the judge  stated  "what  has  not
         been  established,  however,  is  that  there  is   no   reasonable
         alternative to the  appellant's  partner  acting  as  her  mother's
         carer. For as long as she remains in the UK looking after a mother,
         it is likely that social services will not intervene. Therefore, as
         attractive as the options might appear, I am satisfied that if (the
         appellant's partner) were  not  in  the  UK,  or  decided  that  of
         necessity or choice she had to return to work, suitable alternative
         arrangements could be made for her mother's care ."

     44. At [59] the FtTJ referred to the approach as explained in  Lal  and
         stated  "  there  was  no  evidence  that  it  would  be  literally
         impossible family life to continue in Algeria because, for example,
         his partner would not be able to gain entry  clearance.  The  judge
         noted  that  the  evidence  relied  on  as  amounting  to  a  "very
         significant  difficulty"  making  it  impossible  family  life   to
         continue outside of the UK centred around his partner's  desire  to
         remain in the UK to look after her mother, but the judge noted that
         "there were alternatives available to mitigate that difficulty".

     45. Having carefully considered both the written grounds and  the  oral
         submissions of the parties, I am satisfied that the FtTJ  erred  in
         her assessment of this issue.

     46. Whilst the FtTJ recited the test at [54] and made reference to part
         of the decision in Lal at [59] I am satisfied that the FtTJ did not
         apply that test to the particular circumstances of this appeal  and
         secondly, failed  to  take  into  account  material  evidence  when
         reaching the overall decision both when  considering  the  exercise
         under the rules and addressing the issue outside of the rules which
         the FtTJ  did at [62].

     47. As the decision in Agyarko sets out, the test is to  be  understood
         in a "practical and  realistic"  sense  rather  than  referring  to
         obstacles which make it literally impossible for the family to live
         together. The "very significant difficulties" as  set  out  in  EX2
         means  that  the  appellant's  partner  would  face  "very  serious
         difficulties in continuing her family life outside the UK and which
         could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship".

     48. At [57] and [59]  the  FtTJ's  assessment  referred  to  the  issue
         relating to his partners mother's care and that  it  had  not  been
         established that there  was  "no  reasonable  alternative  to  (his
         partner) acting as  her  mother's  carer."  The  FtTJ  reached  the
         conclusion that social services would  intervene  if  she  was  not
         caring for her mother and that if she was not in the UK or she  had
         the choice to go back to work  "suitable  alternative  arrangements
         could be made."

     49. Again at [59] the judge  found  that  "there  are  alternatives  to
         mitigate the difficulties" and concluded that they could be carried
         out by "someone else".

     50. However, whilst the FtTJ  made  reference  to  the  test  of  "very
         significant difficulties", there was no reference as to whether the
         circumstances would entail "very serious hardship" by reference  to
         the evidence.

     51. Furthermore, whilst at [59] the FtTJ cited the decision in Lal  and
         "there was no evidence that it would be literally impossible family
         life to continue in Algeria", the FtTJ did not go on to address the
         rest of the test as set out in Lal which  went  on  to  state  that
         "whether taking account of any steps which could be reasonably  (my
         emphasis)  be taken to avoid or mitigate the difficulties, it would
         nevertheless entail very serious hardship".

     52. In my judgement the FtTJ did not consider whether  the  alternative
         she identified was "reasonable" when reaching a  decision  that  it
         had  not  been  established  that  no  reasonable  alternative  was
         available or that alternatively  there  were  circumstances   which
         could amount to "very serious hardship".

     53. As to the alternative care arrangements, the only finding made  was
         at best inferential on the basis that the appellant's mother  would
         be fully entitled to NHS care and support from the social services.
         However, what was missing was any consideration of the evidence  of
         the appellant's partner and what actual  care  could  be  provided.
         There was no evidence that her mother would  receive  the  type  of
         care that she was currently receiving from a daughter as opposed to
         any "entitlement" that arose due to her situation or as  a  British
         citizen. The evidence before  the  tribunal  from  the  appellant's
         partner was that she received  a  carer  allowance  as  her  carer,
         having giving up her well-paid employment to do  so  because  there
         was no replacement for the type of care that she could give by  the
         state.

     54. Whilst the judge made reference to the other  carers  who  came  to
         administer medicine, this was the extent  of  their  role  and  the
         evidence before the tribunal was that the social services  expected
         members of the family to  take  on  that  responsibility.  In  this
         respect the judge failed to take into account that it was  not  the
         appellant's "desire" look after her mother but that  there  was  no
         replacement for the type of care she required which could be  given
         by the  state  which  is  why  she  had  given  up  that  well-paid
         employment which had been evidenced by her salary slips.

     55. Whilst the judge did not consider the appellant to be an impressive
         witness, it does not appear that that  view  was  extended  to  his
         partners evidence and there is no reason why her account as to  why
         she was caring for her mother was one that  should  not  have  been
         accepted.

     56. It is also unclear what  evidence  there  was  in  support  of  her
         finding that there were "reasonable alternatives" from the evidence
         was before the tribunal.

     57. I am also satisfied that in reaching the decision the judge  failed
         to take account of the type of care  that  was  undertaken  by  the
         appellant's partner. Whilst  the  FtTJ  considered  what  might  be
         "practical" assistance that could be given by  alternative  carers,
         in my judgement there was no consideration of  the  emotional  care
         the appellant's partner provided for her mother which could not  be
         replicated by the state. This was particularly important given  the
         nature of her illness.

     58. On the factual evidence there was family life not only between  the
         appellant and his partner but also between the appellant's  partner
         and her mother. There is no dispute  from  the  evidence  of  their
         relationship went beyond normal emotional ties  and  there  existed
         real and effective support provided by the appellant's  partner  to
         her mother. The only finding made is that it  was  the  appellant's
         partners preference to look after her mother (at [57] and that  she
         had not established that there  were  no  reasonable  alternatives.
         However, in my view there is no assessment of what was "reasonable"
         in the context of the factual claim or what "suitable arrangements"
         would be.

     59. The decisions in Agyarko and Lal make it plain when addressing  the
         question  there  is  a  need  to  have  regard  to  the  particular
         characteristics and circumstances of the individuals concerned.  In
         that context, there was clear evidence from  the  appellant,  which
         the judge accepted, that the appellant's mother did not want to  go
         into a care home (at 40]. Nor did her daughter wish  her  to  given
         the evidence that she was in the final stages of  her  illness  (at
         [22]).

     60. There was no assessment  of  the  consequences  of  the  ending  of
         support  for  the  appellant's  partners  mother   and   the   very
         significant hardship that would entail for the appellant's partners
         mother with whom she shared family life.

     61. In relation to the issue of placing her mother in a care home,  the
         grounds refer to COVID -19 and that this would be  unreasonable  to
         place her mother in  such  an  establishment  due  to  the  present
         circumstances of the virus. As Mr Diwnycz submitted at the time  of
         the hearing on 12 March 2020 the country had not entered  lockdown,
         and this may have been the reason why it did  not  feature  in  the
         judge's mind as a relevant consideration. However, the decision was
         not completed until 6 April 2020 by this time  there  was  evidence
         that care homes  were  being  disproportionately  affected  by  the
         virus. I conclude that this is not necessarily a feature that would
         have been readily apparent to the  judge  but  there  was  evidence
         before the  tribunal  that  the  appellant's  partner  was  greatly
         concerned of such an arrangement that  it  would  not  meet  others
         needs and thus would entail "very serious hardship" if she were  to
         leave the United Kingdom to enable family life to continue  outside
         of the UK. In the alternative to leave the UK and settle in Algeria
         with her partner would lead to "unjustifiably harsh consequences".

     62. For those reasons I am satisfied that the FtTJ  erred  in  law  and
         that the decision should be set aside.

     63. As to the  remaking  of  the  decision,  neither  party  sought  an
         adjournment to file any further evidence and were content  for  the
         tribunal to remake the decision on the evidence that was before it.
         Miss Joshi in her submissions referred to the legal test set out in
         Agyarko and confirmed in Lal and that on the factual  circumstances
         of this particular appellant taken with those of his partner,  that
         the evidence demonstrated that there were very serious difficulties
         in continuing family life outside of the UK for the  appellant  and
         his partner which would entail "very  serious  hardship"  and  that
         there were no steps that reasonably could  be  taken  to  avoid  or
         mitigate the difficulties. She placed weight upon the  evidence  of
         the appellant's partner supported by the appellant as to the  level
         of care that was undertaken and that no evidence had been  provided
         to demonstrate that that care could be undertaken by an  identified
         others.

     64. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to make any further submissions noting that
         this was a "finely drawn appeal."

     65. When remaking this decision, neither  party  disputes  the  factual
         matters set out in the FtTJ's  decision.  I  will  summarise  those
         facts.

     66. The appellant met his partner in 2012 and for the last eight  years
         they have lived together in a genuine and subsisting  relationship.
         The appellant left Algeria aged 20 and thus has lived in the United
         Kingdom since that time unlawfully. He has been United Kingdom  for
         15 years without leave. The appellant is emotionally dependent upon
         her partner in the light of her mother's  illness  and  the  stress
         that this is put upon her (paragraph 38) and that she does not know
         how she would cope in the absence of her partner (at [38].

     67. The appellant's  partners  mother  is  suffering  from  a  terminal
         illness and as a result in or about 2017 his partner  gave  up  her
         well plaid employment to act as a carer to her mother.  Her  father
         had died in or about 2013 and there had been  further  life  events
         which had caused her upset and distress.  In  September  2019,  her
         mother had a stroke which had resulted in her not being mobile  (at
         [20]). The appellant's partner cares for her mother  for  prolonged
         periods of time from 1.20-7 PM each day and there  are  four  other
         carers who administer her medication who stay for short periods  of
         time (at [20]).

     68. The appellant's partners mother is described as in her final stages
         of illness and that she has been told that her  medication  is  not
         effective. The appellant also assists his partner in caring for her
         mother (at [32]) although not to the same extent as his partner.

     69. The appellant has not returned to Algeria since he left at the  age
         of 20 and he previously had  lived  with  his  grandmother.  It  is
         unclear whether she has died  or  whether  he  does  not  know  her
         whereabouts (at [56]). The appellant is able to speak English,  his
         previously had work experience as a kitchen porter, decorating  and
         working in a car wash (at [27]).

     70. This is a  human  rights  claim  and  the  only  ground  of  appeal
         available to the appellant was that the respondent's  decision  was
         unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998.If  Article  8  is
         engaged, as on the facts of this appeal, the Tribunal may  need  to
         look at the extent to which an appellant is said to have failed  to
         meet the requirements of the rules, because  that  may  inform  the
         proportionality balancing exercise that must follow.

     71. When undertaking an assessment under the Immigration Rules relating
         to private life under Paragraph 276ADE, there is no dispute that he
         cannot meet those requirements given his length of residence of  15
         years nor can it be said that there are very significant  obstacles
         to his reintegration to Algeria in the light of the FtTJ's findings
         set out at [66].

     72.  I  now  turn  to  EX1  and  the  issue  of   whether   there   are
         "insurmountable obstacles". I have set out earlier  the  applicable
         test both identified in the Supreme Court's decision in Agyarko and
         in the more recent decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Lal.  In
         considering this issue are in my myself that this  is  a  stringent
         test.

     73. Having considered the particular circumstances of  the  appellant's
         partner and the particular individual circumstances that  arise  on
         the facts of  this  case,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  very
         significant difficulties in continuing family life together outside
         of the UK which even if they could be overcome, by alternative care
         for example, would entail very serious hardship.

     74. Those difficulties are recited above. The appellant's partner is  a
         full-time carer for her terminally ill mother and having considered
         the evidence, which is not in dispute, had the  type  of  care  she
         required been available, it is not likely that she would have given
         up her well paid employment to carry out that care.  Her  evidence,
         which was not challenged, is that she provides care for her  mother
         which not only extends to her  physical  well-being  but  also  her
         emotional well-being. There is no evidence before the tribunal that
         the type  of  physical  care  or  importantly  the  emotional  care
         undertaken  by  the  appellant's  partner   could   reasonably   or
         practically be provided by the state. It is not a matter of  choice
         or of desire but in my judgement the evidence demonstrates that the
         appellant's partners care for her  mother  is  because  her  mother
         requires the physical  and  emotional  care  that  a  daughter  can
         provide at a critical stage of her life.

     75. Whilst I accept the appellant also carries out some tasks  for  the
         appellant's  mother,  as  the  FtTJ  found,  those  tasks  are  not
         extensive (at [57]). However, in the light of the evidence they are
         likely to have the  effect  of  complementing  the  care  given  by
         partner and must go some way to alleviating some  of  the  pressure
         upon her.

     76. I also take into account that if  the  appellant  was  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom with his partner for  family  life  to  be
         established in Algeria, the evidence before the  tribunal  is  that
         the only realistic option for the appellant's partners mother would
         be to be in a care home. The evidence before the tribunal  is  that
         this is not something that either her mother would want at a  stage
         of illness nor what the appellant's partner could envisage for her.
         Such a move would in my judgement entail very serious  hardship  in
         the light of the COVID risk in view of her age and is  not  a  step
         that I consider would be one that  would  reasonably  mitigate  any
         difficulty in the  very  serious  hardship  that  they  would  face
         showing that the test of insurmountable obstacles is met.

     77. Even if I were wrong, as the decision in  Agyarko  sets  out,  even
         when the requirements are  not  met,  an  applicant  may  still  be
         granted leave if the consequences  of  removal  are  "unjustifiably
         harsh" (at [54 - 55] of that decision).

     78. In carry out that assessment, I am satisfied that there  is  family
         life between the appellant and his partner who  are  in  a  genuine
         subsisting relationship of some length. There is also  family  life
         established between the appellant's partner and her mother for  the
         reasons I have already referred to.

     79. A court must accord "considerable weight"  to  the  policy  of  the
         Secretary of State at a "general level": Agyarko paragraph [47] and
         paragraphs [56] - [57]; and see also Ali paragraphs  [44]  -  [46],
         [50] and [53]. This includes the policy weightings set out in  Part
         5A (sections 117A- 117D) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 (inserted by the Immigration Act 2014).

     80. As provided by section 117A (1), Part 5A applies where a  Court  or
         Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under the
         Immigration Acts breaches Article  8  and  as  a  result  would  be
         unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Section 117A
         (2) requires the Court  or  Tribunal,  in  considering  whether  an
         interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
         family life is justified under article 8(2), to have regard in  all
         cases to the considerations listed in section 117B.

         Section 117B states as follows: -

             "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
             cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-"

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-"

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-"

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-"

                  (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

     81. To ensure consistency with the HRA 1998 and the ECHR, section  117B
         must,  however,  have  injected  into  it  a  limited   degree   of
         flexibility so that the application  of  the  statutory  provisions
         would always lead to an  end  result  consistent  with  Article  8:
         Rhuppiah (ibid) paragraphs [36] and [49].

     82. I also take into account the decision of GM (Sri Lanka) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1630.  The  Court
         of Appeal set out a helpful summary as follows:

          a. the rules  and  section  117B  must  be  construed  to  ensure
             consistency with article 8;

          b. the national UK authorities have  a  margin  of  appreciation,
             which is not unlimited but is nonetheless real and  important,
             when setting the weighting to be applied to various factors in
             the overall proportionality assessment;

          c. the proportionality test for an assessment outside  the  rules
             is whether a "fair balance" is struck between competing public
             and private interests;

          d.  the  proportionality  test  needs  to  be  applied   on   the
             "circumstances of the individual case";

          e. there is a requirement for proper evidence and mere  assertion
             by an applicant as to his or her personal circumstances and as
             to the evidence will not however necessarily  be  accepted  as
             adequate; and

          f.  the  list  of  relevant  factors  to  be  considered   in   a
             proportionality assessment is "not closed"  and  there  is  in
             principle no limit to the factors  which  might,  in  a  given
             case, be relevant to an evaluation under article 8, which is a
             fact sensitive exercise.

     83. In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8,  the  heart
         of the assessment is whether the decision strikes  a  fair  balance
         between the due weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining an effective system  of  immigration  control  and  the
         impact of the decision on the individual's private or family  life.
         In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a court or
         Tribunal should give appropriate weight  to  Parliament's  and  the
         Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength  of  the  general
         public interest as expressed in the relevant  rules  and  statutes:
         see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and see   R  (MM  and  others)
         (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC
         10, the Supreme Court at [43].

     84. The public interest in effective immigration control is engaged (at
         S117B (1)). The appellant formed his relationship with his  partner
         when he was in the UK unlawfully and as a consequence little weight
         can be attached that relationship (see  s117(4)  and  also  to  the
         private life that he has established albeit a  lengthy  one  of  15
         years. Financial independence in the United Kingdom and an  ability
         to speak English would be neutral factors  in  the  analysis  under
         Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended).

     85. On the other side of the balance,  I  attach  some  weight  to  the
         nature of the relationship the appellant has with  his  partner  in
         the context of the support that he provides in the  very  difficult
         circumstances and  mitigate  the  hardship  she  currently  has  in
         looking after her mother. Whilst the evidence does not  demonstrate
         he carries out extensive caring abilities,  what  he  does  provide
         some respite for his partner  and  upon  whom  she  is  emotionally
         dependent.

     86. On the present circumstances the appellant's partner cannot support
         an  entry  clearance  application  so  that  family  life  can   be
         maintained. To do so she would have to relinquish the care  of  her
         mother, and the  consequences  of  that  would  mean  that  in  all
         likelihood she would be in a care home which would entail  all  the
         difficulties already set out above.

     87. Whilst it  is  not  necessary  to  identify  any  "unique"  or  any
         "exceptional" factor (see Agyarko at [47], [60]), in  my  judgement
         the circumstances that relate to the appellant's  partner  and  the
         care of her mother are compelling on the evidence for  the  reasons
         already outlined. In my judgement those circumstances are  of  such
         weight  to  demonstrate  that  when  the  interference   with   the
         appellant's family and private life is balanced against the  public
         interest, the consequences of removal are "unjustifiably harsh."

     88. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that  the  decision  of
         the FtTJ made an error on a point  of  law  and  the  decision  set
         aside. I remake the  appeal:  I  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8
         grounds.



Notice of Decision

     89. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and therefore the decision is set aside;
         I remake the appeal: I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

         Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  the
         facts concern the medical circumstances of a  third  party.  Unless
         and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is
         granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
         indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction
         applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   29 October 2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

