
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: HU/19261/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |      Decision & Reasons          |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On 11 April 2018                  |         On 18 April 2018         |
|                                  |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                           Mr SATISH KUMAR PARMAR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel (instructed by SZ,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Andrew on 31 January 2018 against the  determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge G  Jones  QC  who  had  dismissed  the
         appeal of the Appellant seeking settlement on Article 8 ECHR family
         life grounds.  He is married to a British Citizen by whom he has  a
         British Citizen child. The decision and reasons was promulgated  on
         3 January 2018.


    2.     The Appellant is a national of India.  The Appellant had entered
         the United Kingdom illegally in December 2006,  somehow  supporting
         himself  thereafter.   On  24  September  2014  the  Appellant  was
         arrested for the possession of indecent images of children.  He was
         sentenced to 6 months imprisonment, suspended  for  42  months,  to
         perform 180  hours  of  unpaid  work  and  to  appear  on  the  sex
         offenders' register for 7 years.  On 29 June 2017  he  married  his
         British Citizen wife with whom he had earlier undergone a religious
         wedding.  The appeal was dismissed on the basis that there were  no
         exceptional circumstances.  The  British  Citizen  wife  knew  from
         almost the start that the Appellant had  no  right  to  be  in  the
         United Kingdom.  The British Citizen child was not  a  trump  card.
         The Appellant could return to India and  make  an  entry  clearance
         application.  Article 8 ECHR proportionality required him to do so.
          Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 did not apply.  The wife's ill health was
         outweighed by the need for immigration control.


    3.     Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the judge had erred by ignoring Home Office  guidance
         concerning British Citizen  children,  with  reference  to  section
         117B(vi) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  and
         had not considered the impact of the  Appellant's  removal  on  his
         wife and child.


    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal.    There  was  no
         rule 24 notice.


    Submissions


    5.     Ms Malhotra for the Appellant relied on the grounds  of  onwards
         appeal and grant.  The best interests of the British Citizen  child
         had not been considered.  The judge had failed to engage  with  the
         Home Office policy which SF and others (guidance,  post  2014  Act)
         Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) showed was necessary. The judge  paid
         close attention to the Appellant's criminality  but  the  threshold
         had not  been  crossed.   The  judge  had  speculated  about  other
         possible  criminal  offences.   The  evidence  showed   exceptional
         circumstances in relation to the  Appellant's  wife's  serious  ill
         health.  The Appellant played an important role in the family life.
            The determination should be set aside and remade.


    6.     Mr Tarlow for the Respondent submitted that there was plainly no
         material error of law, even if the judge had expressed himself very
         freely.  The evidence had not been  misunderstood.   The  Appellant
         had not met the Suitability requirement of Appendix FM.  The  child
         was not a trump card as the judge had said.   The  Appellant  could
         apply for entry clearance.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.


    7.     In reply, Ms Malhotra emphasised that entry clearance might  not
         be available for the Appellant.  The refusal was a disproportionate
         interference with the Appellant and his family's family  life.   It
         was not reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.


    No material error of law finding


    8.     In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
         somewhat generous, and failed to reflect the fact that the evidence
         in the appeal was weak and had been sufficiently addressed  by  the
         judge in the decision and reasons.  Unfortunately it is typical  of
         many appeals seen in the First-tier Tribunal and again in the Upper
         Tribunal involving couples  seeking  to  rely  on  Article  8  ECHR
         grounds.  Had the Appellant returned to India before the  religious
         marriage as he should have done, the current uncertainty could have
         been avoided.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the  provisions  of
         Appendix FM could not with appropriate efforts  be  complied  with,
         subject of  course  to  the  Suitability  issue  arising  from  the
         Appellant's conviction.  The current unhappy situation was  created
         by the parties.  Compliance  with  the  law  is  not  a  matter  of
         individual choice.


    9.     The judge's finding that there were no exceptional circumstances
         was supported by the evidence before him.  The Appellant's  British
         Citizen wife was well aware of his  lack  of  status  before  their
         religious wedding, yet went ahead.  There was no  medical  evidence
         before the judge to show that her  unfortunate  illness  (which  is
         progressive) could not be adequately treated  in  India,  where  of
         course as is well known alternative therapies are  also  available.
         The result of the Secretary of State's decision did not require the
         Appellant's wife or child to leave the United Kingdom, as they  are
         British Citizens.  The Home Office Guidance discussed in SF (above)
         was thus not relevant, as the child would not be left behind in the
         United  Kingdom  while  the  rest  of  his  family  were   removed.
         Moreover, the child was under two years of age, so section 117B(vi)
         was also inapplicable.  His best interests were plainly  to  remain
         with his mother, wherever she might be  living.   The  location  of
         family life was a question of choice for the parents.  There was no
         suggestion that the child's best interests  could  not  be  equally
         served in India, where his father's family lived according  to  the
         evidence.   There  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
         Appellant and his wife (who share the  same  religious  allegiance)
         could not live in India safely and happily.  He  has  close  family
         there who are supportive.  He would be able  to  work  lawfully  to
         provide for his family.  She is unable to work, wherever she  might
         live.


    10.    The judge accepted and specifically took into account  the  fact
         that the Appellant is involved in looking after his wife and  their
         child (see [24] of the decision and reasons), but found  in  effect
         that they could manage in his absence and that the  effect  of  his
         absence was  outweighed  by  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
         immigration control.  The Appellant's wife's own evidence (see  her
         witness statement) was that her parents and sister provide help and
         support with childcare.  The Appellant's immigration history was  a
         bad one as was plain.  The judge thus applied MA (Pakistan)  [2017]
         EWCA Civ 180 correctly.


    11.    The tribunal finds that the onwards appeal has no real substance
         and that there was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision
         challenged. The judge's best interests assessment for the child  as
         required  under  section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
         Immigration Act 2009 was carried out and  sufficient  reasons  were
         given for the conclusions reached.


    12.    The Appellant and her husband have  several  reasonable  options
         open to them for the continuation of their family  life,  i.e.,  to
         live together in India or to travel there together on a visit while
         entry clearance is sought or to separate on a temporary basis while
         the Appellant obtains entry clearance on the  terms  prescribed  by
         the Immigration Rules.


    DECISION


    The onwards appeal is dismissed


    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.


    Signed                             Dated 11 April 2018




    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




