

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/19147/2016
      HU/19156/2016
      HU/19153/2016
      HU/19160/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Manchester
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On: 14th March 2018
  On: 16th March 2018
|                            |                  |                           |
|                            |                  |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     JL
                                     LD
                                     PFL
                                     JL
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:          Ms N. Patel, Lei Dat and Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are all nationals of China.   They  are  respectively  a
    father, mother and their two children.  They appeal with permission the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Wedderspoon)  to  dismiss
    their linked human rights appeals.


 2. The factual matrix before the First-tier Tribunal is  a  familiar  one.
    Two adults have come, with permission, to live in the UK.    They  have
    made a life for themselves, brought their children  up  here,  and  now
    they would like to stay.  In this case the  father  of  the  family  JL
    arrived with a work permit in 2004 and his wife LD and elder child  MJL
    joined him in 2008. The youngest child  PFL  was  born  in  the  UK  in
    December 2009.


 3. It is common ground between the parties that the task  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was first to determine whether any of the four appellants
    could qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules. In  this
    case the only applicant who had a viable case under the Rules was  PFL.
    She was prima facie a 'qualifying child' in that she had spent at least
    seven continuous years of her life in the UK.  The  important  question
    for the Tribunal was whether it would be 'reasonable' to expect her  to
    leave the UK. If it was not, PFL qualified for  leave  to  remain  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  After  conducting  its  analysis
    'under the Rules', the Tribunal was then to proceed to consider whether
    there were grounds 'outside of the Rules' to allow any of  the  appeals
    with reference to Article 8.


 4. It is common ground between the parties that  this  determination  does
    not reflect that approach.  The determination sets out at  some  length
    various authorities on the question of  proportionality,  s117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  and  the  question  of
    reasonableness of the removal of children. It then makes  reference  to
    the facts and evidence, before turning, under the  heading  'findings',
    to proceed directly to a Razgar analysis of the case.   Finding that it
    would be in the best interests of PFL to remain with her  parents,  the
    Tribunal  concludes  that  the  decision  to  refuse  leave  would   be
    proportionate and that the appeals should all be dismissed.


 5. I need not set out in any great detail  the  objections  raised  by  Ms
    Patel in her grounds, since before me Mrs Aboni conceded that the First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in its approach to the extent that the decision
    could not stand.  The errors of law were, in summary:


          i) Failure to consider the position of each individual  appellant
             under the Rules. PFL had a prima facie  case  under  paragraph
             276ADE(1)(iv) and this should have been considered in light of
             the applicable policy guidance and case-law. The failure to do
             so led the Tribunal to fail to identify 'strong  reasons'  why
             she should be refused leave: see MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ
             705, PD and Others  (Article  8  -  conjoined  family  claims)
             [2016] UKUT 108.


         ii) Failure to make findings in respect of the private life of  JL
             (junior), a young man who has lived in the UK for  approaching
             ten years.


        iii) Legal misdirection. In  addition  to  adopting  a  problematic
             structure (for which see above) the  Tribunal  further  places
             reliance on EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The conclusions in EV  had  no
             application to this case. The child in  EV  (Philippines)  was
             not a qualifying child, having only lived  in  the  UK  for  4
             years. PFL is a qualifying child, and as such quite  different
             policy and legal considerations apply.


 6. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  therefore  set  aside  by
    consent; the matter is remitted for hearing de novo in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


    Anonymity Order


 7. There is no reason why the identity of the adult Appellants  should  be
    protected. The case does however turn on the  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom of a child. I have had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders. I am concerned that identification
    of the adult Appellants could  lead  to  identification  of  the  child
    involved and I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order  in
    the following terms:


         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellants  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Decisions


 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law. It is set aside by consent.


 9. The matter is remitted for hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


10. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              7th March 2018
