
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/19424/2016

                                               HU/19425/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 May 2018                            |On 9 May 2018                       |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - abu dhabi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 azaz ahmed
                               yasmin mehmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Nasser Hussain Ali (Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent and  the
    respondents as the appellants (as they appeared before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellants, Azaz Ahmed and Yasmin  Mehmood,  were  born
    respectively on 9 April 1994 and 28  September  1963,  are  a  son  and
    mother and citizens of Pakistan.  They applied for entry  clearance  in
    the United Kingdom as visitors but were refused  by  decisions  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) dated 5 July 2016.  They  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson) which, in a decision promulgated on
    16 October 2017, allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The ECO
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge noted that the sponsor and his family last  visited  Pakistan
    in 2014.  The sponsor's wife suffers from hepatitis C, fibromyalgia and
    impaired vision.  The judge also noted that  "the  youngest  child  has
    health problems of his own" but he does not state what  those  problems
    may be.  The judge  did,  however,  conclude  that  it  was  "extremely
    difficult" for any of the UK based family to visit Pakistan,  a  matter
    "made worse by the considerable cost involved of flights for  them  all
    in term time."  The judge failed to explain why the family  would  have
    to travel in term time.  The visit appears to be for the appellants  to
    visit their "sister/daughter and her children."

 3. Following an extremely brief account of the circumstances and evidence,
    the judge proceeded to make findings.  He noted the  appellants'  "good
    immigration history" and found that the sponsor provided evidence  that
    was consistent with "what the appellants claim" although it is  unclear
    exactly what he means by that statement.  The judge, without giving any
    reasons, found that the appellants were "well-established  in  Pakistan
    both economically and socially."  He found, as he was entitled to find,
    that they would return to Pakistan following  their  short  visit.   He
    concluded that the provisions of HC 395 (the  Immigration  Rules)  were
    met.  He did not consider in any detail the reasons given  by  the  ECO
    for rejecting the application.   He  did,  however,  move  directly  to
    Article 8 and concluded that "additional aspects" of the appeal led him
    to conclude that it would be disproportionate to dismiss it.  He refers
    only to the  "health  of  the  second  appellant's  daughter"  being  a
    "significant obstacle to her travelling to Pakistan to see  her  family
    either alone or with her husband  and  children.   This  is  made  more
    difficult by the health problems [unspecified in the decision]  of  her
    youngest child."  Whilst the judge refers to having  "medical  evidence
    in relation to both" he fails to explain why that medical evidence  had
    led him to conclude that the ECO's decision was disproportionate.

 4. I have no doubt that the judge had  sympathy  for  the  appellants  and
    sponsor in this case.  He has,  however,  simply  failed  to  make  any
    attempt at a structured analysis of the appeal on Article 8 grounds or,
    indeed, attempt to give any cogent reasons for allowing the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  I find that his decision is flawed  accordingly.
    I have set it aside.  I have remade the  decision.   I  am  aware  that
    Article 8 cannot be used, as the judge has used it  in  this  case,  to
    allow an appeal simply where no appeal can be made in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The grounds of appeal cite ECO Sierra Leone v Kopoi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 155 at [30]:

         In my view, the shortness of the proposed visit in the present case
         is a yet further indication that the refusal of leave to enter  did
         not involve any want of respect for anyone's family  life  for  the
         purposes of Article 8. A three  week  visit  would  not  involve  a
         significant contribution to "family life" in  the  sense  in  which
         that term is used in Article 8. Of course, it would often  be  nice
         for family members to meet up and visit in this way.  But  a  short
         visit of this kind will not establish a relationship between any of
         the individuals concerned of support going beyond normal  emotional
         ties, even if there were a  positive  obligation  under  Article  8
         (which there is not) to allow a person to enter the UK  to  try  to
         develop a "family life" which does not currently exist.

 5. Whilst I  am  aware  of  the  practical  difficulties  claimed  by  the
    appellants  and  sponsor  which  might  prevent  the  sponsor's  family
    travelling from the United Kingdom to  Pakistan,  I  am  reminded  that
    those difficulties alone simply do not establish that the  short  visit
    proposed by the appellants would "involve a significant contribution of
    family life in the sense in which that term is used in Article 8."  The
    parties have concentrated on the problems involved in travelling rather
    than upon the strength  of  the  emotional  ties  which  might  justify
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  In  the  circumstances,  the
    appeal is dismissed.  I  would  make  one  final  comment.   The  ECO's
    grounds of appeal do not take issue with the judge's finding that these
    appellants met the requirements of HC 395.  In the circumstances, I  do
    not set aside those findings  although  I  do  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.  The First-tier Tribunal's findings may be of  assistance  to
    the appellants should  they  decide  in  the  future  to  make  another
    application for entry clearance.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 16  October  2017  is
set aside.  The judge's finding that the appellants met the requirements  of
HC 395 is preserved.  I have remade the decision.  The  appellants'  appeals
against the decision of the ECO dated 5 July  2016  is  dismissed  on  human
rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 8 MAY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal of the appellants and therefore there can be  no
fee award.


Signed                              Date 8 MAY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


