
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19997/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 9th January 2019    On 18th January 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Mr YAWAR [S]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr H Hashmi, Counsel, instructed by Five Star
                    (International) Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. It is the Secretary of State who is appealing in these proceedings.
       For convenience I will continue to refer to the parties as they were
       in the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The Secretary of State has been given permission to appeal the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingsworth who, in a
       decision promulgated on 12 September 2017, allowed the appellant's
       appeal on article 8 grounds.

    3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 26 November 1992. He
       came to the United Kingdom in June 2011 as a student with leave valid
       until August 2012. He then re-entered the United Kingdom in December
       2012, again with leave as a student. That leave was valid until
       August 2013 and was subsequently extended until April 2016.He then
       made an in time application for leave to remain on the basis of
       family life. This was refused by the respondent on 5 August 2016.

    4. His application was based upon his marriage in December 2015 to Mrs
       [MA]. She is originally from Pakistan and had limited leave to remain
       until 9 October 2016.  The application was refused because whilst a
       genuine and subsisting relationship was accepted she was not a
       British citizen nor is she settled or a refugee with leave. Regarding
       the appellant's private life, he had not been here the necessary 20
       years and no reason was seen why he could not integrate into life in
       Pakistan.

The First tier Tribunal

    5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth did not have the benefit of a
       presenting officer for all of the hearing. There had been a
       presenting officer in attendance and the decision records the appeal
       began at 3.15. As the time approached 4.pm and there were 5 witnesses
       for the appellant the presenting officer indicated they needed to
       leave by 5:20 PM and objected to the appeal continuing in their
       absence. The judge refused to adjourn and continued to hear the
       appeal after the presenting officer left.

    6. The judge concluded there would be very significant obstacles to the
       appellant's integration into Pakistan on the basis his wife could not
       join him. This was said to be because of his wife's immigration
       status and the fact he is a Sunni Muslim and she follows the Shia
       branch of Islam and would be at risk of persecution.

The Upper Tribunal

    7. Permission to appeal has been granted on the basis it was arguable
       that the judge misdirected himself in suggesting the fact that the
       appellant's wife could not be removed meant the respondent were
       agreeing it was not reasonable for her to go with him to Pakistan.
       The 2nd ground was the judge failed to refer to any country
       information that demonstrated they both could not live together in
       Pakistan because the followed different branches of Islam. Finally,
       it was arguable the judge failed to consider the public interest
       factors in section 117 B.

    8. An application was made on the 3rd January 2019 by email by the
       appellant's representatives seeking to adjourn today's proceedings.
       This was on the basis that there had been a change of representation
       on 20 March 2018 and the new solicitors, 5 Star International Ltd,
       had not obtained the papers from the previous solicitors. They state
       they contacted the Tribunal office on 24 August 2018 and Field house
       on 5 September 2018 seeking documentation. Some documentation was
       provided but they still awaited the bundle submitted at the original
       hearing and the skeleton argument referred to in the decision. That
       application was refused on the basis the solicitors had adequate time
       to seek the paperwork. The adjournment application was refused by
       Notice dated 8 January 2019 from a staff member exercising delegated
       powers. It was felt the appellant's representatives had not
       demonstrated they had made sufficient effort to obtain the necessary
       papers.

    9. At the outset of the hearing Mr H Hashmi indicated he still had not
       received all of the papers. The file confirmed contact with the
       Tribunal on 30 August 2018 about papers. There is also a fax from the
       appellant's former solicitors dated the 23 November 2018 indicating
       that the file had been sent to the appellant's new representatives.
       The presenting officer opposed the adjournment and said that she had
       advised the appellant instructing solicitors that she will be in
       attendance early this morning and could provide papers if required.

   10. The limited correspondence on file does suggest the appellant's new
       solicitors have not pursued the matter with sufficient vigour. I have
       borne in mind the principles set out in Nwaigwe (adjournment:
       fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). I have also had regard to
       paragraph 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
       which advises the Tribunal to avoid unnecessary formality and deal
       with a case in a proportionate manner. It was my conclusion the issue
       could be adequately dealt with by providing Mr H Hashmi with the
       relevant papers from the court file and allowing him time.

   11. At hearing, Mrs Aboni submitted that the judge was mistaken in
       believing the sponsor could not leave the United Kingdom. It was
       accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State that she had been
       granted discretionary leave. This however did not mean she could not
       go back to Pakistan with her husband. Furthermore, the judge failed
       to adequately reason why paragraph 276 ADE(vi) was applicable. The
       judge had concluded that because of their religious differences the
       couple could not go to Pakistan but made no reference to any country
       background material supporting this. Furthermore, the public interest
       in maintaining immigration control and the factors set out in section
       117 B were not considered. She did accept that the 3rd ground in the
       leave application was incorrect in stating that section 117 B
       provided that little weight should be given to a family life
       established when the appellant's leave is precarious. In fact,
       section 117 B (4)(b) in stating that little weight should be given to
       a relationship formed with a qualifying partner is referring to
       someone in the United Kingdom unlawfully which is not the situation
       here.

   12. I raised with Mrs Aboni that the decision indicated the presenting
       officer had to leave because of the hour. The respondent had not
       sought to argue the judge erred in proceeding the absence of the
       presenting officer. Mrs Aboni indicated she had not drafted the
       grounds. She questioned why if the appellant chose to instruct
       representative in Scotland the fact the representative then had to
       travel a considerable distance should be a ground for not adjourning
       Whilst she indicated there were some issues about the judge
       continuing in the absence of the presenting officer she was not
       seeking to rely upon this as an additional ground.

   13. Mr Hashmi made the point the appellant is entitled to instruct a
       representative of their choice, irrespective of where they were
       located. The judge had set out in detail why they were proceeding.

   14. He referred me to page 20 of the appeal bundle. This was a letter
       sent by the Home Office to the appellant's solicitors including a
       copy of the Minute in relation to the grant of discretionary leave to
       the appellant's wife. The Minute recorded that his wife had been
       dependent upon her father's claim for protection. His claim was
       refused but he was granted discretionary leave which covered her. Her
       circumstances changed when she married and was no longer dependent
       upon her father. It was pointed out that her mother and brother had
       been granted further leave to remain on the basis of their family
       life until 24 September 2019, as had her father. The Minute records
       that she was granted leave as it would be disproportionate to remove
       her in the circumstance.

   15. Mr Hashmi argued therefore the respondent was accepting it would be
       disproportionate to remove her to Pakistan. The judge had referred to
       this Minute at paragraph 15 of the decision in considering the
       proportionality of the refusal of the appellant's application and
       concluded the appellant and his wife could not live in Pakistan. His
       wife would be unable to support an entry clearance application by him
       because of her immigration status.

   16. In response, Mrs Aboni reiterated that the respondent was not seeking
       to remove the appellant's wife. Whether she went to Pakistan with him
       was a matter for her. It is correct that the respondent cannot remove
       his wife. This however is different from saying she cannot go to
       Pakistan.

Consideration

   17. The appellant came here from Pakistan with leave as a student until
       30 April 2016. In December 2015 he married a national of Pakistan. At
       the time his wife was entitled to be here because her father had been
       granted discretionary leave in April 2014 following his unsuccessful
       protection claim. In line with this leave had been granted to his
       wife and their son and daughter, the appellant's wife.

   18. The appellant then made an application for leave to remain 3 days
       before his leave was due to expire. That application could not
       succeed under the rules because of his wife's limited immigration
       status. In considering the appeal judge initially was to look at
       matters through the prism of the rules. The respondent had considered
       the application under appendix FM but the difficulty for the
       appellant was EX 1 did not apply because of his wife's lack of an
       appropriate immigration status. The judge accepted appendix FM could
       not be met.

   19. The appellant's representative argued that he did meet the
       requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(vi). This is concerned with private
       life which can encompass family life. The judge correctly referred to
       this at paragraph 16 and 20.

   20. The determinative issue was whether there would be very significant
       obstacles to the appellant's integration into Pakistan. The judge at
       paragraph 18 refers to the fact they follow different branches of
       Islam. The judge then states that his wife cannot back because she is
       a Shia Muslim who would be persecuted as she has married a Sunni
       Muslim. The 2nd inventory of productions for the appellant contains
       numerous articles about violence between the two sects. However that
       is not reflected in the judge's decision. It does not explain and
       reference to country information why his wife would face persecution.
       I find this to be a material error of law.

   21. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth then wrongly conflates the
       grant of discretionary leave to the appellant's wife with the
       conclusion that she cannot reasonably return to Pakistan. I find
       paragraph 22 to 25 illustrate the judge's misconception. The
       appellant's wife was no longer dependent on her father because she
       had married and was living with the appellant. The Minute is dealing
       with her situation as someone who no longer would have leave as a
       dependent as she is an adult and is married and living with her
       husband in Derby. The issue was whether her removal as a consequence
       would breach her article 8 rights. Those rights were considered
       against the prism of the immigration rules. Specifically on the 13th
       line of page 20 the Minute and records that she did not meet
       276ADE(vi)She had not demonstrated very significant obstacles to her
       integration into Pakistan. Rather, she was granted leave outside the
       rules on the basis of exceptional circumstances. Those circumstances
       included her immigration history as a dependent on her father's
       claim; the previous discretionary leave, and the fact her mother and
       brother and also been granted leave until 24 September 2019.

   22. The judge records that an application for entry clearance by the
       appellant would not succeed until 2024 because of his wife's lack of
       status. There also would be issues about financial requirements and
       so forth. However, there is the option of his wife going to Pakistan
       with him. The only counter to this advanced by the judge is that she
       would thereby face persecution. As indicated earlier, the judge has
       not reached a sustainable conclusion on this.

   23. For completeness I find the judge has adequately considered section
       117 B. This can be seen at paragraph 34. However, I find the decision
       is fatally flawed by the Judge conflating the grant of discretionary
       leave to the appellant's wife with not being able to go to Pakistan
       and also concluding she would face persecution without explaining
       this conclusion.

Decision

  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth allowing the
  appeal on article 8 grounds materially errs in law and is set aside. The
  matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.



Directions

(i)  Relist for a de novo hearing at Nottingham excluding First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hollingworth.

(ii) An Urdu interpreter will be required

(iii)    The hearing should take no longer than 1- 30 hours.

(iii)    The appellant's representatives are to prepare a properly
paginated bundle.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

