
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                         Appeal Number:

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                     HU/19543/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2021                           |On 3 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before



                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                            LAKSHIMAN RAMANAYAKE

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



      Representation by way of written submissions :

             For the Appellant:   Mr C Timson of Counsel instructed by
                    Alison Law Solicitors
             For the Respondent:  Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



Background


       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 30  April  2020  in
          respect of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judges Garratt
          and Dainty, promulgated on 25 February 2020 following a hearing at
          Manchester on 13 February 2020.


       2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national or Sinhalese ethnicity born
          on 21 October 1962. He claims to have entered the UK in March 2001
          but only came to the attention of the authorities when he  made  a
          human rights claim based on his private life in August 2019.  That
          was  refused  on  13  November  2019  and  gave  rise   to   these
          proceedings. His claim is that he suffers  from  depression  as  a
          result of atrocities he witnessed in Sri Lanka, that he  also  has
          various other physical health issues, that he would  be  destitute
          on return because he had no  family  support  and  would  find  it
          difficult to obtain employment due  to  his  age.  He,  therefore,
          maintains that he would face very significant obstacles on return.
          No asylum claim has been made.


       3. The panel heard oral evidence and found that the  appellant  would
          not face very significant obstacles on return. It found  that  the
          appellant's ill health did not reach the threshold set  out  in  N
          [2005] UKHL 31 or D [1997] 24 ECHR. It noted  that  he  had  never
          claimed asylum and that he came to the UK for economic reasons.


       4. Permission was granted on the basis that the  panel  had  arguably
          used the wrong test when assessing  the  article  8  private  life
          claim under paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) and that  inadequate  reasons
          had arguably been provided for the conclusions reached  given  his
          particular circumstances of age, ill health, absence  of  familial
          support and long absence from Sri Lanka.


       5. The parties are both agreeable to a determination  on  the  papers
          and on that basis I proceed to assess the appeal and the arguments
          made.


              Discussion and Conclusions


       6. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made.


       7. The respondent maintains that the panel provided adequate  reasons
          for  the  decision  having  considered  the   appellant's   health
          conditions and absence of support. It is submitted that the  panel
          properly concluded that the decision was prop and that  there  was
          no basis for a grant of leave outside the rules.


       8. For the appellant it is submitted that the appellant's health  and
          medical conditions were relevant matters  for  consideration  when
          the issue of very significant obstacles was assessed. Whilst it is
          accepted that these may not reach the high article 3 threshold, it
          is argued that the panel was  wrong  to  have  only  assessed  the
          medical evidence on that basis. It is  submitted  that  it  should
          also have considered how the appellant's health would impact  upon
          his ability to return and adjust to  life  in  Sri  Lanka.  It  is
          further submitted that no reasons are  given  for  the  conclusion
          under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


       9. It is plain that the  panel  only  assessed  the  appellant's  ill
          health in the context of whether the article 3 threshold had  been
          met. Not only was this not a part of the appellant's claim but the
          panel also entirely omitted to consider how the appellant's mental
          and physical ill health would  impact  upon  his  ability  to  re-
          integrate into Sri Lanka society  when  combined  with  the  other
          factors relied upon such as his age, lack of familial support  and
          long absence from that country. Whilst it is by no  means  certain
          that these factors would, even  combined,  lead  to  a  successful
          outcome, the appellant is entitled to  have  his  appeal  properly
          assessed and this has not been done in this case.  The  panel  has
          regrettably applied the wrong test.


      10. It is also the  case  that  the  panel's  reasoning  for  why  the
          requirements of 276ASE(1)(vi) were not met is inadequate. Although
          the panel accepted that there would be difficulties and hardships,
          it rejected the claim that  these  amounted  to  very  significant
          obstacles. No reasons were, however, provided.


      11. For these reasons, I conclude that the determination cannot  stand
          and it is set  aside  in  its  entirety  except  as  a  Record  of
          Proceedings.   The appellant has not had a fair  determination  of
          his appeal and as fresh findings of fact  will  be  required,  the
          matter is remitted for re-hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
          appellant has not asked for any findings to be preserved.


      Decision


      12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
          which requires that it be set aside. The appeal is allowed to  the
          extent  that  it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   in
          Manchester for a fresh decision to be made  on  all  matters.  The
          appeal shall be heard by  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  except
          Judges Garratt and Dainty.


      13. Directions shall be issued  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  due
          course.


      Anonymity


      14. No request for an anonymity order has been made at any stage.



      Signed


           R. Keki?

           Upper Tribunal Judge

           Date: 17 February 2021


