
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/19848/2018
     HU/19849/2018
     HU/19850/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 August 2019                             |On 09 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                            el (First Appellant)
                            jw (Second Appellant)
                            kw (Third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy, Counsel instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. There are three appellants in this appeal.  I will refer to the first
    appellant as EL, the second appellant (who is EL's husband) as JW and
    the third appellant (who is the child of EL and JW) as KW.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  JW entered the UK as a
    student in 2010 and was joined by his wife EL in 2013.  KW was born in
    the UK on 25 August 2016.  Following various grants of further leave
    their leave expired in November 2016.  The appellants made a human
    rights claim to the First-tier Tribunal which was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Parker at Taylor House on 11 April 2019.  In a
    decision promulgated on 29 May 2019, the judge dismissed the appeal.
    The appellants are now appealing against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The appellants claim that removing them from the UK would represent a
    disproportionate interference with their private and family life
    because of the length of time they have been in, and their integration
    into, the UK; because it is in the best interests of their child to
    remain in the UK; and because there would be very significant obstacles
    to their integration into Sri Lanka.

 4. They have given two reasons why there would be very significant
    obstacles.  The first is that EL suffers from mental health problems.
    The evidence to support this is contained in a number of medical
    letters.  Amongst other things, there is correspondence from several
    professionals describing EL as having suicidal thoughts and suffering
    from anxiety, depression and PTSD following a traumatic birth and
    delivery.  The second reason why the appellants claim that there are
    obstacles to integration in Sri Lanka is that KW has language and
    speech problems in respect of which there has been extensive
    correspondence (although no detailed assessment) and there is a
    suspicion that he may meet the criteria to be diagnosed with autism.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge found that there would be no breach of family life by
    returning the family to Sri Lanka as they would be returning as a
    complete family unit.

 6. The judge considered whether EL's medical condition met the threshold
    in N [2005] UKHL 31 and Paposhvili v Belgium and concluded that even
    applying the Paposhvili threshold it would not be contrary to Article 3
    to return her to Sri Lanka because of her medical condition.

 7. The judge stated at paragraph 45 that:

         "In relation to suicidal ideation [EL] is left alone when the first
         appellant goes out for food shopping and both appellants confirm
         this happens regularly".

 8. At paragraph 48 the judge noted that EL had attempted suicide on one
    occasion but stated that the fact she is left alone regularly suggests
    there is not a high risk.

 9. The judge referred at paragraphs 45 and 46 to the medical evidence
    regarding EL and at paragraph 49 to the evidence concerning KW,
    describing him as suffering from speech and language issues and
    currently attending therapy sessions for this.

10. The judge found at paragraph 50 that the appellants:

         "Are citizens of Sri Lanka who have spent the vast majority of
         their life in that country and will be able to assist the son's
         integration into Sri Lanka.  There is a functional educational
         system which the son will be entitled to enrol in.  Basic internet
         searches indicate the presence of specialists in language and
         speech in Sri Lanka".

11. At paragraphs 54 to 55 the judge concluded:

         "The appellants have not lived in this country for twenty years and
         failed to meet the requirements of 276ADE.  They are not under the
         age of 25 and there are no significant obstacles to their
         integration.  They have resided in Sri Lanka including their
         childhood, formative years and a significant portion of their
         lives.

         They will return as a family unit no breach of their family life.
         The youngest child is only 2 and can adapt to life there.  Their
         private lives not be interfered to such a level that the decision
         is not proportionate.  The best interest of the child applying
         Section 55 is to be with her family and that can be maintained on
         return.  They have retained knowledge of the life, language and
         culture.  They would not face significant obstacles to
         reintegrating into life".

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

12. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to consider that the
    appellants could not in practice return to the village where their
    families live given the absence of mental health facilities and would
    therefore need to relocate to a part of Sri Lanka where they lack
    support from family and friends.

13. The grounds also maintain that the judge was not entitled to draw an
    inference from EL being left alone when JW leaves the house that the
    suicide risk is not high as an assessment as to whether there is such a
    risk would need to have been based on expert evidence.

14. The grounds also maintain that the judge failed to address the suicide
    risk on return to Sri Lanka as opposed to the present risk in the UK.

15. In addition, there is an argument in the grounds that there was a
    failure to consider the evidence of the stigma attached to mental
    health problems in Sri Lanka and the implications this would have for
    the appellants.

16. Further, the grounds contend that there was a failure to consider how
    the help KW currently receives would be available in Sri Lanka or the
    impact of its absence.

17. It is also argued that there was a failure to consider how EL's mental
    health problems would affect her ability to assist her son or JW's
    ability to assist him given the needs of EL which he would need to
    provide for.

18. At the hearing Mr Murphy argued that the judge's approach to the very
    significant obstacles test in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    was flawed because the judge failed to have regard to the implications
    for the appellants of the combination of:

      a) EL having serious mental health problems;

      b) KW having significant developmental/communication problems;

      c) the family needing to reside away from any possible support in
         their home village in order to access medical treatment for both EL
         and KW; and

      d) the lack of funds which would mean that the family would be
         destitute and not able to afford the necessary treatment for either
         EL or KW.

19. Mr Murphy also submitted that the judge failed to address the best
    interests of KW.  He argued that it was not sufficient for the judge to
    simply say that it was in KW's best interests to remain with his
    parents without engaging in a distinct assessment of whether it would
    be in his best interests to remain in the UK with his parents.  Mr
    Murphy argued that had such an assessment been carried out, and had the
    judge made a clear and explicit finding that it was in KW's best
    interests to remain with his parents in the UK, that factor, taken as a
    primary consideration in the proportionality assessment, might have
    tipped the scales in favour of the appellants.

20. Mr Murphy also argued that as the judge had not rejected the evidence
    of EL and JW about EL's need for psychiatric care and had not rejected
    JW's evidence about the family's ability to afford to accommodate
    themselves, this was a case where the judge should properly have
    considered the significant obstacles to integration in light of those
    factors.

21. Mr Murphy also referred to the country guidance case of GJ and others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and
    argued that regard should be had to the findings in that case about the
    very limited availability of psychiatric care in Sri Lanka.  He
    referred to paragraph 454 of GJ where it is stated that there are only
    25 working psychiatrists in Sri Lanka and that money spent on mental
    health goes primarily to large mental health institutions in the
    capital city which are inaccessible and do not provide appropriate care
    for mentally ill people.

22. Mr Avery's response to these arguments was that the judge had addressed
    all of the appropriate issues.  He highlighted that KW was a 2 year old
    and there was no evidence before the judge to show an independent
    private life.  He argued that it was sufficient to consider KW's best
    interests in terms of remaining with his parents, neither of whom have
    a lawful basis to remain in the UK.

23. He argued that the medical evidence regarding both EL and KW was
    "thin".  With regard to KW, he observed that there were many letters
    concerning appointments and referrals but an absence of actual evidence
    about his level and degree of disability.  He pointed out that there is
    no evidence stating a diagnosis of autism.

24. With respect to EL, Mr Avery argued that the evidence did not establish
    a high risk of suicide.  Mr Avery also argued that GJ is not comparable
    as the condition of the appellant in that case, and the psychiatric
    evidence to support the claim in GJ, was an order of magnitude
    different.

Analysis

25. I am satisfied that the decision does not contain a material error of
    law.

26. The appellants' case rests on the assertion that EL and/or KW have a
    serious medical condition that creates a significant obstacle to
    relocation to Sri Lanka.  However, the evidence that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal was not sufficient to justify such conclusions
    being reached.

27. Regarding EL, there was no expert report or medical correspondence to
    support the contention that she was at high risk of suicide either in
    the UK or on return to Sri Lanka.  The medical evidence concerning EL
    taken at its highest cannot, on any legitimate view, support the
    conclusion that she meets the threshold of risk in N or Paposhvili;  or
    in respect of suicide that set out in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and
    Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  As pointed out by Mr Avery,
    the evidence to support EL's risk of suicide falls a long way of that
    which was before the Tribunal in GJ.

28. Similarly, there was an absence of evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal to support a finding that KW suffers from a serious condition
    that would hinder - or create an obstacle to - his relocation to Sri
    Lanka with his parents.  There were several letters indicating that
    there will be assessments of KW but there was no detailed report,
    either from an expert or clinician.

29. It is against the backdrop of this evidence about EL and KW that the
    decision of Judge Parker and the grounds of appeal advanced by the
    appellants need to be considered.

30. The appellants argue that there was a failure to consider that they
    would not have family support because they would need to relocate to a
    city to access medical facilities in Sri Lanka.  This argument is
    misconceived as there was nothing in the decision to indicate that the
    support of wider family was necessary for removal to be proportionate.



31. The argument that the judge erred by finding that the suicide risk was
    not high because EL could be left alone is equally unpersuasive.  The
    burden of proof lay with the appellants to show there was a high risk
    of suicide and the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, taken at
    its highest, could not - and does not - support such a conclusion,
    given the absence of expert evidence or correspondence from a
    psychiatrist describing and explaining the basis for considering there
    to be a high risk of suicide, either in the UK or upon return to Sri
    Lanka.

32. I accept that the judge did not make a specific finding about stigma
    being attached to mental health problems in Sri Lanka.   However, I am
    satisfied that any finding that there is such a stigma would not have
    affected the outcome of the appeal given that the medical evidence that
    was before the Tribunal does not support a conclusion that EL will have
    a high risk of suicide or very severe mental health conditions that
    would put her in the category of person for whom a medical condition or
    risk of suicide should prevent removal from the UK under Article 3 of
    the ECHR.

33. The grounds concerning KW are also unpersuasive for the same reason,
    which is that there was an absence of evidence to support the
    proposition that he has a serious developmental or medical condition
    that would be an obstacle to living in or integrating into Sri Lanka.

34. Mr Murphy also submitted that the decision was deficient because of a
    failure to consider whether it would be in the best interests of KW to
    remain with his parents in the UK.  I am not persuaded by this
    argument.  Mr Murphy is correct that there is no explicit finding on
    this point in the decision.  However, KW was only 2 years old at the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal decision and there was an absence of
    evidence (as discussed above) to show he has a development or medical
    condition that would be an obstacle to integration into Sri Lanka.  In
    the absence of any such evidence, it was clearly open to the judge to
    find that it was in KW's best interests to remain with his parents
    either within or outside of the UK.

35. The appellants' case, in summary, is that the First-tier Tribunal
    failed to have proper regard to the severity of the medical/health
    problems faced by EL and KW but the claim founders because the evidence
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal does not support that the
    problems are as severe as the appellants would need to establish in
    order to succeed in their claim.  There is, in respect of EL, some
    evidence to indicate mental health problems and possible suicidal
    ideation but it falls a long way short of the expert or clinical
    psychiatric opinion that would be necessary to establish a claim under
    Article 3 or tip the balancing exercise in favour of the appellants
    under Article 8 ECHR.  In respect of KW, the evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal, likewise, does not support a finding that he has very
    significant developmental or medical problems.  Mr Murphy observed that
    a diagnosis of autism is often made at a later age.  That may well be
    the case but the judge was required to decide the appeal based on the
    evidence that was before her.  I am satisfied that the judge, for the
    reasons she gave, and based on the evidence that was before her, was
    entitled to dismiss the human rights claim.  I therefore dismiss the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                                    |
|                                    |Dated: 6 September 2019             |


