
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/19793/2016
                                                HU/19801/2016, HU/19798/2016
                                                HU/19804/2016, HU/19805/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2019                           |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                        Israel [A] (first Appellant)
                       Oladunni [A] (second Appellant)
                           [M A] (third Appellant)
                          [I A] (fourth Appellant)
                           [M A] (fifth Appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Waheed of Counsel, instructed by E H Dawson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are Nigerian citizens,  being  the  father,  mother  and
    three  children.   The  first  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely in 2002 and has  remained  unlawfully  ever  since.   The
    second appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2006 with leave, but  as
    from June  2007  she  has  also  remained  without  leave.   The  third
    appellant was born on 21st April 2010; the fourth on 10th July 2012 and
    the fifth on 10th April 2016.

2.   The appellants sought leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  family  and
    private life, which application was refused  by  the  respondent  in  a
    decision of 29th July 2016.

3.   They sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson at the hearing on 11th January 2018.
     In a  decision  promulgated  on  23rd  January  2018  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

4.   The appellants sought to challenge that decision and  leave  to  do  so
    was granted on  one  particular  basis,  namely  that  there  had  been
    inadequate consideration of the situation of the third appellant who is
    now a qualified child.

5.   The matter came before me for hearing on 2nd August 2018  to  determine
    that issue.

6.   It is entirely clear from  the  generality  of  the  evidence,  as  was
    presented before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  that  the  first  and
    second appellants' immigration history is a bad one.  Applications  had
    subsequently been made by the parents but  had  been  dismissed.   They
    continued to reside in the United Kingdom when the children were  born.



7.   A number of matters were raised in the various documents  as  presented
    in terms of the health of the first and second appellants  and  of  the
    difficulties which it was claimed the family would  face  if  returned.
    Such concerns were found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to be general
    in nature and had little substance in terms of detail or evidence.

8.   For example the first appellant claimed that he lived in  fear  of  his
    uncles in Nigeria, that he has no family there and that his brother and
    sister had been killed.   He fears that FGM will be inflicted upon  his
    daughter, the  third  appellant.   There  is  no  indication  that  any
    application for asylum has been made in relation to those matters.

9.   It is said that the appellants  could  not  live  in  northern  Nigeria
    because of Boko Haram.  Little reason is given why they could not  live
    in the south or in one of the cities.  It was claimed that  there  were
    no jobs, that government schools are on strike and that  there  was  no
    education  and  that  life  generally  in  Nigeria  is   unstable   and
    precarious.  The Judge noted in the course of  the  determination  that
    there was little detail provided in that respect.  Indeed it was noted,
    particularly of the second appellant, that she had  made  no  inquiries
    about schooling in Nigeria.

10.  It  was  apparent  from  the  determination  as  a  whole  that  proper
    consideration has been given to the situation  of  the  first,  second,
    fourth and fifth appellants.

11.  The concern, however, and indeed the subject of challenge in the  grant
    of permission, relates to the approach taken to  the  third  appellant,
    who at the time of the hearing, had over seven years' residency in  the
    United Kingdom and was, for the purposes of Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act, a qualifying child.

12.  I found that there was inadequate consideration  as  to  her  situation
    and circumstances nor clear reasons given why it would be  "reasonable,
    for her to return with her family to Nigeria".

13.  It is upon that narrow basis that I found there to be an error  of  law
    such that the decision is to be set aside to be remade.

14.  In terms of the ambit of  any  further  consideration  I  set  out  the
    following in my determination of 9th August 2018 in these terms:-

         "The first relates  to  the  ambit  of  any  consideration  of  the
         decision.  For my part I find little reason  to  depart  from  the
         evidence presented to the First-tier Tribunal and  the  conclusions
         drawn  in  relation  to  the  first,  second,  fourth   and   fifth
         appellants.  Clearly whether or not they are returned to Nigeria as
         a family depends very much on the outcome of the  consideration  in
         relation to the third appellant.  In those circumstances  it  seems
         to me that the focus of the consideration should be in relation  to
         the third appellant.  That does not  necessarily  preclude  further
         evidence as to country conditions and availability of treatment  as
         it is her best interests and the reasonableness of her return  that
         is the focus of consideration.


         The second consideration being whether the matter  be  remitted  to
         the First-tier Tribunal or retained in the Upper Tribunal."

15.  Not having received any response to such matters, I determined, in  the
    decision of 9th November 2018, that the matter would be retained in the
    Upper Tribunal and that the scope of consideration would be limited  as
    indicated.  Those  acting  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  subsequently
    submitted a letter of 4th December 2018 in which it was contended  that
    a letter had been written in response  to  my  original  directions  on
    17th August 2018.  There is little record of it having been received in
    the file but I note the copy that has been enclosed.  Significantly for
    the purposes of the hearing it is said "we confirm that  the  appellant
    accepts the ambit of reconsideration in  the  decision  of  9th  August
    2018".

16.  There was a request that the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing but by  that  time  the  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal had been set.  Mr Waheed made no  application  to  change  the
    venue in his submissions when the matter came for rehearing  before  me
    on 3rd January 2019.

17.  Given the limited scope of  consideration  in  this  matter  I  do  not
    repeat what was said for and on behalf of the first, second, fourth and
    fifth appellants before Judge Davidson.  I see no reason to depart from
    the findings which were made by that Judge in  the  decision.  As  that
    decision was set aside I  indicate  that  I formally  adopt  what  was
    presented in relation to those appellants as part of this my  decision.



18.  The focus being of course upon [MA], the third appellant.

19.  I was helpfully  presented  with  three  bundles  of  evidence  at  the
    hearing which have  been  marked  respectively  bundles  A,  B  and  C.
    Certain of the bundles were before the First-tier Tribunal, but  bundle
    C contains new evidence since the hearing.

20.  The first appellant  Mr  [A]  gave  evidence.   He  first  adopted  his
    witness statement of 10th November 2017 to be found in bundle A at page
    17 onwards.

21.  It is his claim that he fled Nigeria in 1995  because  his  uncles  had
    threatened to kill him if he  stayed  in  Nigeria  because  of  a  land
    dispute. They killed his brother.  He  stayed  in  South  Africa  until
    2001, then in other countries, arriving in the United Kingdom  in  June
    2002.

22.  He sets  out  detail  of  his  health,  in  particular  that  he  is  a
    noninsulin dependent diabetic with other medical  conditions  and  sets
    out the treatment that he receives.  He also said that his wife suffers
    from a number of conditions which are set out.

23.  In terms of [MA], the  statement  indicates  that  she  is  settled  at
    school, her home, her church and her community.  At  the  time  of  the
    witness statement she was in year three at the [ ~ ] Primary School  in
    Abbey Wood.  She loves attending school, doing her homework and playing
    games in school.  She is part of the gymnastic club in school  and  she
    attends meetings every week on either Tuesday or Thursday after school.
     When she finished her operation on 10th August 2015 to repair the hole
    in her heart she said she could not wait to return to school.

24.  Significantly the witness statement made reference to a letter  of  2nd
    November 2017 from the [ ~ ] Primary School confirming  that  [MA]  and
    [IA] attend the school.

25.  The statement continues that [MA]  loves  to  attend  children's  Bible
    school in church every Sunday  morning  and  on  Wednesday  and  Friday
    evenings she partakes fully in the singing and all activities organised
    for the children.  She loves to read her children's Bible and to  learn
    about Bible stories at church where she is taught more of her faith.

26.  Given her complex medical condition she continues to  be  monitored  by
    cardiac specialists on a regular appointment basis.

27.  She loves to read, write, draw and watch television.  It is  said  that
    she is deeply integrated in the UK community and that removing her from
    the UK will be inflicting severe harm on her and causing mental harm.

28.  The statement concludes with the  expression  by  the  first  appellant
    that Nigeria is unsafe.  There is no parents or siblings in Nigeria and
    that his wife has no family in Nigeria.  There  are  no  properties  in
    Nigeria and nowhere to stay.

29.  The first appellant  said  in  his  oral  evidence  that  his  daughter
    requires  two  sets  of  drugs  every  day,   namely   furosemide   and
    spironolactone.  She has to take the drugs in the morning before school
    and needs to rest after taking them and also on her return from  school
    and she needs also to rest after taking them.  She has  regular  check-
    ups with the hospital and the next is expected in February 2019.  It is
    said that [MA] is very weak. Although she liked  dancing  she  has  not
    been able to do very much  because  if  she  falls  over  it  would  be
    potentially fatal for her.  He stressed that she has scar  tissue  from
    the chest to the stomach and that stops her moving very much.   Largely
    therefore she is confined to the home except for visits to the park and
    unable to undertake any long journey particularly one to Nigeria.

30.  Before leaving Nigeria the first appellant worked as a  businessman  in
    a hardware shop in Lagos state for  some  eight  years.   He  said  his
    father owned cocoa land in Oyo state which was one and  a  half  hours'
    drive away.  There was a dispute between his father and the family over
    the land.  The father, brother and sister were killed by the uncles  in
    1983.  He lost contact with his only remaining brother whom he had last
    seen in 1998.  He has a friend who lives near  to  the  plantation  who
    says that the uncles have developed the property well and are  wealthy.
    He himself fears returning to Lagos because the uncles  will  kill  him
    because they will fear that he will want to take  the  land  back  from
    them.

31.  In terms of his wife's family he believes that she has none,  otherwise
    he would have heard her speaking of them or to them.

32.  He continued to stress that whilst Nigeria is unsafe that there was  no
    place that he could go to in Nigeria that would be  safe  or  would  be
    able to provide proper medical care for his daughter.

33.  In terms of the medical evidence reliance is placed upon the report  of
    the general practitioner, 2nd August 2017 confirming  that  [MA]  is  a
    registered patient at the surgery. She  continues  to  have  a  leaking
    valve which will require lifelong cardio follow up as the  cardiologist
    feels  her  disease  may  progress   and   require   further   surgical
    intervention in the future.   The  view  of  the  doctor  that  it  was
    imperative for her care that she should remain in the United Kingdom as
    the level of care required  would  be  unavailable  in  a  third  world
    country.

34.  The doctor wrote a further letter of 12th July 2018  in  precisely  the
    same terms.

35.  There is a report from Guy's and St Thomas's NHS dated  30th  September
    2016 written to the general practitioner.

36.  Significantly the diagnosis is partial atrioventricular  septal  defect
    with a repair of partial atrioventricular septal defect in August 2016.
     She was reviewed and had a reasonably good  exercise  tolerance.  When
    seen on 30th September 2016 she was well looking and her  heart  sounds
    were normal.  The specialist said he was pleased with her progress

         "I have asked parents to stop her furosemid and spironolactone  and
         I would like to see her again for further  follow  up  in  eighteen
         months' time.  It is very important  that  she  continues  to  have
         follow up as the left AV valve regurgitation  could  well  progress
         over time and she may require further intervention in the years  to
         come".

37.  There is no up-to-date  report  from  the  doctor  notwithstanding  the
    indication which I had previously given that an up-to-date report would
    be important.

38.  Mr Waheed relies heavily upon the  medical  evidence  set  out  in  the
    respondent's  country  information  on  Nigeria  of  May  2015  and  in
    particular the overview of the healthcare system in Nigeria as set  out
    in section 2.2 thereof.

39.   In  summary  it  is  said  that  the  healthcare  and  general  living
    conditions in Nigeria are poor. Conflict  and  communal  violence  have
    forced hundreds of thousands of people to flee their homes  and  access
    to quality care is difficult,  with  many  primary  healthcare  centres
    lacking skill and motivated staff.  It said despite  the  collaborative
    efforts of both Nigerian government, donor agencies and NGOs to provide
    an efficient and effective healthcare delivery in Nigeria,  confronting
    problems render these efforts much less than desired.   These  problems
    include emerging and re-emerging  health  problems,  such  as  HIV/AIDS
    pandemic, inadequate payment of health workers' salaries, poor  quality
    of care, brain drain.  It was also  said  that  there  is  insufficient
    budget allocation and lack  of  strategic  plan  and  preparedness  for
    epidemics and pandemics.

40.  In terms of all the recent evidence that is contained in  bundle  C,  a
    report speaking of the murder of a student, an  article  healthcare  in
    Nigeria speaks of diarrhoea being a problem  befalling  westerners  and
    that the quality of healthcare  institutions  is  generally  poor.  The
    article speaks of the brain drain of doctors and staff.

41.  There is an article indicating that Nigeria has the largest  number  of
    children out of school.  It seemed to be  from  a  BBC  News'  article,
    speaking of government funded schools  lacking  funding.  There  is  an
    article that the President  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  health
    checks.  It submitted that that is relevant to show the poor quality of
    healthcare available in Nigeria, There are articles about rape, lack of
    electricity and trafficking.

42.  There is an article of 19th June 2018 from the Guardian speaking  of  a
    young family in Edo state requiring funds to pay for surgery  to  their
    child with a hole in the heart, and how difficult it is  to  find  that
    funding. There is another article about someone  who  requires  surgery
    for a hole in the heart in India at great expense.   It  was  submitted
    there was also an article 14th  October  2018  speaking  of  13,200,000
    Nigerian children not at school.   Those reports are generic in nature.



43.  In terms of the respondent's position and evidence relied  upon,  I  am
    asked to by Mr Melvin to have regard to the detail that is set  out  in
    the refusal letter under challenge, namely that of 29th July 2016.

44.  In terms of the treatment available to [MA], reliance  is  placed  upon
    the Country of Origin Information Service Report for Nigeria May  2015,
    in particular sections 2.7 and 2.8 thereof.  It  said  that  outpatient
    treatment and follow  up  by  a  cardiologist  is  available,  ECG  and
    ultrasound scans are also available  in  most  secondary  and  tertiary
    centres, outpatient treatment and follow up by a  cardio  surgeon.   It
    said that the medication  which  the  [MA]  receives  is  available  in
    Nigeria.

45.  In terms of treatment for diabetes that is also available and set  out.
      It  considered  therefore  that  the  appropriate  medical  care  and
    treatment is available in Nigeria.

46.  For the sake of completeness the refusal decision considered  also  the
    health of the first and second appellant and concluded  that  treatment
    was readily available for them also in Nigeria.

47.  The parties made their  submissions.   Mr  Melvin,  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, relied upon the written submissions he has  presented.   He
    contends that the first appellant has exaggerated both the difficulties
    in relocation generally  and  the  health  needs  of  his  daughter  in
    particular.  I was asked to find that he lacked  credibility  and  that
    treatment was available for [MA] and that it was reasonable in all  the
    circumstances for her to return with her family.

48.  Mr Waheed  relies  heavily  upon  the  medical  evidence  that  he  has
    presented, contending that it would not be in  the  best  interests  of
    [MA] or reasonable to expect  her  with  her  condition  to  return  to
    Nigeria even with her family.

49.  The concept of reasonableness is one that is reflected in a  number  of
    decisions.  The most particular in EV  (Philippines)  EWCA  Civ  [2014]
    874, MA (Pakistan) EWCA Civ [2016] 705, AM Pakistan EC EWCA Civ  [2017]
    180, MT and ET (child's best interest; ex  tempore  pilot)  UKUT  00088
    [2018] and more recently in KO (Nigeria) UKSC [2018] 53.

50.  It has been noted in relation to the decision of KO that three  of  the
    appeals involved linked  cases  as  to  the  treatment  of  "qualifying
    children" and their parents under the  statutory  regime  contained  in
    part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

51.  In particular Section 117B(6) provides

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom".

52.  A qualifying child being defined as one who has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more.

53.  In the course of the judgment Lord Carnwath considered in  some  detail
    the development of the jurisprudence and  policy  in  relation  to  the
    qualifying child.

54.  At paragraph 11 of the judgment set out as  follows,  the  most  recent
    version of the IDI (22nd February 2018), no doubt taking account of the
    Court of Appeal decisions to which I shall  refer  below,  includes  an
    additional paragraph which  more  closely  reflects  the  Secretary  of
    State's submissions in the present case:

         "The consideration of  the  child's  best  interests  must  not  be
         affected by the conduct or immigration history of  the  parents  or
         primary carer, but these will be relevant to the assessment of  the
         public interests, including in  maintaining  effective  immigration
         control; whether this outweighs the  child's  best  interests;  and
         whether, in the round, it is reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
         leave the UK (family migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b.   Family
         life (as a partner or parent) and private  life:  ten  year  routes
         page 76)".

55.  Such was considered by Lord Carnwath in the  light  of  attempts  by  a
    parliament to clarify the application of Article 8  and  in  particular
    the case of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 and part 5A of the 2002 Act.

56.  The assessment continues at paragraphs  18  and  19  in  these  terms:-



         "18.     On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
             seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts  to  consider
             where the parents, apart  from  the  relevant  provision,  are
             expected to be, since it will normally be reasonable  for  the
             child to be with them.  To  that  extent  the  record  of  the
             parents may become indirectly material, if it leads  to  their
             ceasing to have a right to remain here, and having  to  leave.
             It is only if, even  on  that  hypothesis,  it  would  not  be
             reasonable for the child to leave that the provision may  give
             the parents a right to remain.


         19.  He noted (paragraph 21) that Lewison LJ  had  made  a  similar
             point in considering the 'best interests' of the  children  in
             the context of Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 paragraph 58


                  '58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of  the
                      best interests of the children must be  made  on  the
                      basis that the facts are as  they  are  in  the  real
                      world.  If one parent has no right to remain, but the
                      other parent does, that  is  the  background  against
                      which the assessment is conducted.  If neither parent
                      has a right to remain, then that  is  the  background
                      against which the assessment is conducted.  Thus  the
                      ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect
                      the child to follow  the  parent  with  no  right  to
                      remain in the country of origin'".

    The point was  well  expressed  by  Lord  Boyd  in  SA  (Bangladesh)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] SLT 1247, [2017] Scot
    CSCSOH 117:

         "22.     In my opinion before  one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom? In a case such  as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'.   To  approach  the  question  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made".

    To the extent  that  Elias  LJ  may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
    (Pakistan), paragraph 40, I  would  respectfully  disagree.   There  is
    nothing in the section  to  suggest  that  "reasonableness"  is  to  be
    considered otherwise than in the real world in which the children  find
    themselves".

57.  In terms of paragraph 58 of EV (Philippines) Mr Melvin  and  Mr  Waheed
    were in agreement that that represented  the  appropriate  approach  to
    take in the matter of reasonableness.

58.  In  terms  of  assessing  the  best  interests  of  [MA]  and  whether,
    notwithstanding such interests or because of them,  it  was  reasonable
    for her to return to Nigeria  with  her  parents  it  is  necessary  to
    consider  her  health,  cultural  integration,  links  with  the  wider
    community and her school and to what extent she has  developed  private
    life independent of her family.

59.  In one sense a proper determination  as  to  her  health  is  difficult
    because of  the  lack  of  up-to-date  medical  evidence,  which  ought
    reasonably to have been produced, given  the  issues  which  have  been
    highlighted.

60.  I find that the oral evidence of the first appellant before  me  stands
    in sharp contrast with that which he set out in the  witness  statement
    to which reference has been made.  He seeks  to  present  in  his  oral
    evidence a child who is crippled by the nature of  her  scarring,  such
    that mobility is restricted; who is dependent upon medication  and  who
    is weak and infirm and needs much rest and is  unable  to  undergo  any
    physical activities by reason of that condition.  Such stands in  sharp
    contrast with the happy active young girl who is part  of  a  domestics
    club in the school, who attends meetings after school,  partakes  fully
    in the scene all activities organised by the children as attested to by
    the first appellant in his statement of 10th November 2017.

61.  It is reasonably to be expected that  if  the  condition  of  [MA]  had
    deteriorated to the extent as now claimed from  that  set  out  by  her
    father in November 2017, she would have been referred to the consultant
    and a further assessment had been made.

62.  I find that the first appellant is motivated  to  put  the  worst  case
    upon the facts for his  daughter  and  indeed  for  return  to  Nigeria
    generally in order to prevent such a return.   I  find  that  he  lacks
    credibility in what he has to say in that regard.

63.  Reliance was placed upon the statement  from  the  consultant  who  has
    care of [MA] as set out in the report  of  30th  September  2016.   The
    report  is  reasonably  optimistic  as  to  the  health  of  [MA]   and
    significantly  records  that  the  parents  were  asked  to  stop   her
    furosemide  and  spironolactone.   Such   calls   into   question   the
    credibility of the  evidence  from  the  father  that  she  needs  that
    medication to continue.  There is no further medical report to indicate
    that those drugs are now required.

64.  Taking the medical report, together with paragraphs 12 and  13  of  the
    witness statement, it seems to me that I can safely find that [MA] is a
    happy and active child, enjoys school, has  friends  and,  contrary  to
    what her father seems to say, involved in church as well as school.

65.  That of course bears sharply on the issue as to what  intervention  she
    requires whether by drugs, supervision or follow up.  The report of the
    consultant of 30th  September  2016  spoke  of  a  further  checkup  in
    eighteen months' time from then would  have  been  around  February  or
    March 2018.  If there had been any  significant  deterioration  in  her
    condition it reasonable to expect that there would have been  a  report
    to the general practitioner from the consultant on that matter.  It  is
    far from clear whether [MA] was  taken  to  the  hospital  to  see  the
    consultant at that time or not.

66.  Much reliance is placed upon the respondent's  country  information  on
    Nigeria of May 2015.  Mr Waheed relies upon paragraph 2.2,  whereas  Mr
    Melvin relies upon paragraph 2.7 of the same report.

67.  As Mr Melvin submits, Nigeria is a country of contrast with  particular
    problems in a number of areas which has led to the displacement of many
    people.  There is little to suggest,  however,  that  adequate  medical
    treatment would not be available in the larger cities, such as Lagos, a
    city from which the first appellant comes from and has lived  for  some
    31 years before coming to the United Kingdom and so  it  is  reasonably
    assumed would be an area with which he was  familiar.   It  is  perhaps
    surprising that there is a marked absence of any more  official  up-to-
    date material that is relied upon.

68.  Generally I do not find the additional information contained in  bundle
    C to be of great assistance in this matter. That a number  of  families
    may find it difficult to raise funds for hole in the  heart  operations
    is of limited application, particularly to someone such as [MA] who may
    require supervision, rather than surgery.  Two examples of difficulties
    does not indicate to any degree of reliability systemic failure on  the
    part of the medical services.  The  article  concerning  healthcare  in
    Nigeria from the United Nations is more designed to alert  the  visitor
    to what is required to counter common  disease,  rather  than  focusing
    upon the facilities available to those living in Nigeria.  It  is  said
    that hygiene conditions are problematic, especially outside  the  large
    cities.  That says very little because it is to be anticipated that any
    return to Nigeria would be to a large city such as Lagos,  rather  than
    the countryside. The brain-drain of doctors and medical staff may be  a
    concern but does not deal with what is available in  terms  of  medical
    care.  That the president needs to have treatment begs the question  as
    to what treatment he needs and why it is that he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

69.  Reliance is placed at page 25 of  bundle  C  upon  an  e-mail  of  11th
    February 2007, which speaks of a child who had problems with her  heart
    following birth.  She was taken to Igbobi Orthopaedic Hospital in Lagos
    and later met a cardiologist at the  Lagos  State  University  Teaching
    Hospital.  The tests revealed the hole in the  heart.   Thereafter  the
    problems arose as to the payment for the treatment.  What  is  revealed
    certainly in that e-mail, if correct, is that there were two  hospitals
    with staff, the cardiologists in particular in Lagos.

70.  Having considered the medical evidence as  a  whole  I  find  that  the
    evidence presented on behalf of the respondent  is  more  reliable  and
    specific to the issue and that there would be access  to  hospital  and
    treatment if need be, particularly in the big cities,  particularly  in
    Lagos.

71.  So far as the health of [MA] is concerned I find  nothing  to  indicate
    that she is otherwise than a happy and outgoing  child,  enjoys  school
    and school activities and being with her siblings and family.  I do not
    find that she is in the poor state of health as described by her father
    nor  that  she  is  in  any  immediate  need  of  significant   medical
    intervention or treatment.

72.  I find therefore that it would not be  detrimental  to  her  health  or
    wellbeing were she to accompany her family to Nigeria, particularly  to
    Lagos.

73.  In terms  of  her  best  interests  I  recognise  the  desirability  of
    stability within the family context.  There is nothing to indicate that
    there is any wider family or extended family context in the UK to which
    she has any emotional needs or relationships.  Apart from the issue  of
    her health there seemed to be little to  indicate  that  she  would  be
    deprived of anything significant in terms of her private life were  she
    to accompany her siblings  and  family  to  Nigeria.  There  is  little
    indicate she  has  developed  interests  and  hobbies  that  could  not
    otherwise be found elsewhere or relationships that could not  otherwise
    be enjoyed elsewhere.

74.  I find on the evidence that she is very much focused  upon  the  family
    and has not yet developed any degree of  independence  or  social  life
    apart from them.  As the first appellant indicated, either  he  or  his
    wife takes the appellant to and from school, together with [IA] who  is
    also in that  school.  I  do  not  find  that  [MA]  would  suffer  any
    psychological difficulties or emotional deprivation in  remaining  with
    her family but elsewhere.

75.  In determining reasonableness of course it  is  important  to  consider
    the circumstances to which she would be going were she to accompany her
    family to Nigeria.  In that connection I find that her father  is  very
    familiar with the area of Lagos having worked there.  He  worked  as  a
    cleaner in the UK for a number of years  before  being  prevented  from
    doing so by his immigration status.   The  second  appellant  had  also
    worked as a cleaner.  I find therefore that the family as a whole could
    establish a normal family life in Lagos in particular and find work.

76.  In terms of the absence of any family members  in  Nigeria  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found that the evidence  given  by  the  first  and
    second appellants lacked credibility in that regard.  I do not find the
    first appellant to be credible in his contention that  he  is  at  risk
    from his uncles.  He has had many years to  present  an  asylum  claim,
    which he has not and he had produced  no  documentation  or  any  other
    matters to  substantiate  his  claimed  fear.   What  seems  to  be  of
    significance is that his uncles, and presumably  cousins,  seem  to  be
    doing well in their business, and absent of any ill will towards him no
    doubt would be in a position to lend support to  him  and  his  family.
    His contention that his wife had no relatives  because  he  would  have
    known about that stands curiously in the evidence, which  was  recorded
    from his wife by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, that she had  a  sister
    but had lost contact with the sister and that her partner, that is  the
    first appellant, would not know these details as these are not  matters
    which are discussed.

77.  It was noted in paragraph 93 of the refusal decision  that  within  the
    reconsideration request dated 12th October  2010  the  first  appellant
    claimed that most of his brothers and  sisters  emigrated  as  well  to
    America and Canada years ago but in his Statement of Additional Grounds
    of 29th February 2016 stated that he only had one sibling  and  he  was
    killed. It seemed there was  now  yet  another  brother.   Overall  the
    contradictions serves further to undermine the credibility of any claim
    of fear upon return.

78.  I find to the contrary that there are family members of both  sides  of
    the family in Nigeria from whom support could be sought.

79.  In terms of  the  various  articles  relating  to  violence,  such  are
    isolated incidents as highlighted and do  not  support  the  contention
    that violence is endemic everywhere in Nigeria. The focus of return  in
    common sense is upon the big cities in Nigeria, rather than  the  north
    or country areas.

80.  In terms of schooling additional material is less than helpful.   As  I
    have indicated the e-mail of 25th July 2017 purporting to represent the
    views of BBC News is that government funded  schools  in  Nigeria  have
    practically collapsed; that  is  in  some  contrast  with  the  article
    concerning 13,200,000 Nigerian kids out of school. The  focus  of  that
    article is to suggest that the obvious  advantages  of  education  must
    remain repugnant to many parents.  The question is asked in that e-mail
    "why is it that in spite of the universal basic education programme  of
    the government, school enrolments appears to be on  a  downward  slide.
    If education is free why are parents withdrawing  their  children  from
    school".  The article suggests that there is indeed a viable  education
    system in place in particular areas of the country, as is contended  by
    the respondent in the submissions made to me.

81.  Thus although the best interests of [MA] may be  said  to  lie  in  her
    remaining in her community and with her school, the same could be  said
    for her siblings.  That she is a qualified child is  to  be  recognised
    and given the appropriate weight.  For the reasons already  advanced  I
    do not find that her heart defect is such as to cause  any  significant
    difficulties to her were she to live in Nigeria.

82.  The reality of the matter in this case is that she remains three  years
    older than her next sibling and that she is focused understandably upon
    her family.  The ultimate question  is  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect [MA] to follow the parents  with  no  right  to  remain  to  the
    country of origin, has been set in the context of public interest.

83.  For all the reasons I find that it is reasonable to expect [MA]  to  go
    with her family to Nigeria.  Cogent reasons have been  given  why  [MA]
    should be deprived of the  advantages  that  the  status  brings.  Such
    reasons lie in the context against which the assessment  is  conducted.
    She is an integral part of the family that otherwise has  no  right  to
    remain. When looking at the features particular  to  her,  as  set  out
    above, I find little to indicate that it would be unreasonable for  her
    to return with her parents.

84.  In all the circumstances therefore I adopt the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  It is not disproportionate or in breach of  their
    fundamental human rights that  the  first,  second,  fourth  and  fifth
    appellants be removed to Nigeria.  I find in the  circumstances  it  is
    reasonable also for the third appellant to accompany  them,  such  that
    all the family as a unit may be removed to Nigeria.

85.  In those circumstances the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 23 Jan 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
