
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19695/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 8 August 2019            |On Thursday 15 August 2019           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     VM
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  I
continue the anonymity direction because the case involves  minor  children.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge G A Black  promulgated  on  18  April  2019  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 12 September 2018 refusing his  human  rights  claim.
       The Appellant asserts that removal will breach his Article 8  rights
       based on his relationship with two of the children  of  his  brother
       who was tragically murdered.  Those children live  in  the  UK  with
       their mother.  All are British citizens.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Albania.  He came  to  the  UK  as  a
       visitor on 15 January 2016.  He was granted further leave to  remain
       in order to give evidence at the criminal trial into  his  brother's
       murder and then to administer his brother's estate as next of kin.

    3. As I have already noted, the Appellant now seeks to remain based  on
       his relationship with his brother's children, [AG] who is aged seven
       years and [AI] who is aged  five  years.   He  asserts  that  he  is
       entitled to remain as he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
       relationship with British citizen children  and  that  therefore  he
       meets the criteria in Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.


    4. Judge Black did not accept that the relationship which the Appellant
       enjoys with the two children amounts to a parental relationship  for
       reasons which I will come to in due course.  She also did not accept
       that the private and family life of the Appellant was sufficient  to
       engage Article 8 ECHR.

    5. The Appellant challenges only the finding that he does  not  have  a
       parental relationship with the children.  The sole ground is on that
       basis that the Judge has failed adequately to  explain  the  finding
       and/or failed to take into account relevant case-law.  The Appellant
       relies in particular on guidance issued by the Respondent as to  the
       meaning of a parental relationship and the case  of  R  (oao  RK)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department  (s.117B  (6);  "parental
       relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC) ("RK").

    6. Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Robertson on 30 May 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

           "... 2.     The grounds lack  arguable  merit  because:  in  the
           absence of any evidence to establish that the factors as set out
           at paras 4-6 of the grounds applied, which included  a  lack  of
           evidence from the mothers of the Appellant's nephew  and  niece,
           it was open to the Judge to find  at  [8]  that  "there  was  no
           evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant   had   established   a
           relationship with his  niece  and  nephew  akin  to  a  parental
           relationship". On the evidence before her, it was  open  to  the
           Judge to find that the relationships between the  Appellant  and
           his nephew and niece  fell  short  of  establishing  a  parental
           relationship but did establish a  family  relationship  and  she
           gave adequate reasons for her decision at [8-9].


           3.    The grounds are no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
           findings of the Judge, which were open to her  on  the  evidence
           before her and which are not unreasonable.  As the grounds  lack
           arguable merit, permission to appeal is refused."





    7. The Appellant renewed his application for permission to  appeal  and
       permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Dr H H  Storey  on  5
       July 2019 in the following terms:

           "The appellant was given limited leave to be in the UK -extended
           until 7 March 2018 - so that he was able to give evidence  at  a
           trial and otherwise to carry out his duties as next of  kin  for
           his  deceased  brother.   He  said  that  during  this  time  he
           developed close relationships with his children.  On that  basis
           he applied for further leave to remain on human rights  grounds.
           Whilst accepting that the appellant  had  close  ties  with  his
           nephew and niece and a genuine and meaningful relationship  with
           them the judge did not consider that his relationship with  them
           had been shown  to  be  a  parental  one.   Given  that  on  the
           appellant's evidence the children, having lost their father, now
           treat him as a father figure, it is arguable  that  the  judge's
           assessment at para 8 was unduly dismissive (therein he said that
           there was 'no evidence' to show there was a relationship akin to
           a parental relationship, even though was  the  evidence  of  the
           appellant and of one supporting witness)."

    8. The matter comes before me  to  decide  whether  the  Decision  does
       contain any error of law and, if I so conclude,  either  to  re-make
       the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-
       making.


    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION


    9.  The  paragraphs  of  the  Decision  dealing  with  the  Appellant's
       relationship with the two children are as follows:

           "[8]  Having considered all of the  evidence  in  the  round,  I
           conclude that the appellant has failed to  establish  his  human
           rights claim within or outside of  the  Rules  under  Article  8
           ECHR.  I find  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  has
           established a relationship with his niece and nephew akin  to  a
           parental relationship.  I find that he  visits  them  and  takes
           them out on trips  and  I  find  that  this  is  a  genuine  and
           meaningful relationship as between  family  members.   I  accept
           that the relationships are  important  to  him  as  a  means  of
           maintaining a connection with  his  deceased  brother,  who  was
           tragically killed.   There  was  no  evidence  (either  oral  or
           written) from either of the children's mothers in support or  as
           to the nature and significance  of  his  relationship  with  the
           children.   It  was  the  appellant's  evidence  that   he   had
           relationships with all three children but primarily with the two
           children of MM.  I find that there was no  evidence  at  all  to
           support the appellant's claim that he had  a  relationship  with
           the  third  child  from  a  different  mother,  and  indeed  the
           appellant made no specific mention of that child at all.


           [9]   I conclude that the appellant would be  able  to  maintain
           contact with the children by way of visits  and  through  social
           media.  There was no evidence  to  indicate  that  any  lack  of
           contact with the appellant would cause harm to the child or that
           this was not in their best  interests.   Their  mother  had  not
           produced any letter or witness statement in support and was  not
           at the hearing because she had gone on holiday with the children
           to Albania.  It is clear having regard to that evidence that the
           mother and children visit Albania from time to time and  so  the
           appellant would have the opportunity to see  the  children  when
           they visited."

   10. Part of the Appellant's challenge is based on an asserted failure by
       the Judge to have regard to relevant case-law.  The grounds rely  on
       the Respondent's guidance and the guidance given in RK.  I begin  by
       observing  that  neither  guidance  was  apparently  drawn  to   the
       attention of the Judge.  It is  not  contained  in  the  Appellant's
       bundle.  There is no skeleton argument on file,  but  the  Appellant
       was represented at the hearing by Counsel and there is no record  of
       any submission being made  based  on  either  set  of  guidance.   I
       consider that guidance nonetheless.


   11. The grounds do not provide  details  of  the  Respondent's  guidance
       relied upon, but the extract cited in  the  grounds  appears  to  be
       taken from a previous version of what  is  now  "Appendix  FM  1.0a:
       Family Life (as a Partner or Parent): 5-year routes and  exceptional
       circumstances for 10 year routes".  That has recently  been  amended
       (on 25 July 2019) and it appears that  the  extract  cited  is  that
       taken from that cited at  [35]  of  RK.   The  decision  in  RK  was
       promulgated in 2016 and it is  far  from  clear  that  this  is  the
       version current when the grounds  were  pleaded,  and  the  Decision
       made. I will however assume for current purposes that it is.

   12. I do not need to set out the extract given the extensive citation in
       the grounds (as also appears at [35] of RK).  In short summary,  the
       point is made that a person having a relationship  as  parent  of  a
       child is not confined to a person who is the biological parent or to
       a person legally recognised as a parent.  Various  factors  are  set
       out enabling the Respondent's caseworkers to consider the  facts  of
       individual cases, thereby making the point that the issue is  highly
       fact sensitive.  The guidance as cited ends by saying that  "[o]ther
       people who spend time with, or reside with the child in addition  to
       their parents, such as their grandparent, aunt  or  uncle  or  other
       family member, or a close friend of the family would  not  generally
       be considered to have a parental relationship with the child for the
       purpose of this guidance."


   13. Turning then to the case of RK, the headnote reads  as  follows  (so
       far as relevant):

           "1.   It is not necessary for an individual  to  have  'parental
           responsibility'  in  law  for  there   to   exist   a   parental
           relationship.


           2.    Whether a person who is not a biological parent  is  in  a
           'parental  relationship'  with  a  child  for  the  purposes  of
           s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
           depends on the individual circumstances  and  whether  the  role
           that individual plays establishes he or she  has  'stepped  into
           the shoes' of a parent.."

   14.  RK  was  a  case  concerning  a  grandmother  who  relied  on   the
       relationship with her grandchildren in order to remain in the UK  in
       circumstances where the children were living with her but also  with
       both parents.  As  such,  much  of  the  discussion  and  the  final
       paragraph of the headnote are concerned with whether another  person
       can have a parental relationship where both parents are involved  in
       a child's upbringing. However, what is said at paragraphs  [42]  and
       [43] is more generally relevant to the issue before me:

           "[42] Whether a person is in a 'parental  relationship'  with  a
           child must, necessarily, depend on the individual circumstances.
            Those circumstances will include what role they  actually  play
           in caring for and making decisions in  relation  to  the  child.
           That is likely to be a most  significant  factor.   However,  it
           will also include whether that relationship  arises  because  of
           their legal obligations as a parent or in lieu of a parent under
           a court order or other legal obligation.  I accept  that  it  is
           not   necessary   for   an   individual   to   have    'parental
           responsibility'  in  law  for  there  to   exist   a   'parental
           relationship', although whether or not that is  the  case  is  a
           relevant factor.  What is important is that the  individual  can
           establish that they have taken  on  the  role  that  a  'parent'
           usually plays.


           [43]  I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation that, in effect, an
           individual must 'step into the shoes of a parent'  in  order  to
           establish a 'parental relationship'.  If  the  role  they  play,
           whether as a relative or friend of the family, is  as  a  caring
           relative or friend but not so as to take on the role of a parent
           then it cannot be said that they have a 'parental  relationship'
           with the child.  It is perhaps obvious to  state  that  'carers'
           are not per se 'parents'.  A child may have carers  who  do  not
           step into the shoes of their parents but look  after  the  child
           for specific periods of time (for example whilst the parents are
           at work) or even longer term (for example where the parents  are
           travelling abroad for a holiday or family visit).  Those  carers
           may be professionally employed; they may be relatives;  or  they
           may be friends.  In all those cases, it  may  properly  be  said
           that there is an element of dependency between the child and his
           or her carers.  However, that alone would not, in  my  judgment,
           give rise to a 'parental relationship'".

       That extract confirms  the  highly  fact  sensitive  nature  of  the
       inquiry to be made.


   15. What then of the evidence which was before Judge Black.   She  heard
       oral evidence from  the  Appellant.   Judge  Storey  refers  in  his
       permission grant to the supporting evidence of a witness  but  there
       was no oral evidence from any other witness, and  I  infer  that  he
       intended to refer to the  letters  of  support  in  the  Appellant's
       bundle.


   16. Dealing first with the Appellant's witness statement dated  3  April
       2019.  His evidence on the issue of his relationship  with  the  two
       children is as follows:

           "[6]   My  deceased  brother  left  three  children,  from   two
                 different women, in the UK.  They are all British  citizens
                 and live with their mothers in the UK.


           [7]   My brother had two children with [MM].  Their details  are
                 as follows:


                     . Name: [AG], date of birth [..]


                     . Name: [AI], date of birth [..]


           [8]   [MM] and the children  currently  live  at  [..]  Basildon
                 [..]. I have a very strong relationship with [AG] and [AI].


           [9]   I go to see the children fairly  regularly  and  they  are
                 always excited to see me.  When I go  there,  I  take  some
                 gifts and food for them.  I always make sure to spend  time
                 with them and check that they are doing okay and are not in
                 need of anything.


           [10]  Ever since my brother passed away, the children  have  not
                 had a father figure in their life and they now consider  me
                 as a father figure.  I am submitting pictures in my  appeal
                 bundle which show how happy the children are when they  are
                 with me.


           [11]  I either spend time with the children  at  their  home  or
                 take them outside.  At home, we play games  together  or  I
                 read children's books to them  and  help  them  with  their
                 homework.  Sometimes,  I  also  cook  some  meals  for  the
                 children from time to time.


           [12]  I also regularly take the children to  the  park  to  play
                 games, help them play in  the  children's  play  area  with
                 climbing activities and on swings.  I also  regularly  take
                 the children out to restaurants and have even taken them to
                 cinema to watch children's movies from time-to-time.


           [13]  I wish to be able to continue to provide tangible  support
                 for the children of my brother until they are grown up  and
                 fully independent.


           [14]  I am aware that I could keep in contact with them  through
                 modern means of communication, but I do  not  believe  that
                 this  is  sufficient  to  replace  the  face-to-face  human
                 contact I have with them in the UK.


           [15]  My intention is to continue playing a  real  role  in  the
                 children's life with the children of my brother on  a  very
                 regular basis.  I want to provide        financial  support
                 and  physically  take  them  through  their  childhood  and
                 teenage life.  Since I was not there  to  save  my  brother
                 from his murderers, I want to at least contribute to  bring
                 up his children."

   17. The Appellant has produced two letters of support and documents from
       friends who are  providing  him  with  accommodation  and  financial
       support while he is unable to work.  Neither letter  refers  to  his
       relationship  with  the  children.   There  are  also  a  series  of
       photographs showing the Appellant with the children.


   18. Whilst I entirely sympathise with the Appellant's wish to remain  in
       the UK with his brother's family, the evidence is,  as  Judge  Black
       found, entirely insufficient to establish that  he  has  a  parental
       relationship with the children. Indeed, Mr Ahmed accepted  that  the
       evidence was "not extensive". Judge Black's reference to there being
       "no evidence" has to be read in context.  She is there referring  to
       the complete absence of any  evidence  from  the  children's  mother
       supporting the Appellant's case.  His own  evidence  shows  that  he
       visits the children (although it is not said for how  long  or  with
       what frequency).  He does not live with them.  It is  not  suggested
       that he has any input into their upbringing.  It  is  not  suggested
       that he takes any important decisions in relation to them,  such  as
       where they go to school, and the other sorts of  decisions  which  a
       parent with a direct role in a  child's  upbringing  would  need  to
       take.  He says that he would like to support them  financially,  but
       he is not doing so currently (and even that  would  be  insufficient
       without more to show a parental  relationship).  The  only  evidence
       other than his own statement is the series  of  photographs  of  him
       with the children.  Those cannot establish a parental relationship.

   19. As the Judge found, the evidence shows that he has  "a  genuine  and
       meaningful relationship" with the children but that is as between an
       uncle and nephew and niece.  Mr Ahmed submitted that the  Judge  had
       failed to make a clear  distinction  between  that  and  a  parental
       relationship.  I do not accept that.  The Judge has made clear  that
       she is considering two different concepts. There is no inconsistency
       between the finding that he has a relationship which is genuine  and
       meaningful, but which is one  "as  between  family  members"  and  a
       finding that the  Appellant  has  not  established  that  he  has  a
       parental relationship with the children.

   20. It is entirely understandable  that  the  Appellant  would  wish  to
       maintain contact with  the  children  as  a  means  of  retaining  a
       connection with his deceased brother, but this does not show that he
       has "stepped into the shoes" of that brother.  He may regard himself
       as a father figure for the children.  They may even see him as  such
       in the absence of their father  (although  there  is  no  more  than
       assertion of that fact by the Appellant and it is not  developed  in
       terms of how that is expressed in practice).   In  any  event,  that
       does not mean that there exists a  parental  relationship.   As  the
       Judge points out, particularly in circumstances where  the  children
       and their mother apparently still visit Albania, there is no  reason
       why they cannot continue those visits and maintain contact  in  that
       way  with  the  Appellant  (as  well  as  through  modern  means  of
       communication which the Appellant accepts could be used to  maintain
       some form of contact).


   21. Mr Ahmed  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  position  ought  to  be
       compared with,  for  example,  a  biological  father  who  takes  no
       interest in his child's upbringing but would still be considered  to
       have  a  parental  relationship  whereas  the  Appellant,  who  does
       substantially more for his nephew and niece does not.  However, that
       underlines the factual  sensitivity  of  the  issue.   A  biological
       parent in the situation outlined by Mr Ahmed might be found to  have
       a parental relationship in such circumstances due to the  nature  of
       the biological relationship but that is not inevitably the case.  If
       for example, the  father  did  not  live  with  the  child  and  had
       negligible contact, he might well be found not to have a  subsisting
       relationship of that nature notwithstanding the paternal link.   All
       depends on the facts and the evidence of those facts.


   22. Although the Decision is brief, given the paucity of the evidence in
       this case, the findings made  by  the  Judge  and  her  reasons  are
       sufficient to explain why she reached the conclusion she  did  about
       the existence of a parental relationship.  As the guidance on  which
       the Appellant relies in his grounds makes clear, whether a  parental
       relationship exists depends on the facts and the evidence.  Here the
       facts and the evidence do  not  establish  that  relationship.   The
       Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion she did.  Indeed, on  the
       evidence before her, it is difficult to see  what  other  conclusion
       could be drawn.




    CONCLUSION


   23. For all the above reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision does not
       contain an error of law. Accordingly, I uphold the Decision.


    DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  G  A  Black
    promulgated on 18 April 2019 with the consequence that the  Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed

      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 8 August 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
