
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19917/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 04 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of the proceedings.  I  find  that
it is appropriate to continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A. Swain, instructed by Mansouri & Sons
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision  dated  26  September
    2018 to refuse a human rights  claim  in  the  context  of  deportation
    proceedings.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge M.A. Khan allowed the appeal in  a  decision
    promulgated on 03 May 2019. A panel of the Upper  Tribunal  found  that
    the decision involved the making of an  error  of  law  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 October 2019. The case was  relisted  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

Background

3.    The factual background is not in dispute. The appellant is a  43-year-
    old Nigerian citizen. He first came to the UK with his parents in  1979
    when he was three years old. He remained in the UK  until  1981  before
    returning to Nigeria. He returned to the UK with his family in February
    1988, when he was 11 years old. He  was  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain on 11 January 1989. In total, he has lived in the UK for  around
    34 years of his life. His mother, brother and sister are settled in the
    UK and have  become  British  citizens.  The  appellant  is  not  in  a
    relationship and does not have any children. He is said to have a close
    relationship with his sister and her  family.  He  lives  in  the  same
    household as his mother. The appellant  was  educated  in  the  UK  and
    attended Southbank University to study electrical engineering. Although
    the extent of his completed qualifications  is  somewhat  unclear,  the
    appellant has studied electrical engineering, there is evidence that he
    has been in employment, that he has  recently  completed  a  course  in
    railway engineering,  and  is  qualified  to  work  as  a  construction
    labourer. The appellant says that he first tried crack cocaine in  1999
    and subsequently developed a long-term drug habit, which he kept hidden
    from his family. It seems that the appellant was able  to  continue  to
    work and outwardly maintain an apparently  normal  life  until  he  was
    convicted of a serious criminal offence in 2016.

4.    On 26 September 2018 the  respondent  made  an  automatic  deportation
    order under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("UKBA 2007")  and
    section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971  ("IA  1971")  following  the
    appellant's conviction for  fraud.  He  was  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment. The sentencing judge made the following remarks:

         "... It gives me no pleasure whatsoever to be sentencing you today,
         sentencing you for a serious fraud involving effectively the  theft
         of about �125,000 from your employer.

         You're a man of previous good character and you're obviously from a
         supportive family. Your brother is here in  court  to  support  you
         and, as  I  understand  it,  your  mother  also  knows  about  this
         appearance and I've little doubt it's  caused  them  -  it's  quite
         clear it's caused your family distress. I also bear  in  mind  when
         sentencing you that you're a man of  hitherto  good  character  and
         that you admitted your involvement from the outset.  All  of  those
         stand to your credit.

         The fact is though that there was a serious breach of  trust  here.
         You were employed as the accounts manager or administrator for  the
         [BFMP] from October 2009 onwards. Your job  was  to  safeguard  the
         cash. You were responsible for  paying  bills,  you  had  immediate
         access to the practice accounts and  you  reported  solely  to  the
         managing partner. What you did was  simple,  yet  in  its  own  way
         sophisticated, planned and sustained over a  period  of  time.  You
         diverted funds to your own  accounts  and,  on  occasion,  to  drug
         dealers' accounts, but entered in the ledgers that payment had been
         made to persons or companies and the like  to  whom  payments  were
         made regularly by the practice. So to a cursory inspection it would
         appear that a normal, regular payment had been made.

         I mention payments to drug dealers because you have fallen into the
         hands of drug dealers, having developed a  potentially  fatal  drug
         addiction. I'm told that you have managed to  kick  that  habit.  I
         hope for your sake you have and I am sentencing you  on  the  basis
         that you have and I'm giving you to some extent  credit  for  that.
         That said, I must remind you that there's only one person  who  can
         really deal with that habit and  that's  you.  There  are  in  fact
         plenty of agencies and people ready, willing  and  able  to  assist
         you, but if you don't stay on  the  straight  and  narrow  in  that
         regard the drug will have a grip on you and one of two things  will
         happen. You'll either be back here for a longer sentence or  you'll
         be dead, one or other. The choice ultimately is yours. ...

         ... There's no two ways about it whatsoever, that your frauds  have
         adversely affected the medical services  delivered  by  the  [BFMP]
         and, if they had continued,  might  well  have  driven  it  out  of
         business. That's clear from the victim impact statement I have from
         Dr [H], the  senior  partner  of  the  practice.  In  other  words,
         hundreds of other people could have been harmed  by  your  actions.
         That I regard  as  potentially  as  serious  as  anything  in  this
         particular case."

Scope of the appeal

5.    The appellant is a 'foreign criminal' within the  meaning  of  section
    117D(2) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA
    2002").

6.    The appellant was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less  than
    four years and is eligible to argue that the exceptions to  deportation
    contained in section 117C NIAA 2002 apply. He is not in a  relationship
    with a partner and does not have a parental relationship with  children
    in the UK.

7.    The appellant argues that Exception 1 applies, which  relates  to  his
    private life in the UK  (section  117C(4)  NIAA  2002).  The  exception
    contains three elements. The  respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant
    meets the requirements of section 117C(4)(a) and (b). The appellant has
    been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life  and
    is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom.  However,
    the respondent does not accept that he meets the requirement of section
    117C(4)(c) to show that there would be 'very significant obstacles'  to
    his integration into  the  country  to  which  it  is  proposed  he  be
    deported. If the appellant cannot show that he meets  the  requirements
    of Exception 1 he would need to show that there  are  'very  compelling
    circumstances' over and above the exceptions which outweigh the  public
    interest in deportation for the purpose of section 117C(6) NIAA 2002.

8.     A  further  factual  issue  relating  to   the   appellant's   sexual
    orientation as a gay man was raised before the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    April 2019. The First-tier Tribunal judge  noted  that  it  was  a  new
    matter but decided that he had discretion to consider the issue as part
    of the overall Article 8 assessment, albeit he did not go  on  to  make
    any findings [38]. However, it  is  unclear  whether  the  Home  Office
    formally granted or refused consent  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider the issue as a 'new matter' with reference  to  section  85(5)
    NIAA 2002. If the Secretary of State refuses consent the Tribunal  does
    not have discretion to consider the new matter.

9.    At the last hearing in the Upper Tribunal the respondent was given  an
    oral direction to confirm whether consent was given  to  consider  this
    issue as a new  matter.  No  written  response  was  received.  At  the
    hearing, Mr Clarke confirmed that the Secretary of State did  not  give
    consent for the Tribunal to consider the new matter. He claimed that it
    would be unfair on the appellant because it was an issue that needed to
    be considered properly by the respondent. The purpose of section  85(5)
    is to provide the respondent with a fair opportunity  to  consider  any
    new matters. The respondent  has  had  more  than  sufficient  time  to
    consider the matter since it was first raised but has not done  so.  No
    explanation was provided for this failure. It is difficult to  see  how
    it would be unfair to the appellant to consider  it  as  part  of  this
    appeal. In order to avoid abuse of the provision, consent  should  only
    be refused where the respondent is likely to be  prejudiced  by  a  new
    matter that has been raised at a late stage. I can see no prejudice  in
    this case given the time that has elapsed since the issue was raised.

10.   The appellant did not ask  for  an  adjournment  to  consider  whether
    there might be grounds to apply for judicial review of the respondent's
    decision to refuse consent. In the circumstances,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    has no discretion. Inevitably this means that any Article 8  assessment
    undertaken by the Upper Tribunal will not take  into  account  all  the
    relevant circumstances. Mr Clarke recognised that if the appellant is a
    gay man (and it is worth noting that he was  found  to  be  a  credible
    witness by the First-tier Tribunal) it would be a relevant issue  given
    the evidence relating to attitudes towards LGBTQI+ people  in  Nigeria.
    Nevertheless, having refused consent for the Upper Tribunal to consider
    an issue that would be relevant to a proper  assessment  of  the  human
    rights appeal, the Upper Tribunal is obliged by operation of statute to
    exclude it from consideration.

11.   The appeal proceeded with agreement  that  the  following  two  issues
    should be determined:

      i) Whether the appellant would face  'very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration' in Nigeria for the purpose  of  section  117C(c)  NIAA
         2002; and if not

     ii) Whether there are 'very compelling circumstances' that outweigh the
         public interest in deportation for the purpose of  section  117C(6)
         NIAA 2002.

Decision and reasons

Best interests of children

12.   It is not suggested that the appellant  has  a  parental  relationship
    with his sister's children or that Exception 2 applies  in  this  case.
    The evidence shows that  the  appellant  has  a  close  and  supportive
    relationship with his sister and her family. He  enjoys  spending  time
    with her children and no doubt they  enjoy  spending  time  with  their
    uncle. The children have written a letter of support in which they  say
    that their uncle is a kind person who is willing  to  spend  time  with
    them. He takes them to football and helps them with their education. He
    also helps their grandmother who suffers from high blood  pressure  and
    diabetes. She would be  lonely  if  he  is  deported  to  Nigeria.  The
    appellant's sister says that her children adore their  uncle  and  that
    the resulting pain of his deportation would  be  "acutely  felt  by  us
    all". She says that her children tell her "Uncle [S] is like  having  a
    great coach, a favourite teacher, and a best friend, all in one".

13.   It seems clear that the  children  have  a  loving  relationship  with
    their uncle and that he also likes to spend time with them. However, he
    does  not  live  with  the  children  nor   does   he   have   parental
    responsibility. His relationship with the children does not display any
    compelling features beyond the usual loving relationship that one might
    expect between an uncle and his nieces and nephews. It is in  the  best
    interests of the children to remain in the UK  in  the  care  of  their
    parents. Understandably, they would prefer their uncle to remain in the
    UK, but it could not be said that their best interests  point  strongly
    towards him remaining here. In the circumstances, the interests of  the
    children are not a weighty consideration in this case.

Article 8(1) - private and family life

14.   The appellant is a 43-year-old man who came  to  the  UK  as  a  young
    child and has lived in the UK for around 34 years.  The  appellant  has
    spent most of his life in the UK and it is accepted that he is socially
    and culturally integrated.  The  only  family  members  with  whom  the
    appellant has any meaningful relationships live in the UK. He continues
    to live in the same household with his mother  and  they  provide  each
    other with mutual support. He has grown up in the  UK  and  has  strong
    links to this country. The  appellant  has  established  a  significant
    private life in the UK. I am satisfied that his removal in  consequence
    of the decision would affect his right to private and family life in  a
    sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of  Article  8(1)  of
    the European Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

15.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects  the  right  to  private
    and family life. However, it is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

16.   Part 5A NIAA 2002 applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a
    person's right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8
    of the European Convention. In  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of
    foreign  criminals  the  additional  public   interest   considerations
    contained in section 117C apply. The 'public interest  question'  means
    the question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

17.   The courts have repeatedly emphasised that significant  weight  should
    be given to the public interest in deportation. However, that is not to
    say that the weight to be given to the public interest  in  deportation
    is uniform or monolithic: see Akinyemi v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2098. The
    more serious the offending behaviour; the greater the weight is  placed
    on the public interest in deportation. The less serious  the  offending
    behaviour; the more readily an individual's compelling or compassionate
    circumstances might outweigh the public interest in deportation.

18.   The exceptions to deportation  outlined  in  section  117C  NIAA  2002
    reflect the respondent's position as to where a fair balance is  struck
    between the weight that  must  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals and the person's right to private or family
    life. If the appellant meets the requirements of one of the  exceptions
    the respondent accepts that his removal would be disproportionate.

Section 117C(4)(c) - 'Very significant obstacles to integration'

19.   The  respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant  meets  the  first  two
    requirements of Exception 1. In SSHD v Kamara  [2016]  4  WLR  152  the
    Court of Appeal set out  the  essence  of  the  'integration'  test  as
    follows:

         "14.      In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
             "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that he
             be deported, as set out in section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
             399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the  mere  ability
             to find a job or to sustain life while  living  in  the  other
             country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language
             as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for
             a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms  that
             Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration"  calls
             for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have
             a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life."

20.   The facts of this case indicate that the appellant is  a  healthy  man
    with qualifications that  are  likely  to  enable  him  to  find  work.
    However, the Court of Appeal made clear that the test is  not  confined
    to his ability to find work and to sustain life. Exception 1 recognises
    that people who have lawfully resident in the  UK  for  most  of  their
    life, and who are socially and culturally  integrated,  might  find  it
    particularly difficult to establish  themselves  in  their  country  of
    nationality, which after a long passage  of  time  might  seem  like  a
    foreign land to them.

21.   The appellant has lived in the UK  for  most  of  his  life.  He  left
    Nigeria as a young child and has  no  experience  of  independent  life
    there as an adult. He says that he visited Nigeria  once  in  1996.  He
    stayed  with  relatives  who  escorted  him   throughout   the   visit.
    Unfortunately, his aunt died in a car crash while  he  was  there.  His
    remaining cousins died since then. After having heard evidence from the
    appellant and other members of the family the First-tier Tribunal judge
    was satisfied that the appellant would have no  family  support  if  he
    returned to Nigeria.

22.   The appellant was a long-term drug addict who says  that  he  has  not
    taken drugs since he was sent to prison in  2016.  The  evidence  shows
    that his family members in the UK have been instrumental  in  providing
    support during recovery. Although there is no expert evidence  relating
    to this issue, I find that it is reasonable to take judicial notice  of
    the fact that drug addicts are vulnerable to relapse. I find  that  the
    continued support of his family is important if he is going to continue
    to remain drug-free. In contrast, he has no family support  in  Nigeria
    and would be more vulnerable to relapse.

23.   The appellant has spent most of his life in the UK and no  longer  has
    any meaningful connections with Nigeria. He says that he understands  a
    little Hausa but does not speak any local languages.  I  bear  in  mind
    that English is an official language in Nigeria and that  it  would  be
    possible for him to operate in that language to  a  large  extent.  The
    appellant has no practical experience of how day-to-day life in Nigeria
    works and no family members there to help him understand. As an  expert
    tribunal that deals with many Nigerian cases, I take judicial notice of
    the fact that family support  is  particularly  important  in  Nigerian
    society because there is no safety net of state support similar to  the
    UK. The appellant might be able to find  some  menial  work  and  could
    receive limited financial  support  from  family  members  in  the  UK.
    However, it  is  likely  that  he  would  return  to  Nigeria  with  no
    meaningful connections and no idea of how life operates there. He would
    live an isolated existence because he has no family or  friends  there.
    As a result, he might be vulnerable to relapse, which in turn is likely
    to affect his ability to integrate. In my assessment,  it  is  unlikely
    that he will be able to build up within a reasonable time a variety  of
    human relationships that would give substance to his private and family
    life. After a careful evaluation of all the relevant circumstances, and
    taking into account the fact that the  provision  is  said  to  reflect
    where a fair balance should be struck for the purpose of Article  8(2),
    I conclude that the appellant would face 'very significant obstacles to
    integration' in Nigerian  society  within  the  broad  meaning  of  the
    phrase. I  conclude  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    Exception 1.

Section 117C(6) - 'Very compelling circumstances'

24.   Even  if  I  am  wrong  in  my  assessment  I  turn  to  consider  the
    alternative exception. Section 117C(6) NIAA 2002 states that the public
    interest  requires  deportation  unless  there  are  'very   compelling
    circumstances' over  and  above  Exceptions  1  and  2.  The  test  has
    repeatedly  been  described  as  a  demanding  one  involving  a   high
    threshold: see NA (Pakistan), KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 and RA
    (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence; seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123.

25.   The assessment under section 117C(6) of the NIAA  2002  and  paragraph
    398 of the immigration rules reflects the  overall  balancing  exercise
    undertaken  by  the  Strasbourg  court  when  assessing   whether   the
    interference with a person's private or family life  is  justified  and
    proportionate under Article 8(2) of the European Convention. After all,
    that is the stated intention of  the  statutory  scheme.  The  need  to
    consider  the  relevant   principles   outlined   in   the   Strasbourg
    jurisprudence was emphasised by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v  SSHD
    [2016] 1 WLR 4799:

         "25.     The question whether the deportation of a foreign offender
             would be incompatible with article 8 has  been  considered  by
             the European court in numerous judgments. In cases  concerning
             "settled migrants", that is  to  say  persons  who  have  been
             granted a right of residence in the host  country,  the  court
             has accepted that the withdrawal of that right may  constitute
             an interference with the right to respect for  private  and/or
             family life within the meaning of article 8. If  there  is  an
             interference, it must be justified under article 8(2) as being
             "in accordance with the law", as pursuing one or more  of  the
             legitimate aims set  out  in  that  paragraph,  and  as  being
             "necessary in a democratic society", that is to say  justified
             by a pressing social need and proportionate to the  legitimate
             aim  pursued.  .....  In  practice,  the  critical  issue   is
             generally whether the "necessity" test is met. In that regard,
             the court has often  said  that  the  task  of  the  court  or
             tribunal  applying  article  8(2)  consists  in   ascertaining
             whether  the  decision  struck  a  fair  balance  between  the
             relevant interests, namely the applicant's  right  to  respect
             for his private and family life, on  the  one  hand,  and  the
             prevention of disorder or crime, on the other.

         26.      In a well-known series of judgments the court has set  out
             the guiding principles which it  applies  when  assessing  the
             likelihood that the deportation of  a  settled  migrant  would
             interfere with family life and, if so, its proportionality  to
             the legitimate aim pursued. In Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33
             EHRR 50, para 48, the court said that it  would consider  the
             nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
             applicant; the length of the applicant's stay in  the  country
             from which he or she is to be expelled; the time elapsed since
             the offence was committed and the applicant's  conduct  during
             that  period;  the  nationalities  of  the   various   persons
             concerned; the  applicant's  family  situation,  such  as  the
             length of the  marriage,  and  other  factors  expressing  the
             effectiveness of a couple's family life;  whether  the  spouse
             knew about the offence at the time when he or she entered into
             a family relationship;  whether  there  are  children  of  the
             marriage, and if so, their age; and  the  seriousness  of  the
             difficulties which the spouse is likely to  encounter  in  the
             country to which the applicant is to be expelled. Two  further
             factors were mentioned in ?ner v Netherlands  (2007)  45  EHRR
             14,  para  58:  the  best  interests  and  well-being  of  the
             children, in particular the seriousness  of  the  difficulties
             which any children of the applicant are likely to encounter in
             the country to which the applicant is to be expelled; and  the
             solidity of the social, cultural and family ties with the host
             country and with the  country  of  destination.  In  Maslov  v
             Austria [2009] INLR 47, paras 72-75, the court added that  the
             age of the person concerned can play a role when applying some
             of these criteria. For instance, when assessing the nature and
             seriousness of the offences, it has to be taken  into  account
             whether the person committed them  as  a  juvenile  or  as  an
             adult. Equally, when assessing the length of the person's stay
             in the country from which he or she is to be expelled and  the
             solidity of the social, cultural and family ties with the host
             country, it makes a difference whether the person came to  the
             country during his or her childhood or youth, or was even born
             there, or whether he or she only came as an adult. Some of the
             factors listed in these cases relate to the  strength  of  the
             public interest in deportation: that is to say, the extent  to
             which the deportation of the person concerned will promote the
             legitimate aim pursued. Others relate to the strength  of  the
             countervailing interests in private and family life. They  are
             not exhaustive.

         27.      As the Grand  Chamber  noted  in  Jeunesse  v  Netherlands
             (2015)  60  EHRR  17,  para  105,  these  criteria  cannot  be
             transposed automatically to the situation of a person  who  is
             not a settled migrant but an alien seeking admission to a host
             country: a category which includes, as the facts of that  case
             demonstrate, a person who has been unlawfully resident in  the
             host country for many years. The court analysed the  situation
             of such a person, facing expulsion for reasons of  immigration
             control  rather  than  deportation  on  account  of   criminal
             behaviour, as raising the question whether the authorities  of
             the host country were under a duty, pursuant to article 8,  to
             grant the person the necessary permission  to  enable  her  to
             exercise her right to family  life  on  their  territory.  The
             situation was thus analysed not  as  one  in  which  the  host
             country was interfering with the person's right to respect for
             her private and family life, raising the question whether  the
             interference was justified under article  8(2).  Instead,  the
             situation  was  analysed  as  one  in  which  the  person  was
             effectively asserting  that  her  right  to  respect  for  her
             private and family life, under article 8(1),  imposed  on  the
             host country an obligation to permit her to continue to reside
             there, and the question was whether  such  an  obligation  was
             indeed imposed.

         ...

         33.      Considering next the factors which should  be  taken  into
             account, those mentioned in the Boultif line of cases  have  a
             bearing on the proportionality of the deportation  of  foreign
             offenders, whether they are settled  migrants  or  not.  Where
             they are not settled migrants, it will also  be  necessary  to
             have regard to the factors mentioned in Jeunesse,  so  far  as
             relevant and not already taken into account: notably,  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles or major impediments in the
             way of the family living in the country of origin of the alien
             concerned; whether there are factors of  immigration  control,
             such as a history of breaches of immigration law; and  whether
             the family life  was  created  at  a  time  when  the  persons
             involved were aware that the immigration status of one of them
             was such that the persistence of that family life  within  the
             host state would from the outset be precarious. Those  factors
             were mentioned in Jeunesse in a context where family life  was
             relied on to  defeat  immigration  control  at  the  point  of
             admission to the host country. But  it  is  also  relevant  to
             consider, in the context of liability to  deportation  because
             of  criminal  behaviour,  whether  the  offender  has  a   bad
             immigration history, or whether there are major impediments to
             continuing family life in his country of  origin,  or  whether
             family life was established in the knowledge that, because  of
             the immigration status of one of  the  persons  involved,  its
             continuation in the UK was uncertain. If that were not so, the
             perverse consequence would follow that these matters would  be
             liable to carry greater weight if a non-offender  were  sought
             to be removed on account of his irregular  immigration  status
             than if an offender with  the  same  immigration  status  were
             sought to be removed on account of serious criminal conduct."

26.   After section 117C NIAA 2002 was introduced the Court of Appeal in  NA
    (Pakistan)  expressly  recognised  the  need  to  consider   Strasbourg
    principles when applying the statutory scheme:

         "38.     Against that background, one may ask what is the  role  of
             the Strasbourg jurisprudence? In particular, how does one take
             into account important decisions such as  Uner  v  Netherlands
             (2007) 45 EHRR 14 and Maslov v Austria?  Mr  Southey  QC,  who
             represents KJ and WM,  rightly  submits  that  the  Strasbourg
             authorities have an important role to  play.  Mr  Tam  rightly
             accepted  that  this  is  correct.  The  answer  is  that  the
             Secretary of State and the  tribunals  and  courts  will  have
             regard to the Strasbourg jurisprudence when applying the tests
             set out in our domestic legislation. For example,  a  tribunal
             may be considering whether it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  a
             child to remain in England without the deportee; or it may  be
             considering whether  certain  circumstances  are  sufficiently
             "compelling"  to  outweigh  the  high   public   interest   in
             deportation of foreign criminals. Anyone applying these  tests
             (as required by our own rules and legislation) should heed the
             guidance contained in the Strasbourg authorities. As  we  have
             stated above, the scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and paras.
             398-399A of the 2014 rules is to ensure  compliance  with  the
             requirements of Article 8 through a structured approach, which
             is intended to ensure that  proper  weight  is  given  to  the
             public interest in deportation whilst also  having  regard  to
             other relevant factors as identified  in  the  Strasbourg  and
             domestic caselaw. The new regime is not  intended  to  produce
             violations of Article 8."

27.   I conduct my assessment with these  principles  in  mind.  I  turn  to
    consider what weight  should  be  placed  on  the  public  interest  in
    deportation and what factors might weigh in favour of the appellant  in
    order to assess whether the decision strikes a  fair  balance  for  the
    purpose of Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

28.   The appellant was sentenced to  two  years'  imprisonment.  It  was  a
    serious offence involving a breach of trust. A  significant  amount  of
    money  was  embezzled  from  the  GP  practice  where  he  worked.  The
    sentencing remarks make clear that the offence  had  a  serious  impact
    given the nature of his employer's work.  Significant  weight  must  be
    placed on the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals
    and the need to deter others from committing similar offences. The more
    serious the offence the greater is the public interest in deportation.

29.   Although it was a serious offence, it was  not  in  the  most  serious
    category of offences involving periods of  imprisonment  of  over  four
    years. The appellant does  not  have  any  other  convictions  and  was
    previously of  good  character.  There  is  no  OASys  assessment.  The
    appellant was released from prison over two years ago and there  is  no
    evidence to suggest that he has been convicted of any further offences.
    It is clear from his evidence, and the remarks made by  the  sentencing
    judge, that his drug addiction was the root cause of the offence. There
    is no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  holds  pro-criminal
    attitudes or that he has been involved in other  types  of  crime.  The
    appellant says that he has been drug free since he went to prison.

30.   On the other side of the balance the appellant is a long term  settled
    migrant who has lived most of his life in the UK with lawful  leave  to
    remain. He entered the UK as a young child and has strong and  enduring
    connections to the UK. He is socially and culturally integrated. All of
    his close family members live in the UK. His strong ties to the UK  are
    a compelling factor that should be given significant weight.

31.   The appellant speaks English and has training  to  enable  him  to  be
    financially independent. He has taken steps to retrain and is  actively
    looking for work. Those factors are neutral. The appellant has a single
    conviction. Albeit a serious offence it was not at the  higher  end  of
    the scale of offending behaviour. He expresses remorse for his actions.
    It is clear that his conviction led him to reflect  on  his  addiction.
    The fact that the appellant has remained drug free for several years is
    a positive indication. With support from his family  he  remains  drug-
    free. He denies any relapse. Given that the  underlying  cause  of  his
    offence was his addiction to drugs, if he remains drug free,  it  seems
    unlikely that he will reoffend. Of  course,  everyone  is  expected  to
    abide by the law. The fact that the appellant is unlikely  to  reoffend
    just  does  not  add  any  further  weight  to  the   public   interest
    considerations.

32.   The respondent accepts the appellant meets the first two  requirements
    of Exception 1 and I have found that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Nigeria. His private and family life is
    entrenched in the UK. In contrast, if he were returned to  Nigeria,  he
    would face an isolated existence in a country that is foreign to him.

33.   I remind myself that the provisions contained in the statutory  scheme
    are intended to be compliant with a proper application of Article 8  of
    the European Convention. In assessing whether a fair balance  has  been
    struck between the undoubted weight that must be placed on  the  public
    interest in deportation and the individual circumstances of this  case,
    I conclude that, while none of the  factors  are  sufficient  if  taken
    alone, the cumulative  effect  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  are
    sufficiently compelling to amount to  'very  compelling  circumstances'
    that outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.  The  factors  upon
    which I base this cumulative assessment are:

      i) The appellant's particularly long length of lawful residence;

     ii) The strength of his entrenched private and family life ties to  the
         UK;

    iii) The positive progress he has made to combat  his  addiction,  which
         was the root cause of the offence;

     iv) The fact that, while he  remains  drug  free,  he  is  unlikely  to
         reoffend; and

      v) The very significant obstacles to  integration  in  Nigeria,  which
         include social isolation and  increased  vulnerability  to  relapse
         without family support.

34.   For these  reasons  I  conclude  that  removal  of  the  appellant  in
    consequence of the decision would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

35.   I have found that deportation would be a disproportionate response  at
    the current time. However, the appellant should be  aware  that  if  he
    commits any further offences, particularly of a serious kind, it  would
    be  open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  whether  further
    deportation action might be appropriate. This should act  as  a  strong
    incentive for him to remain drug free and to abide by the law.



DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed      [pic]      Date 30 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

