
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19704/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 1st November 2019                  |On 12 November 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Elsoneda [t]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Chaggar of Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated on 2 April 2019,  in  which
    Ms [T]'s appeal against the decision to refuse her human  rights  claim
    dated 16 August 2018 was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with Ms [T] as the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 11 November  1989,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom in 2011,  using  false  documents  for
    which she was prosecuted and sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.  Her
    claim for asylum  was  refused  and  she  was  notified  of  notice  of
    intention to deport her on  31  March  2011.   The  Appellant's  appeal
    against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  the  First-Tier   Tribunal
    (Immigration Judge Bell and Ms Street JP) in a decision promulgated  on
    19 July  2011.   A  signed  Deportation  Order  was  made  against  the
    Appellant who was deported to Albania on 5 August 2011.  The  Appellant
    re-entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  and  in  breach   of   the
    Deportation Order in 2011/12, following which she met her partner  with
    whom she had a child in 2014 and an application for leave to remain was
    made on human rights grounds on 24 October 2017.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not meet the suitability requirements for a grant of leave  to  remain,
    given that she had failed to disclose a  previous  criminal  conviction
    and that there was an extant Deportation  Order  in  force  from  2011.
    Further, the application was refused on the basis that  the  Respondent
    did not accept that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  at
    the date of application because there was no evidence  of  cohabitation
    at that  time  and  in  any  event  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    immigration  status  requirements.   The  alternative  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules were not met  on
    the basis that the relationship was not accepted and on the alternative
    basis, that the Appellant's child could remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    with the father.  The Appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules because there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to  her  reintegration  into  Albania.   Finally,
    there were no exceptional circumstances  which  warranted  a  grant  of
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. Judge Shore allowed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  2  April
    2019 on human rights  grounds.   Although  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed under the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules, it was found that her  removal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences to her and her family if they were all  required  to
    relocate to Albania, such that her removal would be a  disproportionate
    interference with her right to respect  for  private  and  family  life
    under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention   on   Human   Rights.
    Specifically, the First-tier Tribunal found that it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's two children (a second child  having  been
    born in 2019 prior to the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    after the reasons for refusal letter) to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    with both parents.  The Appellant's partner and children  were  British
    citizens, or in the case of the youngest  child,  entitled  to  British
    citizenship (which had by the time of  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal been granted).





The appeal

 5. The Respondent appeals  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in considering the appeal on Article 8  grounds
    without reference to the provisions in paragraphs 390  to  392  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  as  to  the  requirements  for  revocation   of   a
    Deportation Order, nor that Article 8 had been  considered  within  the
    relevant provisions relating  to  deportation  in  paragraphs  398  and
    following  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and/or  section  117C  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. Although the First-tier Tribunal was not assisted by the Respondent  as
    to the correct provisions under which the appeal should be  considered,
    the  Respondent  not  relying  on  any  of  the  relevant   deportation
    provisions in the Immigration Rules either in the reasons  for  refusal
    letter or in oral submissions to the  First-tier  Tribunal;  I  find  a
    material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  its
    failure  to  determine  the  appeal  in  accordance  with  the  correct
    provisions.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  were  clearly  aware  of   the
    Deportation Order, there was no dispute about it and at one  point  the
    First-tier Tribunal referred to it expressly excluding consideration of
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    Despite this and  for  no  apparent  reason,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    however went on to apply the remainder of section 117B and  the  normal
    non-deportation provisions in relation to Article 8.

 7. These findings were given orally in summary to the parties at the  oral
    hearing,  with  subsequent  agreement  between  the  parties  that  the
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal  should  be  preserved
    and the decision on appeal could be remade by the Upper Tribunal on the
    basis of further oral submissions only.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tarlow submitted that the  test  to  be
    applied in this appeal is that in paragraph  399D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, as to whether there are any very  exceptional  circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest in enforcement of  the  Deportation  Order
    made against the Appellant in 2011.  At the  time  of  the  Deportation
    Order  and  the  Appellant's  deportation  to  Albania,  she  had   not
    established any family life, which commenced only after her re-entry to
    the United Kingdom in 2011/2.  In essence, it was  submitted  that  the
    fact that the Appellant has a partner and two  British  children,  does
    not amount to very exceptional circumstances such that paragraph 391 of
    the Immigration Rules applies and the continuation of  the  Deportation
    Order is the proper course.

 9. On behalf of the Appellant, it was accepted that this appeal  raises  a
    narrow point as to whether there are very exceptional circumstances and
    that the test is not materially different to that applied by the First-
    tier Tribunal in finding unjustifiably harsh consequences on the family
    if the Appellant is removed.

10. Ms Chaggar submitted that  there  has  been  a  significant  change  of
    circumstances for the Appellant since the Deportation Order  was  made,
    with a relationship commenced after entering in breach  of  the  order,
    following which two children have been  born,  the  youngest  is  eight
    months old and the eldest is five years old.  It is accepted that there
    is a genuine parental  relationship  with  both  children  and  if  the
    Appellant is deported again, it would leave two young children  without
    their mother.

11. The Appellant's partner is a British citizen who is well established in
    the United Kingdom, has lived here for a long  time  and  has  made  it
    clear in his evidence that he would not to return to Albania  with  the
    Appellant.  It would not be in the  children's  best  interests  to  be
    separated from their mother and it was submitted that the  same  cannot
    be in the public interest.

12. Although accepted that the passage of time since the Deportation  Order
    was made in 2011 is not of itself good reason to revoke the Deportation
    Order, it is relevant that it was  made  some  eight  years  ago.   The
    complete change of circumstances  in  that  time  is  relevant  to  the
    assessment required under paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules.

13. The additional factors which need to be taken into account are that the
    Appellant  speaks  English  and  is  financially   independent,   being
    supported by her partner.  Ms Chaggar further  suggested  that  it  was
    necessary to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    prosecuted and sentenced for the use of a false passport to  enter  the
    United Kingdom prior to determination of her claim for asylum,  raising
    the question of whether the appellant was being penalised for  using  a
    false document with the intention of claiming asylum.  However,  it  is
    apparent from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  in  2011  that  the
    Appellant did not claim  asylum  until  after  being  notified  of  the
    intention to  deport  her  and  in  any  event  her  asylum  claim  was
    unsuccessful.  In these circumstances, this is not a relevant factor to
    be taken into account.

14. Overall it was submitted on behalf of the Appellant that this is a fact
    sensitive assessment in which there has been a  significant  change  of
    circumstances, establishing very exceptional circumstances to allow the
    revocation of the Deportation Order on  human  rights  grounds  and  in
    accordance  with  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] UKSC 53.

Findings and reasons

 1. As above and as agreed between the parties, the findings of  fact  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the Appellant's circumstances
    and  those  of  her  family  members  are  preserved  (subject  to  the
    development as noted above that the Appellant's youngest child has  now
    been granted British citizenship) and no further evidence was  required
    nor any significant additional factual findings needed.  Those findings
    are as follows:

         "45.  I find the Appellant and her partner were credible witnesses,
         although I find that they both exaggerated  the  difficulties  they
         would face on return to Albania.  They clearly would enjoy a  much-
         reduced standard of living in Albania and it is not surprising that
         they do not wish to return, but both have worked in the country  of
         origin and the sponsor has  built  up  a  business  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  No location evidence  was  produced  to  corroborate  the
         claim that they would be unable to find work.

         ...

         48. ...  I make the following findings of fact:

         48.1 The Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             the sponsor, who is a British citizen.  The  evidence  of  the
             Appellant and sponsor on this issue was unchallenged and, even
             if it had been, I would still have found for the Appellant  on
             the point on the balance of probabilities;

         48.2 The Appellant is subject to a  deportation  order,  so  cannot
         rely on section 117B(6);

         48.3 The Appellant was convicted and imprisoned for using  a  false
             document to gain entry to the United Kingdom;

         48.4 She was deported on release, but quickly re-entered the United
             Kingdom illegally, where she has remained;

         48.5  The  Appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
             relationship  with  her  elder  daughter,  who  is  a  British
             citizen, and her younger daughter, who is entitled to  British
             citizenship.  These facts were not in dispute;

         48.6 The Appellant's partner has established himself in business in
             the United Kingdom;

         48.7 The Appellant's elder daughter is attending school;

         48.8  The  Appellant  gave  unchallenged  evidence  that   she   is
             breastfeeding her new-born daughter, and;

         48.9 Both the Appellant and sponsor have family in Albania.

         ...

         50.  In considering section 117B  of  the  2002  Act,  I  make  the
             following findings of fact;

         50.1 The Appellant did not demonstrate to the required standard  of
             proof that she is able to speak English;

         50.2 The Appellant's is married to a British citizen;

         50.3 No evidence was produced as to the Appellant's own  income  or
             finances, but evidence of the sponsor's finances and available
             accommodation was provided.  I find  that  the  Appellant  has
             shown to the required standard of  proof  that  she  would  be
             financially independent and would  not  be  a  burden  on  the
             taxpayer;

         50.4 She is subject to a deportation order, and;

         50.5     The Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
             with two qualifying children.

         ...

         53.5 ... Family life could continue outside the United Kingdom, but
             I find that the best interests of the children,  which  are  a
             primary consideration, are to remain with both parents in  the
             United Kingdom where they  have  lived  all  their  lives  and
             either are or will be confirmed as British citizens."

15. In addition, there was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the
    Appellant's  eldest  daughter  speaks  a  little  Albanian   (but   not
    fluently).  There was no evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    suggest any current medical problems for any members of the family  and
    no educational problems or concerns in relation to the eldest child.

Legal framework

16.  Paragraph  390  and  following  of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out
    provisions relating to the revocation of a deportation order, which  so
    far as relevant to the present appeal provide as follows:

         390.  An application for revocation of a deportation order will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:

                i) the grounds on which the order was made;

               ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

             iii) the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
                  of an effective immigration control;

               iv)  the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
                   compassionate circumstances.

         390A.  Where paragraph 398 applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.

         391.  In the case of a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
         conviction for criminal offence, the continuation of a  deportation
         order against a person will be the proper course:

             (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
             four years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the  making  of
             the deportation order when, if an application  for  revocation
             is received, consideration will be  given  on  a  case-by-case
             basis with the deportation order should be maintained, or ...

         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating  to
         the  Status  of  Refugees,   or   there   are   other   exceptional
         circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation   is   outweighed   by
         compelling factors.

         391A.  In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by change of circumstances since the order was made,  or  by  fresh
         information coming to light which  was  not  before  the  appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State.  The passage of  time  since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a  change
         of circumstances as one for revocation of the order."

         ...

         398.  Where a person claims that the deportation would be  contrary
         to the U.K.'s obligations under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

              (a) ...

             (b) the deportation of the person from the U.K.'s conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years
             but at least 12 months; or

             (c) ... the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will   only   be
             outweighed by other factors where there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraph  399
             and 399A.

         399.  This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                       (ii) ...;

                  a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live  in  the
                     country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
                     UK without the person who is to be deported; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         ...

         399D.  Where a foreign criminal has been deported  and  enters  the
         United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of  the
         deportation orders in the public interest and will  be  implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances.

17. In the present appeal, pursuant to paragraph 399D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, the  test  is  therefore  whether  there  are  very  exceptional
    circumstances to outweigh the  public  interest  in  enforcement  of  a
    Deportation Order, a test which is more onerous on the  Appellant  than
    the unduly harsh criteria in the exceptions to deportation; the test of
    very  compelling  circumstances  in  paragraphs  398  to  399A  of  the
    Immigration  Rules;  and  the  unjustifiably  harsh   consequences   in
    paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM.  As the  Court  of  Appeal  found  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v SU (Pakistan) [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1069 at paragraph 45;

         The  difference  in  the  language  of  paragraphs  398  and  399D,
         suggesting a  more  stringent  requirement  under  paragraph  399D,
         reflect the real difference in the circumstances  covered  by  each
         paragraph.   Paragraph  398  addresses  the  question   whether   a
         deportation order should be made, or an existing order  maintained,
         against a person who has yet to be deported, whereas paragraph 399D
         addresses the very different case of a person who has been deported
         and then re-entered illegally and in breach of that order.  In  the
         latter case, any Article 8 claim that was raised  by  the  deportee
         before his original deportation will, it is hypothesised, have been
         decided against him.  It is  readily  understandable  that  in  the
         cases covered by paragraph 399D of the Secretary  of  State  should
         have formed the view that there is  a  particularly  strong  public
         interest in maintaining the integrity of the deportation system  as
         it applies to foreign criminals.

18. That is in effect to say that the hurdle faced by the Appellant is even
    higher than being able to show that the situation is  unduly  harsh  on
    family members and even higher than the need to show  very  exceptional
    circumstances for those situations in  which  a  person  who  has  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of over four years or who does  not
    otherwise individually meet either of the exceptions.   Whilst  bearing
    in mind that higher hurdle, it is useful to start with  a  reminder  of
    the  application  of  the  normal  rules  to  be  considered  before  a
    Deportation Order is made.  These were set out by the Supreme Court  in
    the case of Hesham Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] UKSC 60, by reference to  the  then  new  Immigration  Rules  in
    paragraph 399 and 399A, confirming the approach  to  be  considered  to
    these provisions and the task of the tribunal as follows:

         38.  The implication of the new rules is that rules  399  and  399A
         identify particular categories of case in which  the  Secretary  of
         State accepts that the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
         offender is outweighed under article 8 by  countervailing  factors.
         Cases not covered by those rules (that is to say, foreign offenders
         who have received sentences of at least four  years,  or  who  have
         received sentences of between 12 months and four  years  but  whose
         private or family life does not meet the requirements of rules  399
         and 399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight  should
         generally be given to the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
         such  offenders,  but  that  it  can  be  outweighed,  applying   a
         proportionality test, by very compelling  circumstances:  in  other
         words, by a very strong claim indeed, as  Laws  LJ  put  it  in SS
         (Nigeria).  The  countervailing   considerations   must   be   very
         compelling in order to outweigh the general public interest in  the
         deportation of such offenders, as assessed by  Parliament  and  the
         Secretary of State. The Strasbourg jurisprudence indicates relevant
         factors to consider, and rules 399 and 399A provide  an  indication
         of the sorts of matters which the Secretary  of  State  regards  as
         very compelling. As explained at para 26 above,  they  can  include
         factors bearing on  the  weight  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of the particular offender, such as his  conduct  since
         the offence was committed, as  well  as  factors  relating  to  his
         private or family life. Cases falling within the scope  of  section
         32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest in  deportation  is
         outweighed, other than those specified in the new rules themselves,
         are likely to be a very small minority (particularly in non-settled
         cases). They need not necessarily involve any circumstance which is
         exceptional in the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel for the
         Secretary of State accepted, consistently with Huang [2007] 2  AC
         167, para 20), but  they  can  be  said  to  involve  "exceptional
         circumstances" in the sense that they involve a departure from  the
         general rule.

         50.  In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out  its  task  on
         the basis of the facts as it finds  them  to  be  on  the  evidence
         before it, and the law as established  by  statute  and  case  law.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether deportation  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the deportation  of  the  offender  against  the
         impact on private and family life. In  doing  so,  it  should  give
         appropriate weight to Parliament's and  the  Secretary  of  State's
         assessments of the strength of the general public interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign offenders, as explained in paras  14,  37-38
         and 46 above,  and  also  consider  all  factors  relevant  to  the
         specific case in question. The critical issue for the tribunal will
         generally be whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the deportation of  the  offender  in  the  case
         before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong  to  outweigh
         it. In general, only a claim which is very  strong  indeed  -  very
         compelling, as it was put in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed.

19. The Supreme Court also recommended  to  the  Tribunal  a  balance-sheet
    approach when undertaking the proportionality  assessment,  considering
    the factors in favour and against an appellant.

20. In addition, by virtue of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"), a court or tribunal  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts reaches  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8
    and as result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998 must in all cases have regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act and in cases concerning the deportation of
    foreign criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C of  the
    same.  So far as relevant to the present appeal, section 117B  provides
    as follows:

         1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
            public interest.

         2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
            of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons
            who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to
            speak English, because persons who can speak English -

           a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           b) are better able to integrate into society.

         3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
            of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons
            who  seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom   are
            financially independent, because such persons -

           a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           b) are better able to integrate into society.

         4) Little weight should be given to -

           a) a private life, or

           b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

            that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
            the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
            person at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
            precarious.

21. So far as relevant to the present  appeal,  section  117C  provides  as
    follows:

         1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         2) The more serious the offence committed by foreign criminal,  the
            greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         3) In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
            sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
            public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception one or
            Exception to applies.

         4) Exception 1 ...

         5) Exception  2  applies  where  C  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
            relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
            subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
            the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
            unduly harsh.

         6) In the case of a foreign criminal has been sentenced to a period
            of  imprisonment  at  least  four  years,  the  public  interest
            required  deportation   unless   there   are   very   compelling
            circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  one
            and two.

22. These statutory provisions, which were not in  force  at  the  relevant
    date of the facts which arose in the case of Hesham Ali, have  recently
    been considered by the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53, with  the  focus  on  the
    assessment within the exception to as to whether deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh on a family member, which remains relevant when looking at
    whether a person can show "very compelling reasons" over and above  the
    exceptions, or in this case, the even  more  stringent  requirement  to
    show very exceptional circumstances.  The Supreme court summarised  the
    applicable test for the second exception as follows:

         22.   Given  that  exception  1  is  self-contained,  it  would  be
         surprising to find exception 2 structured in a different  way.   On
         its face it raises a factual issue seen from the point of  view  of
         the partner or child:  would  the  effect  of  C's  deportation  be
         "unduly harsh"?  Although the language is perhaps less precise than
         that of exception 1, there is nothing  to  suggest  that  the  word
         "unduly" is intended as a reference back to the issue  of  relative
         seriousness introduced by subsection (2).  Like  exception  1,  and
         like the test of "reasonableness" under section 117B,  exception  2
         appears self-contained.

         23.  On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of harshness, that is a level  which  may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons".  That would be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more.

23. I turn now to the Appellant's circumstances and those of her family  to
    conduct the proportionality exercise to  determine  whether  there  are
    very exceptional circumstances to outweigh the very significant  public
    interest in his deportation from the United Kingdom in accordance  with
    the provisions set out above, starting in this case with paragraph 399D
    of the Immigration Rules and using the proposed balance-sheet approach.

24. The factors in favour of  maintaining  the  Deportation  Order  are  as
    follows.  First, as is clear from section 117C(1) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the deportation of  foreign  criminals
    is in the public interest (as is maintenance of  effective  immigration
    control pursuant to  section  117B(1)).   Secondly,  there  is  a  very
    significant  public  interest  not  only  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals but in maintaining a Deportation Order against  such  persons
    who have re-entered the United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  a  Deportation
    Order.  Thirdly, the Appellant has been  convicted  of  an  offence  of
    using a false document to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  and  failed  to
    disclose that conviction when  making  her  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  Fourth, the Appellant has never had lawful leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom and commenced her relationship at a  time  when  she
    had re-entered in breach of a Deportation Order.  Finally,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not find that  the  Appellant  speak  English,  which
    strengthens the public interest in removal pursuant to section  117B(2)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

25. As to the factors in favour of the Appellant, she relies  primarily  on
    family life with her partner and two children.  As above, the preserved
    findings of fact from the First-tier Tribunal are that the Appellant is
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her partner and with  her
    two children, all of whom are now British  citizens.   The  Appellant's
    case is that her partner would not relocate to  Albania  with  her,  it
    would be undesirable and not in the best interests of the  children  to
    do so either and it would  be  unduly  harsh  and  not  in  the  public
    interest for the children to be separated from their mother.  The First-
    tier Tribunal found that it would be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to remain in the United Kingdom with both parents.

26. Secondly, the  Appellant's  circumstances  have  changed  significantly
    since the Deportation Order  was  made,  some  eight  years  ago.   The
    Appellant has not been convicted of any further offences in that time.

27. Thirdly, the Appellant is financially independent and supported by  her
    partner, albeit that is at best a neutral factor in section 117B(3)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

28. I have weighed up all of the facts  and  circumstances  in  this  case,
    balancing the very significant public interest  factors  in  favour  of
    deportation against all of those factors outlined above  in  favour  of
    the Appellant and  find  that  in  this  case  the  Appellant  has  not
    established  very  exceptional  circumstances  to  outweigh  the   very
    significant public interest in her deportation.  Further, even if  this
    were  an  initial  deportation  decision  (without   consideration   of
    revocation or re-entry in breach of a Deportation Order), I  would  not
    have found that the Appellant could meet either of  the  exceptions  to
    deportation in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules and/or in section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

29. Whilst I take into account the best interests of the children and  that
    they, together with the Applicant's partner are all  British  Citizens,
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and findings of  fact  made
    by it falls far short of  establishing  any  unduly  harsh  effects  of
    deportation on the eldest child or the Appellant's partner;  who  could
    either remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant or return  to
    Albania with her (as found by the First-tier Tribunal that family  life
    could continue in Albania where the parents would be able to  work  and
    where there is extended family on  both  sides).   In  respect  of  the
    youngest child, I find that there would be an unduly  harsh  impact  on
    her if she remained in the United Kingdom and was  therefore  separated
    from her mother given her very young age and  the  fact  that  she  was
    being breastfed; however, no unduly harsh impact  has  been  identified
    for the youngest child if she returned to Albania with her mother.

30. Overall, the family circumstances relied upon by the Appellant  do  not
    establish any adverse impact of deportation upon the family beyond what
    would normally be expected in any situation involving deportation, save
    for the adverse impact upon  the  youngest  child  if  she  was  to  be
    separated from her mother.  That is not sufficient  to  establish  that
    any of the exceptions to deportation would apply.  In any event,  taken
    cumulatively and at its  highest,  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant falls even further short of  amounting  to  very  exceptional
    circumstances required to outweigh the public interest  in  this  case.
    For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it  as
follows:

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date         8th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

