
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19886/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2018                  |On 22 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                               HERBERT KULSUMU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr R. Arkhurst, Counsel
For the respondent:          Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  30
    June 2016 to refuse a human rights claim in the context of  deportation
    proceedings.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 26 September 2017.

3.    The appellant appeals against the decision on  grounds  of  procedural
    unfairness. It is not disputed that there is evidence to show that  the
    appellant was suffering from severe back pain to the extent that he was
    unfit attend the hearing. This evidence was not before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the day of the hearing although  the  evidence  appears  to
    indicate that both legal representatives were aware of the fact.

4.    The judge summarised his interpretation of events as follows:

         "2.      At the outset of the hearing, both parties indicated  that
         [they] intended to proceed on submissions only. The  Appellant  had
         provided an unsigned witness statement but Mr Bose on behalf of the
         Respondent indicated  that  he  had  no  issues  with  the  witness
         statement and it could therefore be  produced  as  the  Appellant's
         evidence. The Appellant had chosen not to attend  the  hearing  and
         refused to leave prison. In the circumstances and on the basis that
         Mr Arkhurst had no instructions one way or the other as to  whether
         to proceed or apply for an adjournment and Mr Bose  indicated  that
         he was in a position to proceed and that both  parties  had  always
         intended to proceed on submissions only, I decided to proceed  with
         the appeal in the Appellant's absence."


5.    The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  summary  of  the  proceedings
    stated:

         "Prior to the hearing the representative's (sic) advised that  they
         might apply for an adjournment on the basis that their  client  was
         suffering  from  an  acute  and  recurring  backache  (evidence  of
         condition in appellant's bundle brought to the  hearing).  However,
         on the day the representative was  not  aware  of  the  reason  his
         client had not attended. The Tribunal were informed simply that the
         appellant had refused to leave the detention centre.


         The judge was not willing to adjourn  the  matter  after  agreement
         from the parties that there were not disputes regarding the factual
         history. It was not clear  if  the  claimed  partner  continues  to
         support the appeal as no-one else  turned  up  in  support  of  the
         appeal, and her statement was from 2015. Additionally, whilst there
         was a two page medical letter citing mental health  problems  (such
         that the mother asked the appellant to leave the house),  this  was
         dated 2014 and was an initial assessment without any further update
         providing any further diagnosis or prognosis.


         With the representative's caveat that he had not taken  instruction
         from his client whether he  wished  the  matter  heard  by  way  of
         submission, both parties addressed the judge."


6.    The appellant's solicitors  responded  to  directions  made  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul when he granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. Outlining their version of events they stated:

         "With regards to the information available to our  counsel  we  had
         received an email from Andres Bose the Presenting  Officer  dealing
         with the matter on the 19 [September] 2017 introducing himself  and
         enquiring whether we were still acting for our client. .....


         Later on we received a telephone call from our  client  at  15.45pm
         who informed us that he  was  suffering  from  an  acute  recurring
         backache and that it was very likely he would not be able to attend
         the hearing tomorrow as he was at the medical centre in the  prison
         and could not move. We then sent an email to Mr Bose to inform  him
         and also spoke to him on the telephone that it was likely  that  we
         would be applying for an adjournment as our client was not going to
         be able to attend the hearing because  he  was  suffering  from  an
         acute recurring backache.


         We also contacted counsel by telephone and email to notify  him  of
         the same as it was late in the day to apply for an adjournment  and
         the hearing was listed at Hendon Magistrates Court and request that
         he make an application for an adjournment in court in  the  morning
         of the hearing.


         On the day of the hearing we  received  a  call  from  our  counsel
         asking us to confirm the reason for client's unavailability and  we
         told that that (sic) our client had an acute recurring backache and
         that it had been mentioned  in  his  paperwork  that  he  had  this
         problem. Counsel then stated that  he  would  be  applying  for  an
         adjournment. Later counsel  telephone  and  informed  us  that  the
         adjournment  had  been  refused  despite  the  Presenting   Officer
         confirming that we had informed him of our client's  situation  and
         that he was in agreement for an adjournment.


         He said that the Immigration Judge said that an adjournment was not
         necessary because the client was represented. Counsel said he  told
         the Immigration Judge that he was without instructions but that the
         IJ insisted on proceedings with  the  hearing  and  so  he  had  no
         choice.


         At the time our client was unable to send us any  paperwork  as  he
         was in prison but he promised to get his doctor to write  a  letter
         confirming the same.  We  were  therefore  unable  to  provide  any
         evidence on the day of the hearing other than to  instruct  counsel
         and Mr Bose was also aware of the situation."


7.    Attached to the letter was a short statement from Mr Arkhurst.

         "The case was before IJ Metzger (sic) at Hendon Magistrates  Court.
         You had instructed me to  ask  for  an  adjournment  and  had  also
         informed me that the HO was aware that we would be applying for  an
         adjournment because of the appellant's unavailability due to  acute
         back pain.


         On attending Court I went to the cells and  was  informed  by  them
         that my client had refused to attend court. This  was  at  variance
         with what you had told me so I immediately rang you up.  You  again
         informed me that the client  could  not  attend  court  because  of
         severe backache.


         I then went into court and had a brief conversation with  the  HOPO
         who confirmed what you had told me. In the circumstances I informed
         the HOPO that I would be requesting an adjournment.


         When the IJ came in he told us straight away that he had heard that
         the client had refused to come to  court  and  absent  and  without
         evidence to the contrary was minded to proceed with the hearing.


         I informed him of my difficulties and requested an adjournment. The
         IJ said an adjournment was not necessary  because  the  client  was
         represented I retorted that I was without instructions and was  put
         in an invidious position baring my responsibilities under  the  bar
         code of conduct.


         In the premises I opted to do the  best  I  could  for  the  client
         rather than withdraw as that would have attracted severe  penalties
         from the bar council."


8.    A  letter  from  the  Healthcare  Centre  at  HMP  Belmarsh  dated  26
    September 2017 confirmed that the appellant suffers from  "severe  back
    pain issues" which had been proven by an MRI scan. The letter  went  on
    to state that "he could not move on  20th/21st  and  could  not  attend
    court." He had been put on stronger medication, which was  hoped  would
    enable him to attend court.

Decision and reasons

9.    In light of the subsequent medical evidence, it is not  disputed  that
    the appellant was unfit to attend the hearing due to severe back  pain.
    It  appears  that  both  legal  representatives  were  aware  that  the
    appellant was likely to be unwell although the evidence shows that  the
    judge and Mr Arkhurst were misinformed as to why the appellant was  not
    produced. The source of the misinformation is unclear although  I  find
    that it is reasonable to infer that it is likely that the  error  might
    have occurred through 'Chinese whispers' between the prison,  transport
    and custody suite at Hendon Magistrates Court.

10.   It is unclear  from  the  above  set  of  evidence  whether  a  formal
    adjournment application was made. The Presenting Officer's note and  Mr
    Arkhurst's  recollection  of  events  appear  to  suggest   that   some
    discussion might have taken place. If a formal application was made the
    judge did not register it in his summary of events. In any  event,  the
    judge explained why he thought he could proceed to determine the appeal
    in the appellant's absence albeit that he  proceeded  on  an  incorrect
    assumption that the appellant had refused to leave the  prison.  It  is
    unclear whether it was made clear to the judge that the  appellant  was
    in fact too unwell to attend. It appears that Mr Arkhurst  was  unclear
    as to his instructions.

11.   Mr Lindsay argued that the factual background  to  the  case  was  not
    disputed and that there was a witness statement before  the  judge.  In
    light of the appellant's history of serious offending it  was  unlikely
    that his evidence would  have  made  any  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

12.   I  agree  that  the  appellant's  offending  history  is  particularly
    serious. It is not necessary  to  outline  his  repeated  offending  in
    detail save to note that he has a history of convictions for robbery of
    an increasingly serious nature leading to  sentences  of  detention  or
    imprisonment for periods of two, four, nine  and  most  recently  seven
    years. In light of the seriousness of his offending behaviour he  could
    only succeed in the appeal if he is able to show that there  are  'very
    compelling  circumstances'  that  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
    deportation.

13.   The likelihood of the appellant's oral evidence  making  any  material
    difference to the outcome of  the  appeal  is  low.  Nevertheless,  the
    process of assessing where a fair balance should be struck between  the
    public interest in deportation and individual rights is evaluative. The
    appellant is entitled to give evidence in support of the appeal and for
    his evidence to be assessed by the Tribunal.

14.   Unlike other errors of law, the question  of  procedural  fairness  is
    not reliant on whether the error might have made a material  difference
    to the outcome of the appeal save in unusual  cases  where  it  can  be
    shown that a rehearing cannot be justified on the facts  of  the  case.
    The case involves  important  issues  relating  to  human  rights.  The
    appellant entered the UK as a child and has been resident here for over
    30 years. Although his offending behaviour is particularly serious, and
    will be given significant weight in favour of the  public  interest  in
    deportation, it cannot be said that his human rights claim  is  trivial
    given his long residence  and  extremely  limited  connections  to  the
    country to which it is proposed he will be removed. Even  if  it  seems
    unlikely  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  show  sufficiently
    compelling circumstances to  outweigh  his  serious  offending,  he  is
    entitled to appear and to give evidence in support of the  appeal  when
    such serious matters are at stake.

15.   The First-tier Tribunal's decision to proceed  with  the  hearing  was
    based on a misapprehension of the facts.  It  is  unclear  whether  the
    judge was informed of the medical issues. The  medical  evidence  shows
    that the appellant was unfit to  attend  the  hearing.  The  overriding
    objective of the Tribunal procedure rules dictates that cases  must  be
    dealt with fairly and justly, and  so  far  as  practicable,  that  the
    parties are able to participate fully in  the  proceedings.  For  these
    reasons I find that the appellant should be given a fair opportunity to
    give evidence at a  fresh  hearing.  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law  and  must  be
    set aside.

16.   I note that the appellant's medical condition is an  ongoing  problem.
    There is a limit to the number of times that the case can  be  relisted
    to enable him to  attend  to  give  evidence.  The  appellant  and  his
    representatives should ensure that the appeal is  prepared  to  a  good
    standard with a detailed  and  signed  witness  statement  as  well  as
    supporting evidence. Any witnesses that the appellant  wishes  to  call
    should prepare up to date statements and  their  attendance  should  be
    notified in advance of the next hearing. If the appellant is  unfit  to
    attend on the next  occasion,  and  it  appears  that  it  might  be  a
    recurrent  problem,  he  must  give  his  legal  representatives  clear
    instructions as to whether he is content for them to  proceed  to  make
    submissions in his absence or not.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and the case remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date 20 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
