
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/19452/2018
                                                               HU/19454/2018
                                                               HU/19455/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th August 2019                  |On 2nd September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                         ALAPI [M] (FIRST appellant)
                       VAIBHAV [M] (SECOND appellant)
                           [B M] (THIRD appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Lourdes of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are linked appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P-J  S  White  promulgated  on  22nd  March  2019  in  which  the
    respective appeals of the Appellants were  dismissed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The Appellants are a family of three.  They are citizens of India.  The
    second Appellant is the husband of  the  first  Appellant.   The  third
    Appellant is their son, date of birth 21st September 2004.   The  first
    Appellant is the principal Appellant in  matters  in  relation  to  the
    family's immigration history.  Both the  second  and  third  Appellants
    entered the UK as dependants upon her immigration status.

 3. For the purposes  of  this  decision,  the  following  details  of  the
    Appellants' immigration history  are  relevant.   The  first  Appellant
    entered the UK in November 2009 with leave as a Tier  4  student.   The
    second and third Appellants joined her in June 2010 as her  dependants.
    The third Appellant was 5 years of age at that point.

 4. The first Appellant made various applications extending her leave,  but
    by a decision dated  August  2015,  the  Respondent  refused  to  grant
    further leave.  An appeal against  that  refusal  was  dismissed.   The
    Appellants did not leave the UK.  In October 2017 they made application
    for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.   That  application  was
    refused by the Respondent  on  14th  September  2018.   The  Appellants
    appealed that refusal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  it  is  that
    decision which forms the basis of the instant matter before me.

First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 5. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal came to be considered by FtTJ
    P-J S White.   The  Appellants  were  represented  at  the  hearing  by
    Counsel, Mr Lourdes who also appeared before me.  They submitted a  93-
    page bundle of documents which included  a  statement  from  the  third
    Appellant outlining his  educational  achievements  together  with  his
    school reports.  Those reports included details  of  third  Appellant's
    academic achievements.  The FtTJ heard oral evidence from each  of  the
    Appellants.

 6. The judge noted at [8] the following:

         "Mr Lourdes in his submissions accepted that the  outcome  revolved
         around the position of the third appellant.  He did not submit that
         either of the adults could succeed under any Immigration  Rule,  or
         on any basis other than that the third appellant should succeed and
         therefore they should stay with him.  I  have  no  doubt  that  was
         correct.  They lived most of their lives in India  and  still  have
         family there, with whom they are in touch.  They  came  here  in  a
         purely temporary capacity and have not in fact  qualified  for  any
         grant of leave since the  expiry  of  the  last  Tier  4  leave  in
         February 2015 ..."

 7. Further, at [9] the judge records the following:

         "I asked both adult appellants why they had not returned  to  India
         some time ago when their leaves ran out. I did not  consider  their
         answers entirely satisfactory ... [The first  appellant  said]  she
         put the decision to try to stay down to seeing her son  doing  well
         and in particular his results in the 11+ ... [The second appellant]
         said they could not go back because it would  disrupt  the  child's
         education.  He also told me that he did not agree to the having  to
         leave.  It seems to me likely that it was their intention  to  stay
         here from a very early stage, if not  from  the  outset.   None  of
         that, of course, reflects in any way on the third appellant."

 8.  Further,  at  [10]  when  analysing  evidence  concerning  the   third
    Appellant's position, the judge said the following:

         "In respect of the third appellant I have evidence from his  school
         showing that he is  a  very  bright  child  and  doing  very  well,
         evidence which I have no hesitation in accepting.  I  have  letters
         from some of his teachers who regard him as well settled  here  ...
         and someone who will be adversely  affected  by  return  to  India,
         which they consider will harm  his  education  ...  My  reservation
         about this evidence is that none of them identifies  any  knowledge
         of the Indian education system ..."

 9. Subsequently at [13], the judge noted the following:

         "All three appellants told me that the education  system  in  India
         was completely different and that the third  appellant  would  have
         great  difficulty  adapting  ...  I  am  bound  to  note  that   no
         independent or objective evidence about what would or would not  be
         available to the third appellant in India was produced."

10. Having considered both the documentary and  oral  evidence,  the  judge
    self-directed himself upon the relevant test.   Having  concluded  that
    the Appellants could not meet the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge  was
    satisfied that their appeals fell to be dismissed under Article 8 ECHR.



Onward Appeal

11. The Appellants  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   Permission  was
    refused  initially  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  on  a   renewed
    application before the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  in  the  following
    relevant terms:

         "2.  I remind myself that 'arguable' is a low hurdle to cross and I
             am just persuaded that the grounds advanced are arguable.  The
             Judge appropriately identified the question of  reasonableness
             and considered  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
             (Nigeria) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
             UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR  5273,  where  it  was  held  that  when
             considering section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act  2002,  which  incorporates  the  substance  of
             paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  is
             relevant to consider where the parents  are  expected  to  be,
             since it will normally be reasonable to expect their child  to
             be with them.  The third appellant has been  present  in  this
             country for over 8 years, much of it lawfully, and at the time
             of the hearing had just over a year of GCSE studies before him
             before he sat examinations that are of great importance in his
             life.  It is arguable that the Judge asked himself too  narrow
             a question  as  to  the  impact  of  removal  upon  the  third
             appellant's  education  at  [13],  limiting  it  to  potential
             language difficulties, rather than  assessing  the  impact  of
             leaving  this  country  upon  securing  important  educational
             qualifications.   The  importance  of  the   examinations   is
             identified at [17], but arguably not  lawfully  considered  in
             the proportionality exercise, at [20]."

    Thus, the matter comes before me as an error of law hearing.

Error of Law

12. Before me Mr Lourdes appeared for the  Appellants,  Mr  Avery  for  the
    Respondent.  At the outset of  the  hearing  Mr  Lourdes  handed  up  a
    document dated 29th March 2019 from the Respondent.  It referred solely
    to the third Appellant.  It informed him that following an  application
    made on his behalf on 25th March 2019, he had now been granted a period
    of 30 months' limited leave on account of meeting the  requirements  of
    Section 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.

13. Mr Lourdes' submissions relied therefore on saying that  the  FtTJ  had
    erred in his assessment of the reasonableness test  in  the  particular
    circumstances of these appeals.  He confirmed that he  had  no  further
    evidence to  submit  before  me.   He  relied  upon  the  evidence  and
    submissions made before the FtT and in particular drew my attention  to
    the  raft  of  jurisprudence  which  has  now  evolved  concerning  the
    "reasonableness"  test,  including  EV  (Philippines)   and   Ors;   MA
    (Pakistan) and Ors; MT and ET; JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK)
    Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC); and KO (Nigeria).

14. Mr Avery in response  addressed  firstly  the  question  of  the  third
    Appellant being granted further leave for 30 months.  He said that this
    did not change the position of the Secretary of State concerning  these
    appeals.  The sole question for me is whether the FtTJ has erred in law
    such that the decision stands to be set  aside.   He  referred  to  the
    grant of permission which he said was framed in terms  of  whether  the
    judge had erred in his assessment of the reasonableness test because he
    had focused too  much  on  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  the  third
    Appellant's  education  would  be   disrupted   because   of   language
    difficulties rather than drawing in other factors.

15. Mr Avery continued by saying that in fact a  reading  of  the  decision
    showed that the judge had kept all relevant matters in mind and that Mr
    Lourdes on behalf of the Appellants had not  pointed  to  any  evidence
    which it was claimed the judge had missed.  The grounds were  simply  a
    disagreement with the judge's reasons for finding  as  he  did.   Those
    reasons were open to him and therefore the decision should  stand.   So
    far as the fact that the third Appellant has now been granted a further
    30 months' leave to remain, he said it was open to his parents to  make
    their own application based upon that, but the judge could not be  said
    to have erred when this evidence was not before him.

Consideration of Error of Law

16. In this appeal the core issue to be decided upon is whether  the  third
    Appellant could reasonably be expected to  return  to  India  with  his
    parents.

17. I am satisfied that the FtTJ noted  the  central  issue  and  correctly
    directed himself keeping in mind the decision  in  KO.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted on a narrow point although it is  correct  that  the
    permission grant did widen to include all grounds.  It  was  said  that
    the FtTJ had asked himself too narrow a  question  when  assessing  the
    impact of removal upon the third Appellant's  education.  It  was  said
    that the judge had limited the impact it to potential difficulties with
    language.  That in essence reflects the  submissions  which  were  made
    before me by the Appellants.

18. In my judgment, the Appellants have simply not  made  out  their  case.
    The  judge  identified  that  the  starting  point  before  him  was  a
    consideration of what is in the best interest of  the  third  Appellant
    (MA (Pakistan) and Ors).  He fully set out his consideration  in  [17].
    He noted that the third Appellant is an  Indian  national  as  are  his
    parents.  He accepted that the third Appellant had lived in the UK  for
    eight and a half years  and  had  attained  virtually  all  his  formal
    education here and that any move to  India  would  be  disruptive.   He
    grappled with the issue of the best interests of  the  third  Appellant
    finding it would be in the third Appellant's best interests  to  remain
    with his parents and less strongly to remain in the  UK.   That  was  a
    finding open to him.  The judge then  had  to  turn  his  attention  to
    whether it was reasonable to expect the third Appellant  to  return  to
    India with his parents, and this he did [18].

19. He noted that the third Appellant's  oral  evidence  and  that  of  his
    parents, was  to  the  effect  that  the  third  Appellant  would  have
    difficulty adapting to the education system in India not least  because
    of a claim from his parents that  the  third  Appellant  spoke  limited
    Gujarati. The judge clearly considered that  he  could  not  take  this
    statement at face value because as he noted there was no independent or
    background evidence to  back  up  the  parent's  claim  concerning  the
    difficulty of adapting to the Indian educational  system.   Further  in
    contradiction of this he noted that there are schools in India down  to
    kindergarten level which teach in English.

20. He was satisfied from the evidence before him that the third  Appellant
    was bright enough to adapt to using Gujarati.  The third Appellant  had
    lived in India with one or both parents up to almost six years  of  age
    and it would be reasonable to suppose he spoke some Gujarati.  He noted
    that  the  third  Appellant's  parents  were   people   of   sufficient
    educational qualifications to assist the third Appellant.

21. The judge also kept  the  evidence  concerning  the  third  Appellant's
    private life in mind.  He was well aware that the third  Appellant  was
    in his first year of GCSEs and there would be disruption on  return  to
    India.  He accepted that the third Appellant has a circle of friends in
    the UK but nevertheless looking at the evidence presented decided  that
    the Respondent's decision to refuse their  applications  for  leave  to
    remain under Article 8  ECHR  did  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with their family/private lives.

22. Altogether, looking at the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the
    FtTJ has taken into account all the relevant evidence which was  before
    him and made findings which were fully open to him on that evidence.

23. It follows therefore that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains no error of law requiring it to be set aside.   These  appeals
    are therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  22nd  March  2019
contains no material error of law.  The decision therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made.  I was not asked to make one.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     28 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed these appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     28 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


