
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19866/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 9 May 2018                |On 14 May 2018                      |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (UKVS SHEFFIELD)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               IFTIKHAR AHMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Fraczyk, Counsel instructed by MFI Law Limited,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

   1. This is an appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   For  ease  of
      reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-tier
      Tribunal albeit that the Entry Clearance Officer  is  technically  the
      Appellant in this particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against a
      decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rothwell  promulgated  on  6
      September  2017  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated  14  July  2016  refusing  the
      Appellant's human rights claim made as part  of  his  application  for
      entry clearance to come to the UK as a spouse of his  British  Citizen
      wife ("the Sponsor").

    2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  The Sponsor is  a  British
       Citizen.  Of particular importance to the appeal before  me  is  the
       fact that the Sponsor is self-employed as a foster  carer.   At  the
       date of the application for entry clearance, she had living with her
       two unaccompanied, asylum seeking children, both aged sixteen years,
       one of West African nationality and the other Albanian.

    3. The Judge accepted that the relationship between the  Appellant  and
       the Sponsor is a genuine one.  The Judge accepted that,  because  of
       the nature of the Sponsor's income, she is unable to meet the strict
       evidential requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").
       Although the Respondent raised this as a ground of appeal before the
       First-tier Tribunal on the basis that the Judge had failed to factor
       this into her assessment  when  dealing  with  the  public  interest
       justification for refusal, that ground is not  repeated  before  me.
       Permission to appeal was refused on those grounds by Resident  Judge
       Appleyard on 13 October 2017.

    4. The only ground now  raised  concerns  the  Appellant's  ability  to
       satisfy the authorities in the UK of his suitability to live in  the
       same house as the children fostered by  the  Sponsor.   I  emphasise
       that there is no suggestion that the Appellant is  unsuitable.   The
       Respondent says only that the Appellant has failed  to  produce  the
       necessary  documentation  to  satisfy   the   authorities   of   his
       suitability (namely the Pakistan  equivalent  of  a  Disclosure  and
       Barring Service ("DBS") certificate).

    5. The way in which the Respondent argues this  point  in  the  renewed
       grounds of appeal is as follows:

           "...


           [2]   The ECO reiterates the material  failure  of  the  FtJ  to
           resolve a matter materially in dispute between the  parties  (as
           per Porter v South Bucks District Council  HoL  [2004])  -  that
           being the public interest and the application of s.55 BCIA  2009
           in respect of the Appellant ("A") entering the  household  where
           there had been no equivalent DBS check in Pakistan.


           [3]   Whilst it is of  course  accepted  that  the  learned  FtJ
           referred to some of the evidence at [32] there  is  in  fact  no
           finding as to the effect on the public interest in Article  8(2)
           by the absence of such a check.  The ECO  asserts  that  it  was
           unlawful to sideline  the  important  issue  of  DBS  equivalent
           checks   thereby   removing   it   from   the   assessment    of
           proportionality and fettering the public interest.   It  appears
           from the judgment that the A and S had not produced the relevant
           checks even though on notice that this was  part  of  the  ECO's
           case.


           [4]   The Resident Judge's response is to speculate  about  what
           might be done once the Sponsor arrives in the UK  but  that  was
           unlawful for two reasons:


                1)     Because the FtJ did not express any finding  on  this
                (which is the ECO's point);


                2)     the public interest and s.55 issues about the absence
                of an equivalent DBS document from Pakistan  is  material  t
                whether the A can enter at all  -  it  is  hardly  a  proper
                exposition of the public interest in an entry clearance case
                to say: if something goes wrong  in  the  future  the  local
                authority can resolve it by removing the children  from  the
                S's care (as the Resident Judge  does  at  para.  4).   That
                plainly is not in the best interests of the children and  is
                contrary to safeguarding  those  best  interests  where  the
                matter could have been resolved by the A and S by production
                of the appropriate evidence from Pakistan."


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 19
       December 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):

           "...


           [2]   The Judge allowed the appeal outside the Rules  under  Art
           8, clearly having found at para 33 that the requirements of  the
           Rules were not met.  The sponsor is a foster carer and, as noted
           by the Judge, the social services require the appellant to  have
           a Pakistani equivalent of a DBS check.  The Grounds  argue  that
           the  Judge  failed  to  take  this  into  account  in  assessing
           proportionality as part of the public interest as  he  does  not
           have one.  This is a novel point, so  far  as  I  am  aware  and
           merits consideration by the UT as to whether this is a  relevant
           aspect of the public interest when it arises in entry  clearance
           cases.


           [3]   For these reasons, permission is granted."


    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law.  Both parties accepted that, if I found there
       to be an error of law in  the  Decision,  given  the  basis  of  the
       challenge, the appeal could remain in this Tribunal for  re-hearing.
       I agreed with the representatives that if I found a  material  error
       of law, I would give directions for further  evidence,  particularly
       from the local authority for whom the Sponsor provides services.

    Decision and Reasons

    8. Mr Fraczyk very fairly accepted in his  skeleton  argument  for  the
       hearing that the absence of a DBS equivalent certificate is relevant
       to the Article 8 issue in the following ways:

             a) Section 55 Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
                provides  that   the   Secretary   of   State   "must   make
                arrangements" to  ensure  that  the  functions  within  that
                section  are  discharged  "having  regard  to  the  need  to
                safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the
                United Kingdom".  Those functions include  any  function  of
                the Secretary of State in relation to immigration.  The need
                to safeguard and promote the welfare of the foster  children
                for whom the  Sponsor  has  responsibility  is  therefore  a
                relevant consideration when looking at Article 8;


             b) There is a requirement in the Rules that the  Appellant  and
                Sponsor "intend to live together  permanently  in  the  UK".
                Although the Appellant cannot meet the strict requirement of
                the Rules in any event due to the inability of  the  Sponsor
                to meet the evidential requirements concerning her finances,
                the suitability  of  the  Appellant  to  live  in  the  same
                household as the Sponsor and foster children is relevant  to
                whether the application otherwise meets the Rules.  I  would
                add in this regard that it seems to me also to  be  relevant
                to the financial requirements because,  if  the  Appellant's
                presence in the  home  were  not  acceptable  to  the  local
                authority, the Sponsor would have to stop fostering and that
                is the sole source of her income;


             c) Also outside the Rules, the Appellant accepts  that  whether
                he is able to meet the DBS requirements in the UK which  are
                legal  requirements  for  those  working  with  children  is
                relevant to the public interest.


    9. I consider that those concessions  are  rightly  made.   The  public
       interest is not restricted to  the  issues  listed  in  Section  117
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  is  capable  of
       encompassing wider  considerations  of  this  nature.   For  similar
       reasons, I reject Mr Fraczyk's submission that, because there is  no
       requirement  in  the  Rules  for  a  DBS  certificate   or   similar
       documentation to be provided by  an  applicant  in  the  Appellant's
       situation, that is relevant to the weight to be given to the  public
       interest.  The evidential requirements in the Rules are designed  to
       show that an applicant can meet the standard criteria laid  down  by
       the Rules.  It is not possible  to  cover  every  eventuality  which
       might arise.  Even if I am wrong about that, it is not  relevant  in
       this case since it is accepted that the Appellant  cannot  meet  the
       Rules and that Article 8 falls to be assessed outside the Rules.

   10. I accept with some limitations the Appellant's submission that it is
       for the Respondent to justify interference with the Appellant's (and
       Sponsor's) human rights (see Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas/  BOCs:
       historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC)).  The  limitation  on
       that argument, however, concerns the best interests of the  children
       affected by the Respondent's decision.  Particularly in a case  such
       as this, the Appellant and more particularly the Sponsor are  better
       placed to provide evidence to show that the best  interests  of  the
       foster children are  safeguarded.  Although,  as  noted  below,  the
       Sponsor has had only limited success in obtaining  information  from
       the local authority about the steps which need to be taken,  she  is
       clearly in a better position to obtain that information based on her
       relationship with that local authority.

   11. The above is, however, largely irrelevant in  this  particular  case
       because, for reasons which I now set out, I am  satisfied  that  the
       Decision does not disclose an error of law and/or that any error  is
       on the evidence immaterial.

   12. The evidence on this issue is set out at [32]  of  the  Decision  as
       follows:

           "[32]  The  ECM  raised  concerns  about  the  position  of  the
           appellant in the household as the sponsor is a foster carer.  In
           the bundle served on 3 August 2017 the  appellant  has  provided
           emails to show that the sponsor has raised this issue  with  the
           Fostering Team, London Borough of Croydon in  March  2016.   She
           was advised that he needed to produce the  Pakistani  equivalent
           of a DBS check.  They also state that they will need  to  do  an
           updated panel check.  I accept that the sponsor has advised  the
           Fostering Team that  the  appellant  is  coming  to  the  United
           Kingdom and needs to travel with a current equivalent of  a  DBS
           check.  There are also emails from the  sponsor  in  April  2017
           chasing the  inquiries  made  by  the  ECM,  but  there  are  no
           concluding e mails, save for  an  email  where  the  appropriate
           person   has   stated   that   they   had   not   received   any
           correspondence."


   13. I accept that the Judge does not thereafter consider  the  relevance
       of this factor to the public interest save to take into  account  in
       the Appellant's favour at [41] of the Decision that the Sponsor is a
       foster carer (and  therefore  presumably  is  providing  a  valuable
       service  which  favours  the  public  interest  in  permitting   the
       Appellant to join her rather than  requiring  her  to  join  him  in
       Pakistan).

   14. It may be that this omission is however because the Judge considered
       it unnecessary having set out the evidence to factor this  into  the
       public interest assessment because the evidence  showed  a  lack  of
       impact.  As Mr Walker fairly drew  to  my  attention,  there  is  in
       evidence before the Judge what appears on the face of it to  be  the
       required documentation ([AB/228]).  That is a document which on  its
       face appears to be issued by the Punjab Police, Rawalpindi  District
       and is entitled "Character Certificate".  It is dated 5 March  2016.
       It bears a photograph of a man who I assume  to  the  Appellant  and
       provides his name, parentage and address by way  of  identification.
       It confirms that the Appellant has lived in the district for thirty-
       five years.  It confirms that "[t]here is nothing against him/her on
       the record of the Police station as reported by" the police  station
       for his area.  The notes provide that "[t]his character  certificate
       is valid to submit in the  foreign  embassies  for  visa/immigration
       purpose and valid for six months (from the date of issue) only".

   15. I was informed that this certificate was before the Respondent  with
       the application and before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This  may
       explain why no issue  was  taken  about  DBS  checks  by  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer.

   16. I do not have any confirmation that the certificate is  valid  as  a
       Pakistani equivalent of a DBS check but on the other hand,  it  does
       appear to provide the information that a DBS  check  would  provide,
       namely the absence of a criminal record.  It also appears to  comply
       with what was requested by the local authority in an e-mail dated  8
       December 2015 namely "the Pakistani equivalent of  a  completed  DBS
       Police check".

   17. Mr Fraczyk also directed my attention to the  e-mail  chain  passing
       between the Sponsor and the local authority at  [AB/139-144].   That
       refers to a  "full  assessment"  being  carried  out  by  the  local
       authority  in  the  UK  ([AB/140]).   With  the  exception  of   the
       requirement for the DBS  certificate  which  is  required  prior  to
       travel, therefore, the local authority appears  satisfied  that  the
       Appellant can come to the UK to live with the Sponsor.  Any  further
       checks and assurances will be conducted in the UK.

   18. The enquiries made by the Sponsor of the local authority  about  the
       Appellant's position are set out in  some  depth  in  the  Sponsor's
       witness statement as follows:

           "[24] I confirm that I told my  Supervising  Social  Worker,  Ms
           Sheila Mahraj that I had gotten married in Pakistan and  that  I
           would be sponsoring my husband who is the Appellant to come  and
           join me here in the UK as my spouse.  This was in December  2015
           when I had my first meeting with her.   After  this,  Ms  Sheila
           Mahraj had said that she  would  let  her  Manager  know  and  I
           believe that she must have as further enquiries were being  made
           about my marriage and about the Appellant.  I got an email  from
           Ms Sheila Mahraj dated 08/12/2015 asking to see  a  copy  of  my
           Marriage Certificate and she also asked that if he is coming  to
           the UK then can he bring the Pakistani equivalent of a completed
           DBS Police check.  She had said in this email that  she  had  to
           update the Fostering Panel as to  my  change  of  circumstances.
           So, this email reveals clearly that Ms Sheila Mahraj and Croydon
           Council were aware that I had gotten  married  and  that  I  was
           looking to sponsor him to join me here in  the  UK.   I  sent  a
           reply to her email by email on the 08/12/2015 telling her that I
           did not have the Marriage Certificate because Pakistani law said
           that when a Nikkah ceremony has taken place then it  has  to  be
           registered with the Union Council  of  the  town  in  which  the
           Nikkah took place.  I said that the Appellant had submitted  the
           Nikkah namah (Marriage Certificate) to the Union Council so that
           our marriage could be registered with them  and  this  procedure
           would take up to "a month".  I also told her that the  Appellant
           and I had not yet decided when he would be coming to the UK  but
           I would ask him to get the DBS Police check certificate for  the
           Fostering Panel.  I did send a copy of my  Marriage  Certificate
           and the Police Character Certificate to Croydon Council as  they
           asked.  I did also give this in support of the Appellant's  visa
           application as well as when the visa application  was  submitted
           to the Respondent.


           [25]  I received further enquiries from  Ms  Sheila  Mahraj.   I
           received an email from her on the 11/02/2016 asking:-


           a.    "Is he coming to live in the UK?"


           b.    "a full assessment will need to be undertaken if he  comes
           to this country" (only when he was physically inside the UK on a
           visa)"


           c.    "Is he aware of her as a foster carer and will he want  to
           be part of fostering"


           d.    He would need to "travel with a DBS if he  enters  the  UK
           and is residing at the marital home."


           [26]  I replied to all her enquiries.  I sent her  an  email  on
           the 11/02/2016 telling her that the Appellant will be coming  to
           live in the UK.  I confirmed that it would be fine with  respect
           to the full assessment as the Appellant was happy to undergo any
           assessments that they would need to do once  he  was  physically
           here in the UK.  I confirmed to her that the Appellant was aware
           that I am a Foster  Carer  and  that  he  "will  be  a  part  of
           fostering as a back up carer".  I also told her that I was aware
           of the requirement that he would need to travel with a DBS  when
           he comes to the UK and is living at  my  home  address  as  that
           would be our marital home.  It  should  be  noteworthy  that  no
           issues about the welfare of the foster children had been  raised
           by Ms Sheila Mahraj or Croydon Council at any point in time  and
           I am sure that had there been any issues, then they  would  have
           raised these with me when I told them about  my  marriage,  that
           the Appellant was coming to live with me at my home address  and
           that he would be a back up Carer.   I  was  told  by  Ms  Sheila
           Mahraj that she would just need to update  the  Fostering  Panel
           and that he would need a DBS when travelling to the UK and  when
           he lives with me at my home address and that he  would  have  to
           undergo an assessment which would  only  be  done  once  he  was
           physically here in the UK on his visa.  The Appellant and  I  am
           happy to give  any  information  that  is  needed  to  show  the
           criteria with respect to foster caring is  being  fulfilled.   I
           strongly believe that the welfare needs of the  foster  children
           will continue to be met adequately and that there are no adverse
           concerns.  None have ever  been  raised  in  all  this  time  by
           Croydon Council or Ms Sheila Mahraj.


           ...


           [28]  I cannot explain why Croydon  Council  or  my  Supervising
           Social Worker or the Manager did not respond  to  the  enquiries
           that had been made by the Respondent which are revealed  in  the
           Entry Clearance  Manager's  Review  decision  dated  01/12/2016.
           Their lack of response is beyond our control.  It is  unfair  to
           hold me or the Appellant responsible in some way or to prejudice
           us because of their lack of response.  I wish I  knew  why  they
           did not respond, but I do not.


           [29]  I tried to contact Croydon Council to find  out  why  they
           did not respond to the Respondent's enquiries as I  sent  emails
           to the Unit Manager Joan James-McGowan.  The emails that I  sent
           to her on the 04/04/2017 at 12:13 and 11:51 were given with  the
           Supplementary Grounds as proof of this.  I had a  response  from
           Joan James-McGowan which has not been very much help in  getting
           closer to understanding or finding out why they did not  respond
           to the Respondent's enquiries.  She just confirms in her e  mail
           that "Sheila has informed" her that "she had not"  received  any
           communication from the Respondent.  She also has not  been  able
           to confirm who did receive the  Respondent's  communication  and
           this was very telling from her email as she told me that she was
           asking around and that she would speak to  "Ellen"  who  is  the
           newly appointed Supervising Social Worker...I cannot answer  the
           question why Croydon Council or the Supervising Social Worker or
           Manager did not respond.  This is not one that  I  can  possibly
           have the answer to.  All I know and can confirm is  that  I  did
           tell my Supervising Social Worker, Ms Sheila Mahraj, right  from
           the outset when I had my first meeting with her back in December
           2015 that I had gotten married, about the Appellant and  that  I
           was looking to sponsor him to join me here in the UK.  A  series
           of enquiries were made with me and I have given the emails  that
           had been exchanged between me and Ms Sheila Mahraj to show this.
            No issues have ever been raised about there being  any  adverse
           concerns relating to the welfare of the foster  children  or  of
           the Appellant joining me and living with me at my home  address.
           I do not believe for this reason that there have been any issues
           and neither do I believe that there are any...."


   19. What is said by the Judge at [32] of the Decision has to be read  in
       the context of that evidence.  Although the Judge does not expressly
       refer to the "Character Certificate" she does refer to  the  e-mails
       raising this issue.  It may well be, as I have already  noted,  that
       the Judge was satisfied on the evidence that the Appellant  and  the
       Sponsor have shown that the necessary document has been provided.  I
       accept that if this were so then it might have been  better  if  she
       had said so expressly rather than leave it to inference.

   20. Even if that is not the position, though, I am  satisfied  that  any
       error by the Judge in not  making  a  finding  on  the  evidence  or
       failing to mention the position when looking at the public  interest
       is not material.  I am satisfied on the evidence I  was  shown  that
       the Appellant has produced a "Character  Certificate"  that  on  its
       face provides an equivalent to a DBS check.  I am also satisfied  by
       the Sponsor's evidence that this was  produced  both  to  the  local
       authority and to the Respondent with the visa application.  There is
       no suggestion that the local authority has objected to that document
       as satisfying  the  requirement  (although  equally  they  have  not
       expressly said that it does comply).  There is  no  suggestion  that
       the document is not genuine.  Indeed, in reply, Mr  Walker  accepted
       that the witness statement from the Sponsor on this issue  is  "very
       comprehensive".  It is abundantly clear from that witness  statement
       that the Sponsor is keeping the local authority informed  about  the
       Appellant's arrival in the  UK  and  that  further  checks  will  be
       carried out by that local authority once the Appellant is in the UK.

   21. For those reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Decision  does  not
       disclose a material error of law and I  uphold  the  Decision.   The
       Appellant's appeal against the refusal of  his  human  rights  claim
       therefore remains allowed.

    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rothwell
    promulgated  on  6  September  2017  with  the  consequence  that   the
    Appellant's appeal stands allowed


       Signed          [pic]            Dated: 10 May 2018
       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
