
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20373/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                           |On 18 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                  hanna [z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, instructed by Danielle Cohen Immigration
                    Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Belarus, born on 20 January 1986.   On  7
    July 2016 she made an application for entry clearance  as  the  partner
    (spouse) of [LZ], a British citizen.



Immigration Rules

 2. It is prudent at this early juncture to set out the  Immigration  Rules
    which are said to impinge upon the  decision-making  process,  so  that
    what follows can be put in its proper context:

         "Section EC-P: Entry clearance as a partner


         EC-P.1.1. The requirements to be  met  for  entry  clearance  as  a
         partner are that:


          a) the applicant must be outside the UK;


          b) the applicant must have made a  valid  application  for  entry
             clearance as a partner;


          c) the applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
             grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability - entry clearance; and


          d) the applicant must meet all the requirements of Section E-ECP:
             Eligibility for entry clearance as a partner.






         Section S-EC: Suitability - entry clearance


         S-EC.1.1. The applicant will be refused entry clearance on  grounds
         of suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.1.2. to 1.9. apply.


         S-EC.1.2. The Secretary of State has personally directed  that  the
         exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive to  the  public
         good.


         S-EC.1.3. The applicant is currently the subject of  a  deportation
         order.


         S-EC.1.4. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive
         to the public good because they have:


         (a)  been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years; or


         (b)  been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months
             but less than 4 years, unless a period of 10 years has passed
             since the end of the sentence; or


         (c)  been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 12 months,
             unless a period of 5 years has passed since the end of the
             sentence.


         S-EC.1.5. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive
         to the public good because, for example,  the  applicant's  conduct
         (including convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paragraph  S-
         EC.1.4.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance. ..."


 3. Paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules falls within Part 9, headed:
    "General grounds for the refusal of entry clearance ...":

         "320  In addition to the grounds of refusal of entry  clearance  or
         leave to enter set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, and subject  to
         paragraph 321 below, the following grounds for the refusal of entry
         clearance or leave to entry apply:


         Grounds on which entry clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused


         ...


         Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the United
         Kingdom should normally be refused


         ...


         (11) Where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
             way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:


             (i)  overstaying; or


             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or


             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or


             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether successful or not);


             and  there  are  other  aggravating  circumstances,  such   as
             absconding,   not   meeting   temporary    admission/reporting
             restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity  or
             multiple identities, switching nationality,  making  frivolous
             applications  or  not  complying  with  the   re-documentation
             process."


Entry Clearance Officer's decision

 4. The appellant's application for entry clearance was refused by an Entry
    Clearance Officer ("ECO") in a decision dated 27 July  2016  which,  in
    its material part, states:

         "The Decision


         EC-P.1.1(c)   -   Section   S-EC:    Suitability-Entry    Clearance
         Requirements


         ECO's Reasons for refusal


           . You state that you illegally entered the UK in 2004  and  that
             you left the UK in August 2015.  During some eleven years  you
             remained in the UK, and the documents you  have  submitted  do
             not demonstrate  you  made  any  attempt  to  regularise  your
             immigration status during this entire time.   Furthermore  the
             documents you  have  submitted  do  not  demonstrate  how  you
             supported yourself during this period.


           . Police Records show that you were  sentenced  to  a  3  months
             custodial sentence for assaulting a Constable  in  2006.   You
             served 6 weeks in prison.  Furthermore,  Police  records  show
             that you provided multiple aliases to  the  authorities.   The
             documents you have  submitted  do  not  demonstrate  that  any
             attempt was made during this  time  to  declare  you  were  an
             illegal entrant.


           . Police Records also show you were convicted of theft in  2011,
             I note you have not declared this on your application.


           . Given the violent nature of your  previous  criminal  actions,
             and the non declaration of further  convictions,  as  well  as
             your use of deception to  the  authorities  with  aliases  and
             being an illegal entrant and remaining  in  the  UK  for  some
             eleven years making no attempt during this time to  regularise
             your status, I am satisfied that you have previously contrived
             in a significant way to  frustrate  the  instructions  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  I therefore refuse your application  under
             Paragraph 320(11).


         It has also been considered whether  the  particular  circumstances
         set out in your application  constitute  exceptional  circumstances
         which, consistent with the right to respect for private and  family
         life contained in Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights, might warrant a grant of  entry  clearance  to  the  United
         Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


         In support of your claim  you  state  your  sponsor  is  a  British
         national with family and employment in the UK.


         This has been carefully considered.  However the documents you have
         submitted do not demonstrate that  your  sponsor  is  not  free  to
         travel outside the UK.  You have submitted his  valid  UK  passport
         and have declared that your  sponsor  has  previously  met  you  in
         multiple locations outside of the UK since your departure from  the
         UK.


         It has  therefore  been  decided  that  there  are  no  exceptional
         circumstances in your case.  Consequently your application does not
         fall for a grant of entry clearance outside the rules."


 5. The following observations can be made in relation to this document:

      i) The ECO wrongly relied upon the fact that the  appellant  had  been
         convicted of theft in 2011. There has been no such conviction;


     ii) Consequently, the ECO wrongly relied upon the  appellant's  failure
         to disclose this conviction in her application for entry clearance;


    iii) The ECO's decision does not assert that the appellant fails to meet
         any of the Eligibility requirements of immigration rule  (found  in
         section E-ECP);


     iv) Although the ECO's decision refers to the Suitability  requirements
         of the immigration rule  (found  in  section  S-EC),  it  does  not
         specify which, if any, of those requirements  are  relied  upon  in
         refusing the application. The reasoning provided  by  the  ECO  for
         refusing the application does not show an  affinity  with  any  the
         Suitability requirements;


      v) Reliance is placed by the ECO on paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Rules.
         However, the the reasons provided by the ECO in this regard do  not
         support the contention that the ECO was aware that the  application
         of this rule is discretionary and not mandatory. Of course, even if
         this were not correct any exercise of discretion was undertaken  on
         the basis of an inaccurate factual matrix (see (i) and (ii) above).




First-tier Tribunal's decision

 6. The appellant appealed against the ECO's  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. That appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M  A
    Khan and First-tier Tribunal Judge C A S O'Garro on  13  February  2018
    and dismissed in a decision sent to the parties on 27 March.  The First-
    tier Tribunal gave the following reasons for its decision:





         "Conclusions as to this Appeal


         ...


         24.  In her statement, the Appellant accepts that she purchased  an
             Israeli passport in Ukraine and used this  document  to  enter
             the United Kingdom in 2004.  She immediately started  to  work
             illegally in this country.  The Appellant was  aware  she  had
             entered the United Kingdom illegally and that she was  working
             illegally.


         25.  The Appellant accepts the fact that in 2006, she got  involved
             in a fight and the police were called.  She assaulted a police
             officer; she was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  three  months
             imprisonment.  She states this  was  long  time  ago  and  she
             regrets committing it.  However, an  offence  of  this  nature
             against any member of public is serious enough but  assaulting
             a police officer, those who are responsible  for  keeping  law
             and order is inexcusable.   However,  this  as  the  Appellant
             states, this incident took place in 2006 at the time  she  was
             aged 20 years.


         26.  The Appellant used various aliases during her  overstaying  in
             the United Kingdom, such as Katerina [B], Eskaterina  [B]  and
             Losenva [H].  When she was arrested,  she  gave  her  name  as
             Katerina [B] because she was afraid if she told the truth  she
             would be sent back to Belarus.


         27.  The Appellant accepts that she remained in the United  Kingdom
             until 2015, a period of 11 years before voluntarily  returning
             to Belarus to make an application for  entry  clearance  as  a
             partner.


         28.  Immigration Rules


         ...


         29.  Paragraph 320(11) uses the word "or" after each sub paragraph.
              This means any one sub paragraph applies and there are  other
             aggravating circumstances, the refusal under 320(11)  is  made
             out.  In this case the Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom
             illegally, using deception and overstayed by 11 years.


         30.  The aggravating feature in the Appellant's case  is  that  she
             used multiple identities in order not to be detected by the UK
             Immigration authorities.  In the circumstances,  I  find  that
             the Appellant has previously contrived in a significant way to
             frustrate the intention of the Immigration Rules.


         31.  On the evidence before me on the balance  of  probabilities  I
             find  that  the  ECO  decision  to  refuse   the   Appellant's
             application under paragraph 320(11) is made  out  and  totally
             justified and is upheld.


         32.  As for the Appellant's rights under  Article  8  of  ECHR  are
             concerned, both the Appellant and the sponsor  were  aware  of
             the Appellant's immigration history, they were would  also  be
             aware of the fact that she may be refused any application  for
             entry clearance.  They entered into the  relationship  knowing
             the consequence.


         33.  There are no exceptional circumstances in this case other than
             the sponsor having lived in the  UK  for  over  20  year,  his
             parents are in this country and he has a  job  here.   I  find
             that  these  matters  do  not  form  exceptionality.   In  the
             circumstances, I find that there is no breach of Article 8  of
             the ECHR and the Appellant's  and  the  sponsor's  family  and
             private life can continue outside the United Kingdom."


Decision and Discussion: Setting aside of FtT's Decision

 7. Resident Judge Philipps granted the appellant permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal in a decision dated 1 August 2018.  Thus, the matter
    came before me.

 8. At the hearing, Mr Bramble  accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision contains an error of law. He  submitted,  however  that  given
    that there was only one possible outcome to the appeal,  i.e.  that  it
    should have been dismissed, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  should
    not be set aside.  In response, Mr Fripp submitted that not only should
    the FtT's decision be set aside but that, upon  re-making,  the  appeal
    should be allowed and that this was the only rational decision open  to
    the Tribunal.

 9. Returning to the task before me; as was accepted to be the case  by  Mr
    Bramble, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contains  an
    error of law; indeed, it contains numerous  errors  of  law.   However,
    given the aforementioned concession I need only briefly set the out the
    nature of these errors.

10. First, the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  engage  with  the  issue  of
    which, if any, of the suitability requirements (in  S-EC)  were  relied
    upon by the ECO and, if relied upon, whether any of these  requirements
    had been made out. The Tribunal's decision is entirely silent  on  this
    whole issue. Second, the First-tier Tribunal erred in its consideration
    of paragraph 320(11) of the Rules by (i) failing to direct itself  that
    the application of this paragraph is discretionary; and (ii) failing to
    consider the exercise of such discretion. In short, the First  Tribunal
    considered that the ECO had made out his case under  paragraph  320(11)
    simply as a consequence  of  the  fact  that  there  were  'aggravating
    features' to the appellant's immigration history in the UK. This is  an
    unlawful approach. If the FtT did consider the exercise  of  discretion
    under  paragraph  320(11)  then  it  did   so   absent   the   required
    consideration the appellant's circumstances as a whole.

11. Turning to the decision on the Article 8 ECHR  ground,  which  was  the
    only issue determinative of the appeal, the proportionality  assessment
    is necessarily informed by a lawful assessment under the  Rules  -  the
    Immigration Rules setting out the Secretary of State's (ECO's) position
    as to where the public interest lies in any  given  case.  As  previous
    indicated, the FtT's assessment of the application of the Rules was not
    lawful and the failures in that  regard  necessarily  impinged  on  the
    Tribunal's assessment of the Article 8 ground.

12. Finally, I reject Mr  Bramble's  contention  that  there  is  only  one
    possible outcome to this appeal i.e. that it was bound to be dismissed.
    Given this finding and  the  finding  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision contains an error of law, I exercise my discretion  so  as  to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision and Discussion: Re-making of decision on appeal

13. Having orally given my decision setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's
    determination,  both  parties  indicated  that  they  were  content  to
    continue immediately to the re-making of the decision under appeal.

The Facts

14. The evidence given by the appellant and Mr [Z]  is  summarised  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision, and Mr [Z] gave further  oral  evidence
    before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  was  not  the  subject  of  cross
    examination.

15. The relevant factual matrix  is  broadly  as  follows.   The  appellant
    unlawfully entered to the United Kingdom in 2004 using a false  Israeli
    passport and she remained here until 2015 without leave.   During  that
    time the appellant worked illegally in the UK.

16. In 2006, following  a  struggle  in  a  nightclub,  the  appellant  was
    involved in  an  altercation  which  led  to  her  being  convicted  of
    assaulting a constable. She was sentenced to three  months  in  prison.
    Upon arrest the appellant gave a false name in an attempt  to  decrease
    the likelihood of her being removed to Belarus.

17. The appellant met Mr [Z] in June 2011.  Mr [Z] is  dual  Ukrainian  and
    British national.  The relationship developed to the extent  that  they
    moved in together approximately eighteen months later, living  with  Mr
    [Z]'s mother, and they continued to reside together until the appellant
    left the United Kingdom.  In January 2014, Mr [Z] divorced  his  former
    wife. Shortly thereafter, the appellant and Mr [Z]  became  engaged  to
    marry.

18. The appellant left the United Kingdom voluntarily on 28 August 2015 and
    she and Mr [Z] were married in Moldova on 23 January 2016.  They had  a
    honeymoon  together  in  Dubai  and   the   instant   application   was
    subsequently made on 7 July 2016.

19. The appellant and Mr [Z] speak to each other via WhatsApp every day and
    meet as often as possible.  They met in Turkey from 16 to 20 June  2017
    and they also met in Egypt between 16 and 21 April  2017.   They  spent
    time together in France  over  the  2017/2018  New  Year,  in  Kiev  in
    February 2018, in Cyprus in May 2018, in Kiev again in July 2018 and in
    Cyprus in October 2018.  The couple wish to have a child together,  but
    it is thought not to be appropriate at the current juncture  given  the
    ongoing proceedings.

20. The sponsor asserts that he is not able to move to Belarus  because  he
    runs a concierge business in the United Kingdom and  his  parents  also
    live here, with whom he has a very close relationship.  His parents are
    British.

Submissions

21. Mr Bramble relied upon the Entry Clearance Officer's decision letter of
    July 2016  save  for  those  passages  which  placed  reliance  on  the
    appellant having been convicted of theft in 2011. It is  accepted  that
    there was no such conviction.  As to paragraph ECP.1.1(c) of the Rules,
    Mr Bramble relied upon the appellant's failure to meet the requirements
    of S-EC.1.5, asserting that it would not be  conducive  to  the  public
    good to allow the appellant to come to the United Kingdom as  Mr  [Z]'s
    spouse.  He directed attention to the appellant's acceptance  that  she
    had entered the United Kingdom on a false passport in 2004 and that she
    had been convicted of assaulting a police  officer  in  2006,  using  a
    false identity at that time.   He  submitted  that  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the appellant having voluntarily left the country has  been
    diminished as consequence of her having taken legal advice prior to her
    having done so. Mr Bramble relied upon the same matters in  support  of
    his submissions on the application of paragraph 320(11) of the Rules  -
    asserting that the appellant had previously contrived in a  significant
    way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules.

22. Turning to Article 8 Mr Bramble reminded the Tribunal of the provisions
    of section 117B of the 2002 Act and the public interest in  maintaining
    effective immigration control.  He submitted that it was relevant  that
    the appellant and the sponsor had managed to maintain a relationship in
    separate countries since the appellant's departure from the UK in 2015,
    and he submitted that they could continue to do so in  the  future.  He
    submitted, in the alternative, that the sponsor could leave the  United
    Kingdom and live with the appellant in her home country. Reliance  was,
    one again, placed on the appellant's history in the UK  in  support  of
    the submission that the decision to refuse the appellant leave to enter
    is proportionate.

23. In reply, Mr Fripp observed that the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal
    was the first occasion the ECO had sought to  rely  upon  S-EC.1.5.  of
    Appendix FM.  There had been no reference in  the  decision  letter  to
    this provision nor any reference before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    submitted that the ECO had not sought to identify  how  this  provision
    applied and maintained that, in any event, there  was  nothing  in  the
    facts of the case which could lead the Tribunal to  conclude  that  the
    appellant falls foul of the requirements of this rule.

24. As to paragraph 320(11), which is the  rule  the  ECO  relied  upon  in
    refusing entry clearance, Mr Fripp drew the Tribunal's attention to the
    reported decision in PS (Paragraph  320(11)  Discretion:  Care  needed)
    India [2010] UKUT 440, submitting that a three stage  test  had  to  be
    applied; (i) there needed to be a trigger factor; (ii) there needed  to
    be an aggravating circumstance or feature to  the  case;  and,  in  any
    event, (iii) the application of the rule was a  matter  of  discretion.
    The exercise of discretion is, he submitted, akin to a  proportionality
    consideration under Article 8.

25. Attention was further drawn to the comments in PS (India) regarding the
    public interest in encouraging those who  are  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully to  leave  and  regularise  their  stay.   He  reminded  the
    Tribunal that that the appellant in the instant  case  had  voluntarily
    left the UK and, he submitted, she should be given  significant  credit
    for this.  Mr Fripp submitted that when carefully analysed the facts of
    the case are such that it could not be  said  to  be  proportionate  to
    separate the appellant and Mr [Z].

26. In looking at Article 8 Mr Fripp asserted that, in  addition  to  those
    features which were said to further the ECO's  position,  the  Tribunal
    should also take account of the fact that the appellant and the sponsor
    have now lived apart for a substantial period of time post-marriage and
    that they had paid the  price  in  this  respect  for  the  appellant's
    previous  misdeeds.   Despite  all  this  they  had  maintained   their
    relationship.  The sponsor is a British  citizen  and  is  entitled  to
    remain here and it would not be proportionate to require him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and live in Belarus in circumstances  where  he  has
    his own business in the United Kingdom,  and  lives  with  one  of  his
    parents. Mr Fripp also submitted  that  substantial  weight  should  be
    attached to the actions of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  refusing
    entry clearance in particular the errant reliance on  a  conviction  in
    2011, which does not exist.  He reminded the Tribunal  that  there  had
    not been any explanation or an apology for this.

Discussion

27. The ECO does not  conclude,  nor  does  Mr  Bramble  assert,  that  the
    appellant fails to meet any of the Eligibility requirements  for  entry
    clearance as a partner under E-ECP. The issue under Appendix FM of  the
    Rules, at least as now pursued  by  Mr  Bramble  on  the  ECO's  behalf
    despite this not being how the case was put by the ECO in  the  refusal
    decision, is whether the appellant falls foul of  the  requirement  set
    out in section S-EC.1.5. i.e.  that: "The exclusion  of  the  applicant
    from the UK is conducive to the public good because, for  example,  the
    applicant's conduct (including convictions which  do  not  fall  within
    paragraph S-EC.1.4.), character, associations, or other  reasons,  make
    it undesirable to grant them entry clearance..."

28. It is, of course, for the Entry Clearance Officer to make out his  case
    in this regard, to the balance of probabilities.   As  I  have  already
    identified on numerous occasions, the Entry Clearance Officer  did  not
    in fact identify which, if any, of the  Suitability  requirements  were
    relied upon and in any event insofar as such requirements  were  relied
    upon the consideration thereof was flawed as a consequence of the ECO's
    incorrect reliance on the fact that the appellant had been convicted of
    theft in 2011 and that she had failed to  disclose  this  fact  in  the
    application or entry clearance.

29. I am entitled to consider for  myself  whether  the  exclusion  of  the
    appellant from the UK is conducive to the public good. In  doing  so  I
    need to pay particular regard to the ECO's  and  Secretary  of  State's
    views on this issue. For this purpose, I am prepared to assume that the
    assertions made by Mr Bramble align with the  ECO's  and  Secretary  of
    State's views, although this was no explicitly stated to be the case by
    Mr Bramble.

30. Moving on, consideration of the application  of  S-EC.1.5  involves  an
    assessment of matters that goes beyond simply looking at the  past  and
    includes taking account of the appellant's circumstances  as  a  whole.
    The fact of the 2006 conviction  is  not  of  itself,  in  my  view,  a
    sufficiently weighty factor so as to render exclusion of the  appellant
    conducive to the public good.   Other  provisions  of  the  immigration
    rules deal with the case where  a  person  has  been  convicted  of  an
    offence (e.g. S-EC.1.4 (a)-(c)), and the appellant's  circumstances  do
    not  fall  within  any  of  these  provisions.  That  being  said,  the
    cumulative effect of the appellant's illegal entry into the UK in  2004
    using false documentation, the fact and  nature  of  the  offence,  the
    misleading information given to the police upon the arrest, the use  of
    false identifies, the illegal working in the UK and the fact  that  the
    appellant remained unlawfully in the UK  for  11  years,  are  features
    which  when  taken  cumulatively  bear   significant   weight   in   my
    consideration of whether exclusion of the appellant is conducive to the
    public good.

31. There are however also other factors to be taken into account. The fact
    that the single offence for which the appellant has been convicted took
    place over 12 years  ago,  and  that  there  have  been  no  subsequent
    convictions or offences of a similar type, leads me  to  conclude  that
    the  risk  of  the  appellant  re-offending  in  a  similar  manner  is
    negligible. Mr Bramble did not submit otherwise. Of  course,  the  fact
    that the appellant remained illegally in the UK  and  worked  illegally
    also both constitute criminal offences - albeit the appellant  has  not
    been  duly  convicted  for  this  behaviour.   However,   viewing   the
    appellant's circumstances as a whole I conclude that there is little if
    any prospect of this offending behaviour being repeated. Once again, Mr
    Bramble did not seek to submit otherwise. I also have no doubt that the
    appellant's relationship is genuine and that if she comes to the UK  se
    would live with Mr [Z] in a marital relationship, and that  they  would
    have sufficient funds not to be a burden on the state (i.e.  she  meets
    the eligibility requirements of the Rules).

32. Looking at the appellant's circumstances as a whole  and  having  taken
    full  account  of  all  the  matters  identified  above  including  the
    appellant's criminal behaviour when she was last in the UK, I  conclude
    that it would not be conducive to the public good to exclude  her  from
    the UK. I find that her conduct (including the  conviction  which  does
    not fall within S-EC.1.4.) character and associations do  not  make  it
    undesirable to grant her entry clearance.  I  therefore  conclude  that
    the appellant's does not fall foul of the Suitability  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, it not being  asserted  that  she
    falls foul of any requirements set out in S-EC.1.1 to  S-EC.3.2.,  save
    for S-EC.1.5, which I have rejected.

33. Turning to a  consideration  of  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Rules,  a
    provision which was relied upon by the  ECO  in  his  decision  letter,
    albeit once again on a flawed factual basis. It is beyond dispute  that
    the appellant "previously contrived in a significant way  to  frustrate
    the intentions of the Rules". She was an illegal entrant in the  United
    Kingdom  and  thus  paragraph  320(11)  is   engaged   (See   paragraph
    320(11)(iii)). The presence of  "other  aggravating  circumstances"  is
    also beyond dispute e.g. the fact  that  the  appellant  used  multiple
    identities, including using a false identity upon  her  arrest  on  two
    occasions, as well as the significant length of her  unlawful  stay  in
    the United Kingdom.

34. This though does not complete  a  consideration  of  paragraph  320(11)
    because the application of this provision is a  matter  of  discretion.
    The ECO did not consider the exercise of discretion  and,  if  he  did,
    then he did so not a flawed and unlawful basis for reasons which do not
    require repeating.

35. For the reasons identified in the previous paragraph, it is likely that
    under the pre-2014 statutory appeal regime  this  is  an  appeal  which
    would have been allowed on the basis that the ECO's decision was not in
    accordance with the law, which would have resulted in the ECO having to
    reconsider the appellant's application on the correct  factual  matrix.
    This, though, is no longer an avenue available to the Tribunal.

36. In such circumstances, both parties were content for me to consider the
    exercise of discretion under paragraph 320(11) for myself. I  heard  no
    submissions on the legality of such an approach and make no findings in
    this regard. In all the circumstances I intend to proceed on the  basis
    suggested by the parties, taking full account of Mr Brambles assertions
    as to the conclusions the ECO would have reached had he considered  the
    exercise of discretion on the correct factual footing.

37. Much of what I have said in relation to the suitability requirements of
    the Rules applies equally to  the  consideration  of  the  exercise  of
    discretion under paragraph 320(11), and I take account  of  my  earlier
    finding that exclusion of the appellant from the UK is not conducive to
    the public good.  I also  take  account  of  the  fact,  not  mentioned
    previously,  that  there  is  public  interest  "in encouraging  those
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise  their
    status by an application for entry clearance (see paragraph  14  of  PS
    (paragraph 320(11) discretion:  care  needed)  India  [2010]  UKUT  440
    (IAC)). I do not accept Mr Bramble's submission that diminished  weight
    should be attached  to  the  appellant's  actions  in  leaving  the  UK
    voluntarily because she did so having first taken legal advice. This is
    a matter which must be considered in the round with all other  relevant
    circumstances. One such circumstance is the  obvious  strength  of  the
    appellant's marital relationship with Mr [Z] and the upheaval it  would
    cause Mr [Z] if he were to move to Belarus to order  to  fully  develop
    marital relations. I accept in this regard that he has close  relations
    in the UK with his British citizen parents and in  particular  that  he
    lives with his mother and that he pays for their accommodation. He also
    has a well-established business here with an employee, has  never  been
    to Belarus and does not speak the language of that country. Whilst I do
    not go as far as saying it would be 'unduly harsh' for Mr [Z]  to  move
    to Belarus, he is not required to establish that such is the case.  The
    aforementioned factors are to be weigh in  the  round  with  all  other
    relevant matters when consideration is being given to the  exercise  of
    discretion under paragraph 320(11).

38. Having considered the circumstances of the case as have been put before
    me, taken full account of  the  public  interest  both  in  maintaining
    immigration control but also in encouraging those such as the appellant
    who are unlawfully in the UK to leave and regularise  their  status  by
    making an entry clearance application, and also recognising the  likely
    consequence of refusing entry clearance would be the inability  of  the
    appellant and Mr [Z] to live a full marital  life  -  albeit  this  was
    something they must have  thought  would  be  a  possibility  as  their
    relationship progressed - I conclude that this is not a case  in  which
    discretion should be exercised under paragraph 320(11) so as to prevent
    the appellant being granted leave to enter.

39. Turning finally to Article 8. The appellant and Mr [Z] plainly share  a
    family life together. They have a genuine and subsisting marriage, have
    previously  lived  together  in  the  UK,  are  in  contact  daily  and
    physically meet each other when the circumstances  permit.   The  ECO's
    decision causes an interference with the appellant's family  life  and,
    in particular, the  opportunity  for  her  to  undertake  full  marital
    relations with Mr [Z]. I find that such interference is  of  sufficient
    gravity to engage Article 8.

40. The issue of substance in relation to the Article 8 ground,  as  is  so
    often the case, is whether the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  is
    proportionate. Whilst in undertaking my  assessment  of  the  issue  of
    proportionality  I  have  had  full  regard  to  the  public   interest
    considerations set out in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, and  in  particular  that  identified  in  section
    117B(4), what I find to be of most significance  is  the  Secretary  of
    State's (and ECO's) general view that in  any  given  case  the  public
    interest is identified through the Immigration Rules.  In  the  instant
    case  it  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  meets   the   eligibility
    requirements of the rules relating to entry clearance as a spouse,  and
    I have found that she does no  fall  foul  of  either  the  Suitability
    requirements of those rules or the General Grounds of Refusal. In other
    words, the appellant, meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

41. There is nothing in the facts  of  this  case,  over  and  above  those
    matters which require consideration under the Rules, which leads to  me
    to conclude that the public interest lies in refusing entry clearance -
    despite the requirements of the Rules having been fulfilled.  For  this
    reason, I conclude on the basis of the information and evidence I  have
    been presented with, that the ECO's decision is not  proportionate  and
    that refusing entry clearance breaches Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Upon remaking the decision, I allow the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis
that the ECO's decision breaches Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor           Date 17 January 2019

