
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20013/2018
                                                             & HU/20015/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2019                  |On 11 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     S F
                                     R F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Douglass Simon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  S  Moore,  promulgated  on  10  July  2019.   The
    appellants are citizens  of  the  Philippines  who  applied  for  entry
    clearance pursuant to paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  to  join
    their mother ("the sponsor") who is present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Those applications  were  refused  on  the  grounds  that  in
    respect of the first appellant and the second appellant it had not been
    demonstrated that their mother had shown sole responsibility for  them,
    a requirement of paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules.   It  is
    also stated that in the case of the first appellant she had  not  shown
    that she  had  not  formed  an  independent  family  unit  and  so  her
    application fell to be refused under, paragraph 297(iii).

 2. It should be borne in mind that in this case the appellants' mother has
    two older children.  The older of  them  was  granted  entry  clearance
    subsequent to an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal which was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer  who  made  a  number  of  findings
    regarding the circumstances of the family as it was  in  2014  when  he
    reached his decision.  These are referred to in brief at  paragraph  14
    of the decision.

 3. Judge Moore, however, gave only limited weight to  these  findings  and
    having directed herself in light  of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049   concluded   that   sole
    responsibility had not been shown.  The judge also concluded  that  the
    first appellant had not shown that he  fulfilled  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(iii).

 4. The grounds of permission are

      i) that the judge failed properly to attach sufficient weight  to  the
         findings in the previous determination;

     ii) failed properly to apply the sole responsibility test; and

    iii) misdirected herself as to the application of independent  life  and
         independent family unit.

 5. Dealing with the first ground of appeal, it is agreed  that  the  judge
    had not properly taken the decision of Judge Metzer  into  account  and
    she had not properly directed himself in accordance with  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal of Ocampo v Secretary of State [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    76

 6. The judge does appear to have referred himself to an  earlier  Tribunal
    decision, Chicaiza [2002] UKIAT 01200 but failed to note that this  was
    a finding with regard to the circumstances of the family as a whole  at
    an earlier  date  and  whilst  that  would  not  of  course  have  been
    determinative of the situation as at the date of hearing or the date of
    decision in these appeals, it is an important factor to be  taken  into
    account.  That is because, as the case law demonstrates,  the  question
    of whether someone has sole responsibility can fluctuate over time.   A
    parent may share responsibility, but, later, owing to  the  illness  of
    the person with whom responsibility is shared, he  or  she  takes  over
    sole responsibility.  It is a dynamic situation and that  is  something
    which the judge should have considered.

 7. I turn to the second ground which is  also  made  out.  The  judge  had
    failed  to  properly  to  taken  into  the  test  of  the   change   in
    circumstances whereby the appellants'  grandmother  was  looking  after
    them but was no longer was.  There  is  then  the  involvement  of  the
    sponsor's sister and again this  appears  not  properly  to  have  been
    assessed through the lens of the proper application of the case law.

 8. Further, I consider that the judge did not properly direct  herself  as
    to the meaning of "independent life" and took  into  account  the  fact
    that she had had a child as a sufficient basis for concluding that  she
    had formed an independent family unit which did not take  into  account
    the particular facts of this case whereby the first appellant  did  not
    have full-time care of that  child  and  indeed  the  child's  father's
    family appears to have taken over responsibility for him.

 9. In the circumstances I am satisfied  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and  I  set  it  aside.
    With the agreement of the parties,  I  then  proceeded  to  remake  the
    appeal, hearing evidence from the sponsor  and  then  submissions  from
    both representatives.

10. The sponsor adopted her witness statement and was cross-examined.   She
    said that her children were close to their cousins with whom they  live
    other they are younger, the eldest being 10 the youngest  3.   She  did
    not recall the length of the period during which her daughter had  left
    the house to work but that she had rented a room in an area about three
    hours' drive away they had moved back in February 2017.  She had learnt
    this when she spoke to her.

11. The sponsor said that her daughter sees her son about twice a week  and
    appears to be happy with this.  She accepted  that  their  relationship
    had been strained in the past because she had not been there with  them
    and had been close to the grandmother who had then  passed  away.   She
    did not know why she had stopped work and that she had only  found  out
    about her daughter's child after the birth.   She  said  that  she  had
    lived in the rented room whilst she was pregnant.

12. Miss Everett relied on the  refusal  letter  and  I  accepted  that  it
    contained a number of errors and was in some respects not helpful.

13. Miss Everett submitted that there were  significant  difficulties  with
    regards to the first appellant given the length of time  she  had  been
    away from the family home at a distance of some three hours away  where
    she had had a job, rented a room although  it  would  appear  that  the
    relationship with the child's father had broken  down.   She  submitted
    that in the circumstances the first appellant could not show  that  she
    had not created an independent life and that her  appeal  ought  to  be
    dismissed.  She accepted, however, the second appellant was younger and
    this matter was more straightforward.

14. Mr Slatter submitted that even if it  could  be  said  that  the  first
    appellant had formed a separate family unit, that  was  no  longer  the
    case at the date of decision and that it was no longer  the  case  that
    she formed a separate social unit.

15. Mr Slatter submitted also that although the first appellant was now 18,
    that was not a reason why in  itself  the  decision  was  proportionate
    given that the respondent's policy was, as shown by Rule 27,  to  admit
    appellants at this case.



The Law

16. Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules provide, so far as is  relevant,
    as follows:-

         '297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

                  (a)  both parents are present and settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; or

                  (b)  both parents are being admitted on the same  occasion
                  for settlement; or

                  (c)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom and the  other  is  being  admitted  on  the  same
                  occasion for settlement; or

                  (d)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                  settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                  settlement and has had sole responsibility for the child's
                  upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                  the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion
                  for settlement and there are serious and compelling family
                  or other considerations which make exclusion of the  child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been  made  for
                  the child's care; and

             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
             is not a civil partner  and  has  not  formed  an  independent
             family unit; and ...'

17. I note from  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049 at [34]:

         "These  cases  are  largely  concerned  with  the  issue  of  "sole
         responsibility" arising between a UK-parent and relatives  who  are
         looking after the child in the country of origin. In  many  of  the
         cases, the other parent  has  disappeared  from  the  child's  life
         totally or plays so little part as to have,  in  effect,  abdicated
         any responsibility for its upbringing. What emerges is a concept of
         "authority" or "control" over a child's  upbringing  which  derives
         from the natural social and  legal  role  of  an  individual  as  a
         parent. Whilst others may, by force of circumstances, look after  a
         child, it may be that they are doing  so  only  on  behalf  of  the
         child's parent. The struggle in the case law is  to  identify  when
         the parent's responsibility has been relinquished in part or  whole
         to another such that it should be said that there is shared  rather
         than sole responsibility.  By  contrast,  where  both  parents  are
         active in the child's life, the involvement of the  parent  in  the
         country of origin is significant - perhaps crucial -  in  assessing
         whether the parent in the UK  has  "sole  responsibility"  for  the
         child."

18. Within paragraph 297(iii) there are  two  elements  to  be  considered:
    "leading an independent life"; and,  "has  not  formed  an  independent
    family unit".

19. The issue of  "leading  an  independent  life"  was  considered  in  NM
    ("leading an independent life") Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT  00051.   As  was
    observed by the Tribunal in that case at [11]  it  appeared  there  had
    been  no  previous  consideration  of  that  provision.   Although  the
    decision refers to paragraph 197(iii) that provision  is  identical  to
    the current 297(iii).  As the Tribunal observed at [12] the  underlying
    purpose of the Rule is the continuation and maintenance of  the  family
    unit with  the  parents.   Clearly  that  is  somewhat  difficult  when
    combined with the issue of sole responsibility.  At paragraph [14]  the
    Tribunal said this:-

         "14. Mr Tranter submitted that it was a  matter  of  assessing  the
             nature of the choices made by  the  child.  To  an  extent  we
             agree. It is not enough that the child does make choices about
             his life, for example to take up employment. This, like  other
             choices made by the child, may be factors  to  be  taken  into
             account but the crucial issue is always  to  ask  whether  the
             child has, through choice, separated from his parents'  family
             to form his own social unit, whether alone, by marrying or  as
             part of his own independent social unit. Consequently, a child
             who leaves his parents'  home  and  sets  up  home  alone  can
             properly be said to be "leading an independent life". This  is
             not the same as saying he must no longer be dependent upon his
             parents or is no longer part of their family.  He  clearly  is
             the latter even if living alone and "independently"  of  them.
             The family ties remain even if the family unit headed  by  the
             parents has now split up. Likewise, even  if  living  his  own
             independent life he may be financially dependent (at least  in
             part) on his parents, for example they may help him set up his
             separate home and, perhaps, even help him  with  his  rent  or
             mortgage for a period until he has found his feet financially.
             But, in our view such a person may still be seen  as  "leading
             an independent life". Financial  or  emotional  dependence  is
             not, in this context, the antithesis of "independence". Again,
             these are relevant factors to be taken  into  account  but  no
             more."

20. Some assistance as to what a "family unit" is can be  derived  from  BM
    and AL (352D(iv); meaning  of  "family  unit")  Colombia  [2007]  UKAIT
    00055.  Albeit that that is in a different context it makes  the  point
    that what is a "family unit" is  a  question  of  fact.   A  number  of
    factors will  need  to  be  taken  into  account  and  the  reason  for
    separation from the core family unit is  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account, as was held at [27] to [28]:

         "27. We regard the issue as to what is  a  "family  unit"  for  the
         purposes of para 352D(iv) as a question of fact. In many  cases  it
         will be clear that a child was part of a family unit with an asylum
         seeker in his country of habitual residence. The  child  will  have
         lived  with  the  asylum  seeker  and  perhaps   another   partner.
         Alternatively if there has been  separation  the  reason  for  that
         separation may well be associated with the claim of persecution and
         a child might still remain part of the family unit from  which  the
         potential refugee had been  temporarily  separated.  Here  no  such
         claim is made.

         28.  If on the other hand the separation is the  result  of  social
         choice by the parties and a separate family  unit  based  upon  the
         mother is created, it will be correspondingly harder  to  establish
         that a child is in reality a part of two  different  family  units.
         This  will  be  especially  so  if  the  child  is  young  and  the
         consequence will be separation from the mother rather  than  family
         unity as envisaged by the UNHCR handbook."

21. Two points need to be made  in  connection  with  how  "has  formed  an
    independent family unit" and "leading an independent life" are phrased.
     As with of sole responsibility, both independent life  and  whether  a
    family unit exists are dynamic and fluid. Whether  a  parent  has  sole
    responsibility may change over time due, for example,  to  the  serious
    illness or incapacity of a carer or the other parent which may lead  to
    the UK-based parent acquiring again sole responsibility which may  have
    in the past been shared. What is relevant is the position at  the  date
    of  application,  or  hearing.  The  use  of  "has"  means  that   sole
    responsibility must rest with the UK based parent at time of  decision,
    and "had" that this must have been so for some  time.  But  it  is  not
    necessary for that to have been continuous.

22. Just  as  it  is  established  law  that  family  life  does  not  stop
    immediately somebody turns 18 and as with any relationships, there is a
    spectrum within which they  fall  the  same  is  true  of  whether  the
    particular circumstances in which a person lives  are  such  that  that
    person becomes independent or has formed a separate family unit.

23. The issue of "sole responsibility" is common to both appeals.

24. I accept as the case law makes clear, that who has sole  responsibility
    may change over time.  That is of course less likely where both parents
    are involved with the upbringing but less so where  there  has  been  a
    degree of shared responsibility with another  relative  and,  as  here,
    that relative passed away.  While, on the basis of NM, it  is  possible
    that in the circumstances of this case there  would  have  been  shared
    responsibility between the sponsor and her mother, that dynamic changes
    markedly once the mother had died.  It does not necessarily follow that
    it would not then be a situation when nearly all the decisions  evolved
    upon the parent, perhaps inevitably where the other relative who  might
    be said to have responsibility  is  a  younger  sister,  in  this  case
    Jeanivy, who has her  own  responsibilities  and  family  (see  witness
    statement at pp67 to 68)

25. The starting point in any fact-finding  exercise  is  the  findings  of
    Judge Metzer.  Although, as I observed during the course  of  argument,
    the factual basis was somewhat different in  that  the  father  of  the
    child who was the subject of the appeal, was deceased and so  this  was
    an appeal to which paragraph 297  (i)(d)  applied,  nor  paragraph  297
    (i)(e).  It therefore follows that the issue of  "sole  responsibility"
    was not relevant, that arising only when there are two parents who  are
    alive.  Nonetheless I conclude that it  is  an  accurate  finding  with
    respect to the family situation as at the date of that hearing.   I  am
    satisfied that as at that date, in  light  of  all  the  evidence,  the
    appellant had had sole responsibility for the appellants in this  case.
    The question then arises as to whether that situation had changed  over
    time.

26. I am satisfied that the death of the grandmother altered  significantly
    the dynamic in the family.  Having heard evidence from the sponsor, and
    in light of the  witness  statements  from  both  the  appellants,  the
    contents of which were not challenged directly, I accept  that  Jeanivy
    is not committed to looking after the children as was her mother as she
    has her own family.

27. Viewing the evidence as a  whole,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  sponsor
    continued  to  exercise  responsibility  for   the   second   appellant
    consistently.  I accept that the financial support has  come  from  the
    sponsor and there was a close family relationship and, contrary to what
    was found by Judge Moore, I find that there is significant evidence  of
    contact with the family in the Philippines which was  provided  in  the
    material.  Whilst the situation prior to the death of  the  mother  may
    have been different, and I bear in mind that her  death  was  not  long
    before the decision of Judge  Metzer,  I  conclude  the  situation  has
    changed. I consider that there is little evidence  of  any  significant
    input into the care of the children coming from their aunt, Jeanivy, or
    there now  elderly  grandfather.  I  find  that  neither  has  had  any
    significant input into decisions regarding either of the appellants.  I
    do not consider that, properly applying TD (Yemen) that on the facts of
    this case the situation of sole responsibility for the second appellant
    had as at the date of  decision,  changed  from  that  found  by  Judge
    Metzer.  I find that weight of the evidence is, taking into account his
    evidence, that the sponsor has had sole responsibility for  the  second
    appellant as at the date of decision.

28. The position of the second appellant is more complex given the accepted
    account of her life, moving away from the family home,  taking  a  job,
    and then returning. There is now  (unlike  the  position  before  Judge
    Moore) a witness statement from the first appellant.   It  is  of  note
    that  although  she  explains  that  her  mother  has  exercised   sole
    responsibility for her, and that [5] her  mother  had  always  provided
    care as with funds necessary for her maintenance and accommodation  she
    makes no mention of her moving away from home to obtain work or to have
    rented accommodation.  There is thus a tension between her as  to  what
    she admits and what her mother said.

29. There is, however, a degree of consistency over her immaturity, and the
    fact that she did not plan to have a child, and the fact that  she  had
    in effect given up her child to  the  father's  family.   There  is  an
    overlap between the factors to be taken into account in assessing  sole
    responsibility and independence and membership  of  a  separate  family
    unit.  That is inevitable in somebody approaching adulthood and  it  is
    difficult to see how if a child had, for example, married  and  set  up
    home with a partner, that the issue of sole responsibility  would  have
    any meaning.

30. The factual matrix of what occurred is relevant  both  to  whether  she
    meets the requirements of 297(iii) as well as the issue of whether sole
    responsibility is exercised.  The latter is  because  of  the  admitted
    lack of communication between the first appellant and her mother to the
    extent that it was only after the birth of the child that  the  sponsor
    knew about this which causes me concern.

31. The first appellant turned 18 on 27 July 2018.  The child was born on 2
    January 2018.  Whatever differences there may  have  been  between  the
    first appellant and sponsor  appear  to  have  eased  by  the  date  of
    application.

32. Viewing the evidence as a whole, I am satisfied that although  she  has
    returned to the  family  home,  the  first  appellant  was  leading  an
    independent life prior to that, albeit that she is now,  to  a  degree,
    financially dependent on her mother.  That is because of her moving out
    of  the  family  home  for  a  significant  period,  entering  into   a
    relationship, having a child and having taken employment.  Further, the
    was in the context of a lack  of  communication  between  her  and  her
    mother, to the extent that the mother knew of the pregnancy only  after
    the child had been born, is indicative of independence.   That,  in  my
    view, falls squarely within what is said in NM at  [14],  cited  above.
    She may have returned to the family home, but her actions prior to that
    were out of choice.

33. While she has no longer much of a family life with her child, she still
    has contact on a regular basis. There is, clearly,  a  family  life  in
    existence between her and the child; the bond between a mother and such
    a young child is not easily broken. I am satisfied that a  family  unit
    has thus been created and that it is independent from the  family  unit
    in which she and her brother live, and again from any family unit  from
    her mother.

34. I conclude also that in light of the first appellant's actions, and the
    lack of communication on major issues such as her moving  away,  taking
    work and then having a child, cast significant doubt on whether, in her
    case, the sponsor has had sole responsibility for her, and  while  that
    situation had changed by the date of decision, in the sense that  there
    were communications,

35. For these reasons, I am not persuaded that the  sponsor  had  had  sole
    responsibility for the first appellant or that she was not  leading  an
    independent life or that she had not formed an independent family unit.
    She therefore does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

36. As  I  am  satisfied  that  the  second  appellant  has  fulfilled  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and  whilst  this  is  an  appeal
    technically under human rights grounds it  follows  that  there  is  no
    public interest in refusing him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
    given that he meets the requirements of the Rules and for these reasons
    I am satisfied that it would  be  a  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations  pursuant  to  the  Human  Rights  Convention  specifically
    Article 8 to refuse him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  and  I
    allow the appeal on that basis.

37. The first appellant has not met the  requirements  of  part  9  of  the
    Immigration Rules, following GEN 3.2, the second  appellant  must  show
    whether there are exceptional circumstances which would render  refusal
    of entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a breach of Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights, because such refusal  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  applicant,  their
    partner, a relevant child or another  family  member  whose  Article  8
    rights it is evident from that  information  would  be  affected  by  a
    decision  to  refuse  the  application.  That  exercise  must  also  be
    undertaken, applying section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002

38. There is insufficient evidence to show that the first appellant has any
    significant health issues, or that the consequences  of  refusal  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences. She is a  young  woman  who
    has accommodation and has shown she is able to get employment. She  has
    close family in  Philippines,  and  is  in  contact  with  her  mother.
    Accordingly, I am not satisfied that refusal of entry clearance is,  on
    the facts of this case, disproportionate and I dismiss her appeal.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an
    error of law and I set them aside

 2. I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by dismissing the
    appeal of the first appellant

39. I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by allowing the appeal
    of the Second appellant



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 9 December 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

