

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
HU/20266/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 August 2019                      |On 06 September 2019              |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    K. S.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Kingstons
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a national of India, entered the  United  Kingdom
           legally in September 2009 with leave to remain as a student. His
           leave to remain was then extended so that it  expired  in  April
           2016. The Appellant then made, in time,  an  application  for  a
           variation  of  his  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis   of   his
           relationship with a British citizen partner,  and,  his  British
           citizen children. This was only refused on 20 September 2018.
        2. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  deemed  human
           rights claim was heard and dismissed on  Article  8  grounds  by
           First Tier Tribunal Judge Arullendran in a decision  promulgated
           on 12 February 2019.
        3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by decision of 14
           March 2019 of First-tier Tribunal Judge SH Smith on the basis it
           was arguable  the  Judge  had  failed  to  give  weight  to  the
           citizenship of both children, and the health care needs  of  the
           eldest child, and, had applied the wrong test  when  considering
           section 117B(6).
        4. No Rule 24 Notice  was  lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      Error of law
        5. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bates  conceded  that  he  could
           point to no passage in the  decision  in  which  the  Judge  had
           expressly considered the weight to be given  to  the  fact  that
           both of the Appellant's children are  British  citizens.  It  is
           accepted that this fact is mentioned in the decision, but at  no
           point does the Judge consider the consequences for either  child
           of their inability to exercise their  rights  as  such,  in  the
           event the family are forced to relocate to  India  in  order  to
           stay together. Both children are in full time education, and the
           eldest child receives a significant level of  medical  treatment
           for her  diabetes,  a  condition  which  in  her  case  is  life
           threatening.
        6. Whilst the Judge did not have the benefit of the guidance to  be
           found in either of the decisions of JG (s117B(6): "reasonable to
           leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72, or, AB (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA
           Civ 661, I am not satisfied that her approach to  the  test  set
           out in s117B(6) was consistent with that guidance, or indeed the
           guidance to be found in KO (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53.  In  the
           circumstances I set the decision aside and remake it.


      The decision remade
        7. Neither party made application to  introduce  further  evidence,
           and so I heard submissions based  upon  the  evidence  that  was
           before the Judge, and the findings  of  primary  fact  that  she
           made.
        8. Whatever sins the Appellant may have committed  in  relation  to
           his TOEIC test, he is not liable to deportation. The Appellant's
           partner, and two children are all British citizens. There is  no
           evidence to suggest that the Appellant's partner speaks  any  of
           the languages in use in India other than English, and  the  same
           is true of the two children. The two children  are  enrolled  in
           full time education. The Appellant has  at  all  material  times
           been in a genuine and subsisting relationship with both of them,
           and with his partner, and  as  the  Judge  correctly  identified
           "family life" has existed between parents and  children  at  all
           material times.
        9. The decision under appeal clearly engages the Article  8  rights
           of the Appellant, his partner, and both children.
       10. It is common ground that the eldest  child,  who  is  now  eight
           years old, suffers from type 1 diabetes to an extent that  those
           treating her condition have felt obliged to provide her with  an
           insulin pump (with all that this  entails  over  monitoring  and
           hygiene). This eldest child's condition and monitoring needs are
           such that she is  unable  to  go  on  any  school  visit  unless
           accompanied by a parent, and  her  parents  have  to  check  her
           condition and blood sugar levels throughout both day, and night.
           The family have immediate telephone access to a specialist  care
           team 24hours a day  should  they  have  any  concerns  over  her
           condition.  Her  mother,  the  Appellant's   partner,   is   her
           designated carer, and is in receipt of  carers  allowance  as  a
           result, assessed at the middle rate.
       11. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the best  interests  of
           both children are to grow up in a household  with  both  parents
           and each other. As British citizens they have a right to  access
           the education and health care services available in the  UK;  it
           is unrealistic to expect the eldest child to travel  to  the  UK
           from India to receive health care given the cost, distance,  and
           time involved. This is not a case of health tourism. The  eldest
           child was born in the UK and suffers from a  serious  congenital
           health condition; her best interests clearly lie  in  her  being
           able to continue to access the health care available to  her  in
           the UK rather than  to  face  an  uncertain  availability  in  a
           country and culture of which she has no experience.
       12. As Mr Bates accepts, upon due reflection, the  evidence  readily
           permits the conclusion that it would not be reasonable to expect
           the eldest child to leave the UK for India, a  country  she  has
           never visited. In the circumstances, and applying  the  guidance
           to be found in AB and JG, I am satisfied that the threshold test
           of reasonableness, set out in section 117B(6) is made  out.  The
           real world scenario is that in  the  event  of  the  Appellant's
           removal from the UK, the family would be  separated,  since  the
           couple would be bound to place the  interests  of  their  eldest
           child first. In these circumstances Parliament has declared that
           the public interest does not  require  the  Appellant's  removal
           from the UK, notwithstanding his immigration history and  resort
           to deception to obtain a TOEIC test result.
       13. Looking at the evidence in the round I  am  therefore  satisfied
           that on the facts of this case the decision under appeal  was  a
           disproportionate interference in the Article  8  rights  of  the
           Appellant,  his  partner,  and  his   two   children.   In   the
           circumstances I allow the Article 8 appeal.







   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 12
   February 2019 is affected by material errors of law in the  decision  to
   dismiss the Appellant's human rights appeal which require that  decision
   to be set aside and remade.


   I remake the decision so as to allow the human rights appeal.





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed
















Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 30 August 2019

