
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20213/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 23 February 2021                 |On: 5 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             florie mae senence
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sparkes, instructed by Henry Hyams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there was no  prior  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face-to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines, born on 10  July  2000.
      She has been given permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal dismissing her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse her application for entry clearance  to  settle  in
      the UK with her mother and step-father.

   3. The appellant applied,  on  25  May  2018  (shortly  before  her  18th
      birthday), for entry clearance under paragraph 301 of the  immigration
      rules, on the basis of her family and private life  with  her  mother,
      Marivic Fajardo Thompson, who had leave to remain in the UK under  the
      ten-year route until 11 November 2018.

   4. In the decision of  28  August  2018  refusing  her  application,  the
      respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  live  with   her
      grandparents and that  the  letters  of  support  submitted  with  the
      application stated that her mother, the sponsor, had been  financially
      responsible for her, but there was no  explanation  as  to  where  the
      appellant's father was and why he was unable to care for her and there
      was no evidence to show that the sponsor  was  financially  supporting
      her. Neither did the evidence demonstrate that the appellant's  mother
      had been  responsible  for  making  the  important  decisions  in  her
      upbringing. The respondent noted that the appellant  had  stated  that
      she had visited her mother for 20 days between 3 October 2015  and  22
      October 2015, but that they had not seen  each  other  prior  to  that
      visit for 11 years or since the visit. There was no  evidence  of  the
      claimed regular contact between them. The respondent was therefore not
      satisfied that the appellant's mother had sole responsibility for  her
      and  refused  her  application  under  paragraph  301(i)(b)   of   the
      immigration rules. As for paragraph 301(i)(c), the respondent was  not
      satisfied that there were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
      considerations  making  the  appellant's   exclusion   from   the   UK
      undesirable, given that there was no evidence to show  why  she  could
      not continue to live with her grandparents and why  her  father  could
      not look after her and considering also that she was now 18  years  of
      age and legally an adult.

   5. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  her  appeal  came
      before First tier Tribunal Judge Birrell on 18 July  2019.  The  judge
      heard from the appellant's mother and step-father.  She  accepted  the
      sponsor's evidence that her ex-husband  had  played  no  role  in  the
      appellant's life for the vast majority of her life and  that  she  had
      been financially supporting the appellant since leaving her  with  her
      mother in 2001, sending money initially to her ex-husband  until  2004
      and from then on to her mother (the appellant's grandmother), although
      she noted that there were gaps in the remittances which she considered
      suggested some past support from  the  appellant's  grandparents.  The
      judge noted that the evidence of regular contact between the appellant
      and her mother related mostly to the past 2 years and that the sponsor
      had seen the appellant only once in the past 17 years since  she  left
      the Philippines, when the appellant visited in 2015. The  judge  noted
      further that the sponsor had never been back to  the  Philippines  and
      that there was no proper reason for that and  only  extremely  limited
      evidence of her role in making decisions in the appellant's life.

   6. The judge found it difficult to accept the  sponsor's  claim,  in  her
      oral evidence, that she had chosen her daughter's university, when the
      evidence was that her daughter had chosen her own  school.  The  judge
      accorded  limited  weight  to  a  letter  from  a  counsellor  at  the
      appellant's school and concluded that the appellant had failed to show
      that the sponsor had sole responsibility for her at the time she  made
      the application and that responsibility was shared between the sponsor
      and the appellants' grandparents. It was conceded  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant that her circumstances  fell  short  of  those  required  in
      paragraph 301(i)(c) and the judge concluded that the  requirements  of
      paragraph 301 could not be met  and  that  there  were  no  compelling
      circumstances outside the immigration rules. The judge found that  the
      decision  was  therefore  not  disproportionate  and  she  accordingly
      dismissed the appeal.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      three grounds: that the judge had misunderstood the evidence about her
      grandparents' role in her life and had  applied  the  wrong  test  and
      failed to conclude that responsibility had previously been shared  but
      was now solely upon the sponsor;  that  the  judge's  finding  on  the
      evidence about  the  important  decisions  made  by  the  sponsor  was
      irrational; and that the judge had  failed  to  take  account  of  the
      evidence of her grandparents diminishing ability to care for her which
      had resulted in the sponsor assuming sole responsibility.

   8. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 3 March 2020  and
      the matter came before me. As a preliminary issue, Mr  McVeety  raised
      the fact that the permission application had been made out of time and
      that the timeliness issue had not  been  addressed  in  the  grant  of
      permission.  He did not object to time being extended and I  therefore
      extended time so that the application could be admitted. Both  parties
      then made submissions on the error of law matter.

   9. With regard to the first ground, whereby  it  was  asserted  that  the
      judge had wrongly found that  there  had  been  a  concession  by  the
      appellant's counsel as to the grandparents' role  in  the  appellant's
      care, Mr Sparkes accepted that that was not in  itself  sufficient  to
      consider that the judge's decision should not stand. He submitted that
      when taken  together  with  the  other  errors,  however,  there  were
      sufficiently material errors such that  the  decision  should  be  set
      aside. With regard to the second ground, the judge ought to  have  set
      out  the  key  decisions  which  she  expected  a  person  with   sole
      responsibility for a child to have made and, as for the third  ground,
      the judge erred  by  speculating  about  the  appellant's  grandfather
      having worked and supported her.

  10. In response, Mr McVeety submitted in regard to the first  ground  that
      there  was  no  material  error  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
      appellant's grandparents' role. It was not doubted that she  was  well
      looked after by her grandparents up to the age of 18, but the relevant
      question  was  whether  there  was  shared  responsibility   or   sole
      responsibility by the sponsor. As to the second ground,  there  was  a
      clear absence of evidence of  any  important  decisions  made  by  the
      sponsor. The  decision  as  to  the  appellant's  university  was  not
      relevant to the question of sole responsibility as it was taken  after
      she was 18 years of age. As  for  the  third  ground,  the  judge  was
      entitled to take account of the gap in  evidence  of  remittances  and
      draw the conclusions that she did. The judge's decision  was  a  sound
      one and did not contain any material errors of law.


Discussion and conclusions

  11. I am entirely in agreement with Mr McVeety that  the  grounds  do  not
      disclose any errors of law in the judge's decision. It is  clear  that
      the judge gave detailed consideration to all the evidence and provided
      full and cogent reasons for making the findings that she did.  I  find
      no merit in the assertion in the first of the written grounds that she
      misunderstood the appellant's evidence and  misapplied  the  test  for
      sole responsibility. On the contrary, as the respondent stated in  her
      written submissions, the judge summarised the appellant's case clearly
      and properly at [37] and directed herself properly in accordance  with
      the guidance in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility")  Yemen
      [2006] UKAIT 00049  in  relation  to  the  test  for  determining  the
      question of 'sole responsibility'. The judge was clearly aware of  the
      case being put for the appellant, namely that the  grandparents'  role
      had diminished more recently as their health deteriorated and that the
      sponsor's role had therefore increased as a result. That was the basis
      upon which she considered the evidence and  assessed  the  appellant's
      case and  she  made  cogent  findings  in  that  regard.  The  grounds
      mischaracterise the judge's observations on the evidence at  [47]  and
      it is plain that she was not recording any concession on the  part  of
      the  appellant's  representatives  as  to   the   current   level   of
      responsibility of her grandparents, but was simply observing  that  it
      was accepted that they had done a good job looking after her.  I  find
      that nothing material arises out of this.

  12. Likewise, there is no merit in the second ground  and  the  respondent
      properly observed that  there  was  nothing  controversial  about  the
      judge's finding at [41], whereby she simply found that there was  only
      one example given by the sponsor of her making an  important  decision
      in the appellant's life, which she gave in her oral  evidence,  having
      given no examples in her statement. The judge went on to  give  proper
      reasons for her concerns as to the credibility of that example, namely
      the sponsor having chosen the appellant's university, when it was  the
      appellant herself who had chosen her school, at a younger age, and  it
      therefore would  be  more  likely  that  she  would  have  chosen  her
      university herself. In addition, Mr Sparkes accepted the point made by
      Mr  McVeety  that  the  decision  as  to  the  appellant's  choice  of
      university was made after she had reached 18  years  of  age  and  was
      therefore not a relevant matter in considering the question  of  'sole
      responsibility'.

  13. Finally, and contrary to the assertion in the  third  written  ground,
      the judge clearly gave full and  detailed  consideration  to  the  two
      letters produced from the appellant's school counsellor  and  the  two
      letters from her grandparents,  at  [42]  to  [46],  providing  cogent
      reasons for preferring the first letter from the school to the  second
      and for according the weight that she did to that evidence. As for the
      challenge made by Mr Sparkes to the judge's findings about the gap  in
      the remittances from  the  sponsor  and  speculating  about  a  shared
      financial role with  the  appellant's  grandparents,  that  is  not  a
      particularly material  matter  when  considering  that  there  was  no
      dispute as to the grandparents' earlier role. In any  event,  I  agree
      with Mr McVeety, that the judge  was  entitled  to  make  observations
      about the level of remittances and that there  was  no  error  in  her
      approach to the evidence at [38].

  14. In all of the circumstances it seems to me that the  judge's  decision
      is a  sound  and  comprehensive  one  including  a  full  and  careful
      assessment of the evidence and clear and cogent  findings.  I  do  not
      find any material errors of law  requiring  the  decision  to  be  set
      aside. On the evidence before  the  judge,  the  conclusion  that  she
      reached was one which was fully and properly open to her.

DECISION

  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  24 February
2021
