
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20975/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th August 2020                           |On 2nd September 2020         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                        Dipeshkumar krushnakant patel
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions sent on 24 April 2020 indicating  a  provisional
    view that in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
    of Covid-19 and the overriding objective, it would  be  appropriate  in
    this case to determine the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and if so  whether  the
    decision should be set aside without a hearing;  the  parties  did  not
    raise any objections and both made written submissions  on  the  issues
    raised in the appeal.

 2. In circumstances where no objections were  made  to  the  issues  being
    determined without a hearing and where the parties have  made  detailed
    written submissions; it is in the interests of justice  to  proceed  to
    determine the error of law issues on the papers in light of the written
    submissions available and the full appeal file.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on  18  December  2018,  in
    which the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  human
    rights claim, in the context of deportation, dated 4 October  2018  was
    dismissed.

 4. The Appellant is a national of India, born on 2 October 1982, who  last
    entered the United Kingdom in 2010 with entry clearance as a fianc� and
    was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2012.  On 13 March  2017  the
    Appellant  was   convicted   of   doing   an   act   with   intent   to
    prejudice/defraud   HM   Revenue   and   Customs   and   conspired   to
    conceal/disguise/convert/transfer/remove criminal property, further  to
    which he was sentenced to 38 months' imprisonment and  a  decision  was
    made to deport him, with a deportation order made on 1 October 2018.

 5. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    deportation was in the public interest because of the offence committed
    and that he did not meet any of the exceptions to deportation  set  out
    in the Immigration Rules.  In particular, there was no evidence of  the
    Appellant's daughter or  his  relationship  with  her  and  a  lack  of
    evidence about the Appellant's son such that it was not  accepted  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  and  in  any
    event, no evidence that the Appellant's  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh, either remaining in the United Kingdom without him or relocating
    to India with him.  Further, it was not accepted that the Appellant was
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife due to the  lack
    of evidence of cohabitation prior to his imprisonment and in any  event
    the effect of deportation would  not  be  unduly  harsh  on  her.   The
    Appellant did not meet the private life exception  and  there  were  no
    very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  significant  public
    interest in deportation.

 6. Judge Hawden-Beal dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  18
    December 2018 on all grounds.   In  essence,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with
    his wife and two children, all of whom were  British  citizens  and  it
    would be unduly harsh on them to relocate to India with  him.   It  was
    not however accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant's
    wife and children to remain in the United Kingdom without him such that
    he did not meet the family life exception to deportation;  nor  did  he
    meet the private life exception  and  there  were  no  very  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the following  grounds.
    First, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in  failing
    to consider the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  children  under
    section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    Secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    failing to properly consider the Appellant's criminal  and  immigration
    history.  Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law
    in failing to apply the Supreme Court's  decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53.   In
    particular, it was stated that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take
    into account that the Appellant had only been convicted of one offence,
    that he pleaded guilty, that he was a model prisoner who did not pose a
    risk of re-offending; which were all relevant to the balancing exercise
    required.  Further,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  evidence  of
    medical appointments for one of the Appellant's children that  had  not
    been taken into account; nor had the close bond between  the  Appellant
    and his son and that if deported, the family were likely to need  state
    assistance.  In the alternative,  a  number  of  similar  matters  were
    raised, in addition to a good work record and rehabilitation which were
    relevant  to   consideration   of   whether   there   were   compelling
    circumstances beyond the second exception.

 8. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal;  with  permission  ultimately  being
    granted by the Upper Tribunal after Judicial Review proceedings and  in
    light of the High Court decision.  The decision  of  Her  Honour  Judge
    Karen Walden-Smith granting permission is available on  the  file,  but
    the Appellant's grounds of application for Judicial Review are not.  It
    appears from the grant of permission that it  was  considered  arguable
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  by  considering  the  Appellant's
    criminality when considering the unduly harsh test and that one of  the
    grounds relating to human rights was not pleaded in the application for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Following  the  grant  of
    permission there was no request for  an  oral  hearing  such  that  the
    initial decision refusing permission to appeal was quashed,  permission
    then being granted by the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal in light
    of the High Court decision.

 9. An application was made by the Appellant on 19 March  2020  under  Rule
    15(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  to  adduce  an
    Independent Social Worker's report dated 5 March 2020 on the basis that
    this further evidence goes to  the  heart  of  the  case  and  was  not
    available previously because of the limited time before the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  It is not suggested that this evidence  is  relevant
    to the initial consideration by the Upper Tribunal of whether the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law and if so, whether the  decision  should  be
    set aside and it self-evidently would be relevant only to any re-making
    of the decision under appeal  if  an  error  of  law  was  found  which
    required the decision to be set aside.  This further evidence  has  not
    therefore been admitted at  this  initial  stage  and  not  taken  into
    account for the purposes of the present decision.

10. Pursuant to the directions issued on 24 April 2020, written submissions
    were made on behalf of the Appellant on 5 May  2020.   The  submissions
    were that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in  law  in  having
    regard to the Appellant's criminality  when  considering  the  test  of
    unduly harsh, contrary to the Supreme Court decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    which was handed down prior to the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   In
    the written submissions it was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that
    the grounds of appeal advanced to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal, whilst referring to KO (Nigeria) could have been pleaded more
    precisely but in any event, it  was  a  Robinson  obvious  point.   The
    Appellant submits that the decision should be set aside and  a  resumed
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal to consider the outstanding issue of
    whether it would be unduly harsh on the Appellant's wife  and  children
    to remain in the United Kingdom without him, in particular as the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision contains no analysis  of  the  effect  on  the
    children of remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  him.   It  is
    suggested that the First-tier Tribunal did not consider this because it
    was of no  weight  when  balanced  against  the  Appellant's  offending
    behaviour.

11. Pursuant to the directions issued on 24 April 2020, written submissions
    were made on behalf of the Respondent on 28 July 2020.  The  Respondent
    opposes the appeal on the basis that although the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has applied the decision in MM which was disapproved of by the  Supreme
    Court in KO (Nigeria), the error  was  not  material  in  this  appeal.
    First, the Respondent submits that it is not immediately clear that the
    First-tier Tribunal took into account the severity of  the  Appellant's
    offending in the findings made in relation to the second  exception  to
    deportation.  Secondly, in any event, the First-tier Tribunal  referred
    to the correct guidance in MK, as approved in KO (Nigeria)  as  to  the
    meaning of unduly harsh and found, on the evidence before it, that  the
    difficulties for the family if the Appellant were to be  deported  were
    no more than would  be  experienced  by  any  other  family  who  faced
    deportation of an adult parent, including likely financial problems and
    difficulties with the Appellant's wife's working pattern; with distress
    to family members.  However, these  were  all  matters  which  are  the
    expected consequences of deportation and were not matters  which  could
    meet the high threshold for being unduly  harsh.   Less  still  on  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal could the  Appellant  establish
    very compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.  On these facts, the Appellant's appeal  would  inevitably
    by dismissed.

Findings and reasons

 1. It appears from the written submissions made on behalf of the Appellant
    that the only ground of appeal  now  pursued  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  taking  into  account   the   Appellant's
    criminality when considering whether the impact of deportation  on  his
    wife and children would be unduly harsh to remain in the United Kingdom
    without him (having already found their relocation to  India  would  be
    unduly harsh).  Further, it is accepted  that  this  ground  of  appeal
    could have been more clearly pleaded initially but that the  point  was
    in any event Robinson obvious.

 2. The original grounds of appeal in this case  were  poorly  pleaded  and
    although reference was made to KO (Nigeria) it  was  apparently  on  an
    incorrect application of that authority that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in failing to take enough about the Appellant's conviction
    into account when considering whether deportation would be unduly harsh
    by failing to take  into  account  positives  about  his  criminal  and
    immigration history, including that it was a single offence to which he
    pleaded guilty and that there was no risk of reoffending.  The  grounds
    of appeal as originally drafted were themselves  also  on  a  misplaced
    application  of  KO  (Nigeria).   However,  contrary  to  the   written
    submissions made most recently, the First-tier Tribunal's attention was
    specifically drawn to the Supreme Court decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  as
    confirmed in paragraph 22 of the decision and I agree  that  it  was  a
    Robinson obvious point that the First-tier Tribunal failed to apply  it
    - even if not obvious or clear to the author  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 3. There is as such, no dispute between the parties  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in relying expressly on the case of MM and  others  that
    the Appellant's  criminal  and  immigration  history  was  relevant  to
    whether the impact of deportation would be unduly harsh, as set out  in
    paragraph 38 of the  decision  expressly.   Although  the  Respondent's
    submission that it is not clear whether this was actually done  on  the
    facts has some force given there is no explanation as to what weight is
    given or how this has been  considered;  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    expressly state that there is a great public interest in deporting  the
    Appellant to India and that regard had been had to case  law  referring
    to the same which had not been approved by the Supreme Court.

 4. The issue between the parties in this appeal is whether the  error  now
    more specifically identified was material to the outcome of the appeal.
     The Appellant's submission is that it was because in effect, the First-
    tier Tribunal have made no express findings on the  best  interests  of
    the children or the impact on them of the  Appellant's  deportation  if
    they remained in the  United  Kingdom  and,  in  combination  with  not
    considering this in isolation  without  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    immigration and criminal history, there have been no lawful findings on
    whether the Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on his family
    members.  The  Respondent's  submission  is  that  on  the  facts,  the
    Appellant had not established that the impact on his wife and  children
    could meet the high threshold of being unduly harsh.

 5. The Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that he met the
    family life  exception  to  deportation  in  that  the  effect  of  his
    deportation on his wife and children, whether they relocated  to  India
    with him or remained in the United Kingdom without him would be  unduly
    harsh.  The evidence however focused on the reasons why the Appellant's
    wife and children could not relocate to India (on the  basis  primarily
    of their British citizenship and the eldest child's health  conditions)
    rather than on the impact on them of remaining in the United Kingdom.

 6. In particular, the skeleton argument on behalf of  the  Appellant  went
    little further than a bare assertion  of  it  being  unduly  harsh  and
    identified  only  that  the  family  had   a   joint   mortgage,   were
    interdependent on each other and the Appellant plays an active role  as
    a parent and within the family and that there was no other  support  in
    the United Kingdom.  These were not matters which on any rational  view
    could meet the high threshold for establishing that  deportation  would
    be unduly harsh (the test for which was correctly set out in  paragraph
    36 of the First-tier Tribunal decision, as expressly  endorsed  by  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)).

 7. As to the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, the written evidence
    of the Appellant and his wife did not address the issue in  any  detail
    and the oral evidence added  little  of  substance  either.   The  oral
    evidence which was given was as to the financial impact and  impact  on
    the Appellant's wife's working pattern, is recorded in the decision and
    goes no further than the normal impact on any family  where  a  working
    parent is deported.  These factors  are  all  expressly  considered  in
    paragraph 37  of  the  decision  just  after  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    correctly set out the meaning of unduly harsh.  Further, at the end  of
    paragraph  38,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found   that   the   British
    nationality of the Appellant's family and lengthy separation if  he  is
    deported is not  without  more  sufficient  to  meet  an  exception  to
    deportation  or  provide  enough  to  weigh  in  the  balance   against
    deportation and on the facts in this case, found that there was nothing
    more identified.

 8. The grounds  of  appeal  and  written  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant also fail to identify what on the facts before the First-tier
    Tribunal, could possibly establish that the impact of  the  Appellant's
    deportation on his wife and children if they  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom would be unduly harsh.  Although it can readily be inferred  in
    most cases that the best interests of British national children are  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with both parents; there was  no  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal specifically as to the impact on  either
    of the children of remaining in the United  Kingdom  if  the  Appellant
    were deported.

 9. On the very limited evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    whether or not the Appellant's criminal  and  immigration  history  was
    taken into account, there simply was no evidence of anything beyond the
    normal impact of deportation and separation of a working parent on  the
    remaining family; such that the Appellant could not, on  the  evidence,
    establish that his deportation would be unduly harsh  on  his  wife  or
    children if they remained in the United  Kingdom.   That  is  the  only
    conclusion that could be  reached  on  this  point  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal whether or not it erred in law as identified above.

10.  Similarly,  the  Appellant  has  not  identified  through  submissions
    anything in the evidence which  could,  individually  or  cumulatively,
    amount to very compelling circumstances  to  outweigh  the  significant
    public interest in deporting him as a foreign criminal.  The fact  that
    it was a single offence without risk of reoffending,  that  he  pleaded
    guilty and was a model prisoner; the fact that he has a  strong  family
    life in the United Kingdom, with family members who would be  adversely
    affected by  his  deportation  (which  is  the  normal  consequence  of
    deportation) and the lack of any adverse factors in section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  could  not  on  any  view
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.  On  the  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant's appeal  could  not  have  been
    allowed on this basis either.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                                Date          28th  August
    2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
