
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20619/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2019                  |On 8 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     w a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Reynolds, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although  the  Entry  Clearance  officer  is  the  appellant  in  these
    proceedings, it is convenient to continue to refer to  the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 12  September  2005.  An
    application was made on his behalf for entry clearance  for  settlement
    as the child of a person settled in the UK, pursuant to  paragraph  297
    of the Immigration Rules.  In a decision dated  5  September  2018  the
    respondent refused the application.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against that decision
    and his appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brewer  at  a
    hearing on 14 August 2019 which resulted in the appeal  being  allowed.
    Permission to appeal the decision of Judge Brewer was granted and  thus
    the appeal came before me.

    Judge Brewer's decision

 4. The sole issue in the appeal before  Judge  Brewer  was  that  of  sole
    responsibility under paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Rules.

 5. To summarise, Judge Brewer set out material background facts, and  gave
    a  self-direction  on  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  which  is
    unimpeachable.  He referred at  [9]  to  the  oral  evidence  from  the
    sponsor, SL, the appellant's mother, and to the  parties'  submissions,
    including a skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant.

 6. In the light  of  the  way  that  the  sponsor  gave  evidence  and  in
    particular the difficulty she had in understanding  even  the  simplest
    questions, and difficulty in formulating coherent responses,  his  view
    was that she struggled to follow the proceedings. Although there was no
    medical evidence to  support  the  assertion  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant to the effect that she was suffering  from  Down's  Syndrome,
    Judge Brewer considered it appropriate to treat  her  as  a  vulnerable
    witness and to assess her evidence accordingly.

 7. In his summary of the evidence Judge Brewer  referred  to  the  sponsor
    having left Nigeria in 2008 and come to the  UK  to  study.   There  is
    reference to the evidence that the appellant was left in  the  care  of
    his great-grandparents and that, at the time of the hearing before him,
    only the appellant's great-grandmother survived and she was in her 80s.
     The evidence was that the appellant's father left before the appellant
    was born and had never had any involvement  in  the  appellant's  life.
    That evidence reflected an issue that arose in the proceedings in terms
    of the whereabouts of the appellant's  father,  echoed  in  the  appeal
    advanced before me.

 8. The sponsor's evidence was that from 2012  she  visited  Nigeria  every
    year and regularly sent money to a relative of the  appellant's  father
    who passed it on to the appellant's great-grandmother to pay for  rent,
    food, school fees and the appellant's needs.   The  sponsor's  evidence
    was that she chose the school which  the  appellant  attended,  decided
    what food and  clothes  were  brought,  and  "in  essence  all  of  the
    decisions in his life".  The sponsor's evidence was that she has school
    records and details of regular and frequent contact between her and the
    appellant.

 9. Judge Brewer concluded that much  of  the  evidence  was  supported  by
    documents in the bundle.  He pointed out that there were no records  of
    decisions that the  sponsor  says  that  she  made  but  that  was  not
    surprising given the nature of those decisions.   He  referred  to  one
    wrinkle, as it  were,  in  the  evidence  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, revealed at page 178 of the bundle.  That shows on a  school
    record the name "Mr and Mrs [A]", [A] being the  family  name  and  the
    name of the appellant's father.  Judge Brewer asked for an  explanation
    from the sponsor which the sponsor was unable to provide.

10. Nevertheless, Judge Brewer concluded that given the very clear evidence
    by the sponsor and her mother that the appellant's father had never had
    any  relationship  with  the  appellant  and  although  there  was   no
    explanation for what appeared on page 178,  he  accepted  the  evidence
    that the appellant's father had not, and does not, have any involvement
    in the appellant's life.  He said that "In general I found the  sponsor
    and her mother to be credible witnesses and I accept their evidence".

11. Judge Brewer then went on to deal with certain issues that arose in the
    respondent's decision and concluded that the reasons given for refusing
    the application were not sustainable.

12. At [15] he said that he had detailed a lot of  the  sponsor's  evidence
    because the case turned on what the sponsor said  about  the  issue  of
    sole  responsibility.  There  then  followed  a  detailed  analysis  of
    relevant authority on the issue of sole responsibility.   No  complaint
    is made on behalf of the respondent in terms of the legal  analysis  of
    the relevant case law.

13. Judge Brewer went on to find from [22] as follows. Given the age of the
    appellant's great-grandmother and the  age  of  the  appellant  it  was
    highly likely, and he accepted as a fact, that the sponsor is the  sole
    provider of funds for the accommodation and other needs  for  both  the
    great-grandmother and that of the appellant.   He  reiterated  that  he
    accepted the sponsor's evidence as to  her  involvement  in  her  son's
    upbringing and although there had not been  many  important  decisions,
    those that there were had been  made  by  the  sponsor.   Dealing  with
    issues arising in the decision letter,  he  rejected  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusing the application. He concluded that the sponsor has
    had, and continues to have, sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing.

14. He then turned to consider the  appeal  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

15. The respondent's ground 1 contends that Judge Brewer was wrong to  find
    that the sponsor was to be treated as a vulnerable witness based on the
    unsubstantiated suggestion that she has Down's Syndrome.  It is  argued
    that he had failed to give adequate reasons for  determining  that  the
    sponsor was a vulnerable witness.

16. In relation to ground 2, it is said that whilst Judge Brewer considered
    the  submissions  of  the  appellant's  representative,  he  completely
    disregarded key submissions that were made on behalf of the  respondent
    to the effect that the sponsor and the witnesses were being led  during
    examination-in-chief. The Presenting Officer's ("PO's") minute or  note
    of the hearing before Judge Brewer was referred to. It is  argued  that
    there  is  no  recognition  of  those  submissions  in  Judge  Brewer's
    decision. That is said to tie in with what is said  to  have  been  the
    wholly inadequate reasoning regarding the appellant being a  vulnerable
    witness.

17. Ground 3 contends that the sponsor was unable to provide an explanation
    as to why the evidence showed that the appellant's father was  involved
    in the appellant's life. That is a reference  to  the  school  document
    which refers to Mr and Mrs [A].  It is argued that Judge Brewer  merely
    stated that he preferred the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  but  did  not
    address the fact that the evidence from the school was  not  undermined
    in any way.

18. As regards the PO's note which is said to have  been  attached  to  the
    grounds, Mr Reynolds informed me that it was not in  fact  attached  to
    the grounds. I accept that  it  was  not  provided  to  him  at  least,
    although it is not possible to say  whether  or  not  it  was  actually
    attached to the grounds that were sent to the solicitors. However, that
    is not determinative of the issue that needs to be resolved in terms of
    the submissions that were made to Judge Brewer.

19. In submissions on behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  the
    grounds.  It was submitted that Judge Brewer did not deal at  all  with
    the issue of contact with someone related to the appellant's father and
    the extent to which that might indicate that there was in fact  a  real
    issue arising in terms of whether the appellant's father is indeed  'on
    the scene'.  It was submitted that there were no documents of any value
    showing that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellant  and
    that the absence of the appellant's father  was  not  adequately  dealt
    with by Judge Brewer.

20. The issue in relation to the sponsor's vulnerability and  the  question
    of whether or not Judge Brewer was right to find that she was suffering
    from Down's Syndrome was reiterated. It was submitted that this  was  a
    matter that arose right at the end  of  the  hearing  with  no  medical
    evidence having been provided and no explanation  as  to  how  it  came
    about.   It  was  submitted   that   this   affected   Judge   Brewer's
    consideration of the case.

21. For his part, Mr Reynolds submitted, in summary, that looking at  Judge
    Brewer's decision overall, it could not be faulted.

22. In relation to the PO's note, its  accuracy  is  called  into  question
    because it refers to a school receipt for payment of fees with Mr [A]'s
    name on it.  However, none of the payment  receipts  has  his  father's
    name on it.  They only have the  appellant's  name.  That  affects  the
    credence that one can attach to the PO's note, it was submitted.  I was
    referred to the appellant's birth certificate where  the  name  of  the
    appellant's father is given, supporting the contention that  that  name
    does not appear on the school receipts.

23. It was submitted that the evidence of the sponsor and  the  appellant's
    grandmother (who  both  attended  the  hearing  before  me  today)  was
    assessed by Judge Brewer and he was entitled to come to the  conclusion
    he did in terms of accepting their evidence.

24. It was further submitted on behalf of the appellant that although there
    was said to be contact with a relative of the appellant's father, there
    was no indication that the appellant's father himself had  any  contact
    with the appellant or with  anyone  else.   The  judge  considered  the
    school report and the reference to Mr and Mrs [A]. He noted that  there
    was no explanation for that matter but  was  nevertheless  entitled  to
    find  that  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses  had   established   sole
    responsibility.  The witnesses corroborated each  other,  and  although
    there was what was described by Mr Reynolds as a  slight  'fly  in  the
    ointment' in the assertion on behalf of the respondent that  they  were
    being led, Judge Brewer assessed the evidence overall.

25. It was submitted in relation ground 1 in terms of  the  sponsor  having
    been treated as a vulnerable witness, that  although  it  was  asserted
    that she suffered from Down's Syndrome, in fact Judge  Brewer  did  not
    come to that conclusion in response to the submission  that  was  made.
    He simply found that she was a vulnerable witness and he  was  entitled
    to come to that conclusion.

26. It was accepted that there is no note from the  advocate  who  appeared
    for the appellant before the FtT dealing with the matter raised in  the
    grounds in  relation  to  the  respondent's  submissions  before  Judge
    Brewer, but again it was said that the PO's note was not provided  with
    the grounds.

27. In reply, Mr Tufan raised a matter that does not  feature  directly  in
    Judge  Brewer's  decision  in  relation  to  bank  statements.  It  was
    submitted that certain bank statements appear to show a name  which  is
    similar to, if not the  same  as,  the  appellant's  father's,  showing
    remittances to that person.  It was submitted that that  was  a  matter
    that was unexplained on the part of the appellant.

28. Because that was a new point raised before me, Mr  Reynolds  was  given
    the opportunity to deal with it.  He  reiterated  that  it  was  a  new
    point. For my part I note that this does not appear  to  have  been  an
    issue that was canvassed before Judge Brewer.

    Assessment

29. After  hearing  the  parties'  submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  was
    satisfied that there was an error of law in Judge Brewer's decision.  I
    come to that conclusion for these reasons.  The crucial  issue  in  the
    appeal was the issue  of  sole  responsibility.   For  the  most  part,
    although not exclusively, the assessment of that issue depended on  the
    credibility of witnesses called on behalf of the appellant, namely  his
    mother and his grandmother.  Judge  Brewer  concluded  that  they  were
    credible witnesses.

30. I am satisfied that it was part of the case for the respondent that the
    evidence given by those witnesses was tainted because  of  the  way  in
    which their evidence was given.  The note provided by the PO is to  the
    effect that submissions were made that the sponsor and her mother  were
    being led whilst giving evidence.  That contention is reflected in part
    in Judge Brewer's manuscript record of proceedings which I read to  the
    parties. The note from the PO records that it was submitted  on  behalf
    of the respondent that the witnesses were not credible, that they  were
    led, and that little weight should be given to their evidence.

31. That argument on behalf of the respondent does not feature  at  all  in
    Judge Brewer's decision.  It was submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
    that the  fact  that  Judge  Brewer  recorded  the  submission  in  his
    manuscript note means that he was  cognisant  of  it.  However,  in  my
    judgement  that  does  not  answer  the  complaint  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent. It is encumbent on a judge to deal with a material argument
    advanced on behalf of a party and to explain why, if  the  argument  is
    rejected, why it is rejected. The losing party is entitled to know  why
    they have lost. One cannot tell from Judge Brewer's  decision  in  this
    case what he made of the argument that the witnesses were led and  that
    the credibility of their evidence was thereby affected.

32. Even if I accept that the PO's note was not provided with  the  grounds
    of appeal, there does not appear  to  have  been  any  reason  why  the
    advocate on behalf of the appellant before Judge Brewer could not  have
    been asked to provide a response to what is asserted  in  the  grounds,
    with a statement or note  of  her  own  explaining  her  view  of  what
    transpired at the hearing in term of the submissions or the evidence of
    the witnesses. Having said that, the absence of such response on behalf
    of the appellant is not determinative because the information provided,
    as I have indicated, does suggest that the submission was made that the
    witnesses were led and that that affected their credibility.

33. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in what  is  argued  in  the
    grounds in terms of the suggestion that Judge Brewer was wrong to  find
    that the sponsor was a vulnerable  witness.   He  did  not  accept  the
    contention that she was suffering from Down's  Syndrome.  In  addition,
    notwithstanding the absence of medical evidence  as  to  any  condition
    that she may or may not be suffering from, Judge Brewer was entitled to
    conclude as he did in relation to her evidence for the reasons that  he
    gave, namely in terms of what  he  observed  about  her  difficulty  in
    understanding the simplest of questions  and  in  formulating  coherent
    responses.

34. Nevertheless, the issue of the sponsor having been assessed as being  a
    vulnerable witness does relate to the  contention  that  the  witnesses
    were (improperly) led. It seems to me that where a witness  appears  to
    have difficulty answering questions it is important that answers not be
    suggested to the witness so as to avoid the complaint that the evidence
    is not the witness's own.

35. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that Judge's Brewer's decision  is
    marred by error of law in his assessment of the  credibility  of  those
    witnesses.  That error of law is such as to require the decision to  be
    set aside.

36. Having canvassed  the  matter  with  the  parties,  I  agree  that  the
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  at  which  the  credibility  of  those
    witnesses must be reassessed.  In coming to that conclusion I have  had
    regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement.

37. Accordingly, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing de novo before a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brewer with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 2/01/2020


