
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/20309/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th November 2019                          |On 20th November 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Emmanuel [B]


                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    Mr J Adebayo, Legal Representative of Syeds

                    Law Care Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a citizen of Ghana born on 23rd December 1972.  On  2nd
    July 2018 he applied for leave to remain under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and/or Article 8 on the basis of his family life with his partner [BA],
    a citizen of Ghana.  On 2nd July  2018  his  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  with  a  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds on the basis of his relationship with his  partner's
    child, who it is said is a British citizen aged 2 and who  is  referred
    to in the correspondence as IOJ.

2.   The application met with a refusal on 28th September 2018 on the  basis
    that the claimant was an overstayer having been encountered as such  on
    29th May 2018.  It is not accepted that he had been in  a  relationship
    for the  claimed  time  nor  that  that  relationship  was  genuine  or
    subsisting.  It  was  not  found  that  there  were   any   exceptional
    circumstances which would not permit family life  to  be  continued  in
    Ghana.  Consideration was also given to GEN  3.2  of  Appendix  FM.  No
    compassionate factors were found.

3.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore on 25th February 2019.  Both  he
    and his partner gave evidence before  the  Tribunal  and  a  bundle  of
    documents some 21 folios was presented.

4.   The partner already had a child born on 11th February 2017, that  being
    IOJ.  The father of that child was [OC] born in Portugal.  It  was  the
    evidence of Ms [A] that she had had nothing to do  with  him  since  or
    indeed prior to the birth but essentially it was the claimant  who  had
    assumed parental responsibility for her.   It  was  claimed  that  that
    child was a British national child and a photocopy of  a  passport  was
    presented.  Subsequently both  the  claimant  and  his  partner  had  a
    further child born on 25th January 2019 and  a  birth  certificate  was
    produced.

5.   It was the case as presented by the claimant to the Judge that  he  had
    lived with his partner for more than two years, that  he  is  the  main
    carer of IOJ whilst her mother is at work.  He said that IOJ's  natural
    father did not see her and that he had met him only once.

6.   Ms [A] gave evidence briefly to say that she was  currently  making  an
    application to formalise her immigration status and that IOJ's  natural
    father played no part in her or her daughter's life.

7.   The Judge accepted the credibility of what was said and  made  findings
    accordingly. The Judge  found  that  IOJ  was  a  qualified  child  and
    considered that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
    the United Kingdom and therefore in all the circumstances and  applying
    Section 117B(6) that the appeal should be allowed.

8.   The  Secretary  of  State  seeks  with  permission  to  challenge  that
    decision on the basis  that  deception  had  been  practised  and  that
    material circumstances had not been disclosed  by  the  parties,  which
    would have been material to a proper and fair outcome of the hearing.

9.   Permission to challenge the decision was granted.

10.  The difficulty, which  faced  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  the
    hearing was that there was no representative of the Secretary of  State
    in attendance and therefore essentially the Judge was relying upon what
    was said by the claimant and his partner.  What had been  presented  to
    the Judge in substance was that the natural father of  IOJ  effectively
    had nothing to do with his daughter or indeed with  Ms  [A]  since  the
    birth of the child on 11th February 2017.

11.  Further it was the clear suggestion that for two  years  prior  to  the
    hearing the relationship as between the claimant and Ms  [A]  had  been
    firmly established.

12.  What appeared, however, from the enquiries was that Ms [A] was  in  the
    process of bringing an appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department of  16th
    March  2018.   That  appeal  EA/02678/2018  is  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and is being actively pursued by Ms [A] with a hearing date in
    February 2020.

13.  Such an appeal was based upon an  application  made  on  2nd  September
    2017 for permanent residence as the direct  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national  namely  [OC].   Reliance  was  placed   upon   the   marriage
    certificate.  It was contended that the marriage between Ms [A] and  Mr
    [C] was both genuine and subsisting and that she fell to be granted the
    residence card.  Both Mr [C] and Ms [A] were called  for  interview  on
    8th January 2018 at the Home Office  in  Liverpool  and  attended.  The
    refusal decision sets out very fully the questions that were asked  and
    the answers which were given. This was at a time when the claimant  and
    Ms [A]  were  telling  the  Tribunal  that  they  are  in  a  committed
    relationship, whereas she is presenting  to  the  Home  Office  in  the
    interview that she is in a subsisting  and  genuine  relationship  with
    another.  It was put forward at that interview that she and Mr [C] were
    living apart due to work commitments and although they  were  separated
    they were trying to fix the relationship.  Mr  [C]  indicated  that  he
    worked in Yarmouth  and  visits  his  wife  and  child  weekly  at  the
    matrimonial home.  Ms [A]  indicated  that  they  were  going  back  to
    Wolverhampton where she lives and spoke of the various  visits  to  her
    and the child that Mr [C] has made. It is unnecessary to delve into any
    detail in the refusal decision as it analyses  the  replies  that  were
    made by both as to pregnancy, birth of the child, when the sponsor sees
    the child, the name of the child, the proxy marriage and so-forth.

14.  It was the reasoned conclusion at the end of the interview  that  there
    were so many discrepancies that both parties were unreliable  and  that
    the relationship was not as claimed but was a bogus or  a  relationship
    designed to mislead the immigration authorities.

15.  In terms of the answers given by Mr [C] to  the  marriage  certificate,
    such led the decisionmaker to the conclusion that  there  had  been  no
    valid marriage at all.

16.  Thus the application made by Ms [A] was refused  and  is  significantly
    the subject of her continuing appeal.  It is not entirely clear on what
    basis she  seeks  to  maintain  the  truthfulness  of  her  answers  in
    interview of 8th January 2018 but it is  entirely  clear  that  in  her
    application,  she was seeking to mislead  the  authorities  as  to  the
    reality of  her  relationship  with  Mr  [C].   Such  calls  into  mind
    fundamentally her credibility and her honesty.  As I have indicated she
    was presenting with the claimant to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that
    they are in a committed relationship and yet she is seeking to  present
    to a different Tribunal that, at the same time, she was in a  committed
    relationship with another such as to constitute a proper ground  to  be
    granted  permanent  residence.   The  application  was  not  to   claim
    preserved rights from a previous  relationship  but  rather  presenting
    that that relationship was as of 2nd September 2018 continuing  and  in
    existence.

17.  Were it indeed to  be  found  that  the  sponsor  and  partner  of  the
    Claimant and Mr [C] had entered into a false marriage or no marriage at
    all in order to deceive the authorities as to her  immigration  status,
    such would have  a number of consequences in the consideration  of  the
    evidence that has been presented on behalf  of  the  claimant  in  this
    case.  Poor copies and incomplete copies of the reported  divorce  from
    Mr [C] have been presented as  set  out  on  pages  12  to  14  of  the
    claimant's bundle.  It purports to show a divorce of the  13th  day  of
    October 2018.  The genuineness of that document clearly is called  into
    question,  if  indeed  the  genuineness  of   the   original   marriage
    certificate as presented to the immigration authorities  was  bogus  or
    misleading.

18.  Indeed if Ms [A] and Mr [C]  were  not  married  or  in  any  realistic
    relationship calls into question how it is that their daughter  attains
    British citizenship or should retain it.

19.  It is submitted on behalf of the claimant  that  whatever  may  be  the
    criticisms attached to his partner, such  does  not  detract  from  the
    genuineness of his relationship with her and with the  children.   That
    may or may not be correct but I  do  not  find  it  credible  that  the
    claimant would have been unaware of the basis upon  which  his  partner
    was seeking to gain status in the United Kingdom in the  way  that  she
    has.  It is perhaps significant that in his own brief witness statement
    there is absolutely no mention of any relationship  with  Mr  [C],  not
    withstanding the clear applications that were made by his partner  that
    there were.

20.  I have no hesitation in finding that the evidence as presented  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was at worst deceptive and at best misleading
    and incomplete so as to render any assessment as to credibility by  the
    Judge as being fundamentally flawed.  I do not suggest for  one  moment
    the Judge has fallen into error in the approach  taken  to  credibility
    but that the Tribunal and the Judge had been induced to  make  findings
    upon misleading or accurate or incomplete information  and  that   must
    call into question the safety of the findings that were made.

21.  It is apparent that if the allegations that are  made  in  the  refusal
    letter are substantiated by a Tribunal,  such  greatly  undermines  the
    credibility of the claimant  and  his  partner  and  provide  important
    factors  to be taken in consideration as to whether they should stay or
    leave the United Kingdom.  It calls into  question  also  what  is  the
    correct status of the daughter and of her protected rights.

22.  In all the circumstances the appeal by the Secretary of  State  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is allowed such that the decision is  set  aside  to  be
    remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

23.  Clearly given the relationship between this appeal and EA/02678/2018  I
    direct that they should be considered by the Tribunal  either  together
    or subsequently as the First-tier Tribunal best determine.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  to  be  remade.
Directions for so doing to be issued by the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 15 Nov 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


