
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20553/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th November 2019                   |On 25th November 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    'MP'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

As the appellant is a minor, unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellant:              Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the respondent:             The appellant was represented by his
father, 'PP'



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. These are the written record of the decision which was  given  orally  at
   the end of the hearing on 18th November 2019.  This is an appeal  by  the
   appellant, who was the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal and to avoid
   confusion, will be  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
   remainder of  these  reasons.  The  respondent  was  correspondingly  the
   appellant in the First-tier Tribunal and  will  be  referred  to  as  the
   'claimant,' as the party claiming a breach of his rights under article  8
   of the European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').  His parents' linked
   appeals have been deemed abandoned as one  has  been  granted  indefinite
   leave to remain and  the  other,  discretionary  leave  to  remain.   The
   brevity of these reasons  reflects  the  narrowness  of  the  issues  and
   concessions made.

2. This was an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  the  decision  of
   Judge Housego (the 'FtT').  His decision was  promulgated  on  30th  July
   2019 and it determined the Claimant's appeal for leave to remain  in  the
   United Kingdom ('UK') based on his human rights, specifically the  rights
   to a family and private life.   The  FtT  considered,  in  particular  by
   reference to the appellant, whether it would be reasonable to expect  him
   to leave the UK.  He concluded that the  appeal  should  be  allowed.  In
   doing so he noted, paragraph [65]:-

         "I find that the third appellant's best interests are in favour  of
         his remaining in the UK, but not strongly  so.   It  would  not  be
         unreasonable for the third appellant to return to India as a matter
         of practicality.  He is an Indian citizen and that has some  weight
         too".

   Therefore, it was found that it would not be unreasonable to  expect  the
   Claimant to leave the UK.  However, at paragraphs [74] to [76],  the  FtT
   went on to conclude that it would not  be  proportionate  to  expect  the
   Claimant to leave the UK.

3. In grounds that were lodged on 8 August  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State
   that the FtT's decision was implicitly contradictory, finding on the  one
   hand that it was reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK  with
   his parents, but on the other, it was  not  proportionate.   Mr  Whitwell
   also developed points on other errors in  the  FtT's  decision  which  he
   regarded as what are termed 'Robinson' obvious points, although  for  the
   purpose of simplicity in this appeal I do not recite those  in  full  for
   the purposes of this decision.  Nevertheless, I am satisfied that on  the
   basis of the one issue identified in the grounds that the FtT's reasoning
   about the proportionality of the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
   leave to remain failed to explain why,  if  it  would  be  reasonable  to
   expect  the  Claimant  to  leave  the  UK,  it  would   nevertheless   be
   proportionate.  However, in setting aside the FtT's decision, I  preserve
   the finding at paragraph [75] that it is in the Claimant's best interests
   to remain in the UK.







Remaking the Decision

4. For the purposes  of  remaking  the  FtT's  decision,  I  considered  the
   Claimant's current circumstances. The Claimant's mother  had,  since  the
   FtT's decision, been granted indefinite leave to  remain  on  6th  August
   2019.  His father had been granted discretionary leave to remain on  16th
   November 2019.

5. In light of developments, Mr Whitwell expressly  conceded  that  that  it
   would not be reasonable, for the  purposes  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to expect  the  Claimant  to
   leave the UK, and Mr Whitwell also conceded therefore that the Claimant's
   appeal should be allowed.  In  light  of  Mr  Whitwell's  concessions,  I
   remake the Claimant's appeal by deciding that his  removal  from  the  UK
   would breach his rights under article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

6. The Claimant's appeal on human rights grounds is upheld.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  21 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

On the basis that the Claimant's appeal  only  succeeded  because  of  later
developments, I make no order as to costs.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  21 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



