
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20292/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 8 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Zahid Al Mahmud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
                    Howard Kennedy LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Barlow  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 1 February 2018 allowed the appeal of Mr Zahid Al Mahmud
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 12 August 2016  to
    refuse his application for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer  to  him  as  the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier. Similarly I will refer  to  Mr  Zahid  Al
    Mahmud as the appellant as he was the appellant before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   The appellant arrived in Britain on 8 November 2005 and then  had  made
    various applications for leave to remain  as  a  student,  leave  being
    granted in that capacity until an application made in January 2010  was
    refused.  That decision was successfully appealed.  On 15 November 2012
    he  made  an  application  for  an  extension  of  stay  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) That application  was  refused  and  appealed  and  then
    remitted to the Secretary of State for a further decision on  24  March
    2014.  While that application was outstanding  the  appellant  made  an
    application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence.  That was refused in February 2016.  After  judicial  review
    proceedings the decision was  withdrawn,  but  a  further  decision  to
    refuse was then made on 12 August 2016 which is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.  The decision was based on the  conclusion  of  the  respondent
    that the appellant could not meet the suitability  requirements  as  it
    was alleged that he had used a proxy to take an English  language  test
    and therefore used deception in his application.   The  respondent  had
    also alleged that documents submitted from Brac Bank were not genuine.

4.   The judge, although he accepted that the appellant had  not  discharged
    the burden of proof with regard to  the  documentation  from  the  Brac
    Bank, did, however, consider that the Secretary of State was  wrong  to
    find that the appellant was not a suitable applicant on the basis  that
    he had submitted a false certificate. The judge properly considered the
    evidence and found that the  Secretary  of  State  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof upon her and therefore placed the burden  of  proof  on
    the appellant to produce a cogent reason that he had attended the  test
    centre.  The judge accepted  the  appellant's  arguments  that  he  had
    attended the relevant test centre and had himself taken  the  test  and
    concluded that he that the certificate produced was genuine.

5.   The judge set out his findings and reasons in paragraphs 35 onwards  of
    the determination  and  properly  noted  the  evidence  supporting  the
    assertions of the Secretary of State which also included  enquiry  into
    the London College of Media and Technology which  showed  that  in  the
    period May 2012 to March 2013, 43 of the tests taken at that centre had
    been identified as invalid and it was stated that that showed  that  57
    of the tests had been identified as not being invalid.  The judge  said
    that the appellant had with some difficulty obtained the relevant voice
    recording which ETS stated was from the appellant's test and noted that
    it was accepted by both parties that  the  recording  was  not  of  the
    appellant.  The judge took the view that there  was  evidence  of  poor
    systems at ETS which would mean that the appellant's recording was  not
    necessarily the one that was produced by  ETS.   The  judge  took  into
    account the appellant's detailed description of the tests he had sat in
    2012  and  furthermore  noted  that  the  respondent's  officer,   when
    interviewing the appellant, had described him as relaxed  and  that  he
    had answered all questions in a fluent manner with a high  standard  of
    English.  The judge noted the appellant's qualifications which included
    a degree  in  dental  surgery  from  the  University  of  Dacca  and  a
    certificate in intensive English studies from Guildhall  College  dated
    18 May 2017 and IELTS tests in July 2007 and May 2009.

6.   The  judge  also  noted  a  postgraduate  diploma  in  dental  clinical
    sciences from the University of London dated  1  November  2009  and  a
    postgraduate certificate in public health  and  health  promotion  from
    London Southbank University dated 13 September 2012 as well as an entry
    level certificate in ESO International (speaking and listening)  (entry
    3) CRF level B1.1 in February 2016.  The  judge  concluded  that  these
    showed a  well-educated  person  who  is  developing  his  professional
    qualifications. She stated that his tests in July 2007 and May 2009 had
    not been challenged and that by 2012 he would in the normal  course  of
    living in Britain be expected to have  improved  his  English  language
    abilities.

 7.   The judge  also  noted  numerous  letters  of  support  and  that  the
    appellant had been working as a locum dental nurse  at  various  London
    Hospitals. He had been described by his employers  as  demonstrating  a
    high standard of verbal and written communication skills at work and it
    was said of him that he  had  been  able  to  give  clear  and  concise
    information to colleagues and patients.  A consultant  from  University
    College London Hospital described him as having a good working  command
    of English.  The judge noted that those letters were dated 2017 and the
    appellant could have been expected to have improved by then but  stated
    that there was no evidence that at an earlier  stage  his  English  was
    weak or inadequate.  The judge referred to the judgment in  MA  Nigeria
    [2016]  UKUT  450  which  concluded  that   there   were   inconsistent
    descriptions of the  uploading  of  data  and  that  the  registrations
    systems created the risk of data provided by the  test  centre  to  ETS
    mismatching the candidates in their tests and that the  files  did  not
    contain particulars of the time, date and location of  the  recordings.
    The judge having taken all these matters into  account  concluded  that
    the respondent had not discharge the legal burden of proving  that  the
    appellant's English test  certificates  were  procured  by  dishonesty.
    Although the judge then went on to find that the certificate  from  the
    Brac Bank was not  genuine  the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements for indefinite leave to remain.   The  judge
    then went on to consider the issue  of  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

8.   The Secretary of State appealed, in effect  asserting  that  the  judge
    had not taken into account the fact that the appellant might  have  had
    reasons for using a proxy test taker and arguing  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred by failing to give adequate reasons why a  person  who
    spoke English would have no reason to  secure  a  test  certificate  by
    deception.  It was stated that the judge's reasons  for  accepting  the
    appellant's explanations as to what had happened was  inadequate.   The
    judge, it was argued, had failed to identify  compelling  circumstances
    such as to justify consideration of whether or not  there  would  be  a
    breach of Article 8.

9.   I granted permission on the grounds of appeal but  also  added  that  I
    was concerned about the fact the judge had placed no weight on the fact
    that the certificate from the Brac Bank was not found to be genuine.

10.  I raised this issue at the beginning of the  appeal.   It  was  however
    pointed out to me by Ms Akinbolu that the refusal of the  human  rights
    application related to the suitability requirements with regard to  the
    test and it had not been argued that the fact that the appellant may at
    one stage have relied upon a certificate from  a  bank  which  was  not
    accepted as genuine.  That was not a factor on  which  the  suitability
    issue was based.  The reality was that the  application  made  was  for
    indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  the  ten  years'  lawful
    residence and that the appellant's lawful residence had been  built  up
    on the basis that he had had leave to remain until 2012 but  thereafter
    had had 3C leave and therefore he had lived in Britain  for  ten  years
    lawfully.  Mr Duffy accepted that that was the case.  I consider that I
    was therefore wrong to focus on the issue of the bank certificate.

11.  Mr Duffy in his submissions having  accepted  that  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 322(5)  had  not  been  triggered  by  the  bank  certificate
    emphasised that the grounds related only to the  issues  raised  in  MA
    Nigeria.  He submitted briefly that the key issue was  that  the  judge
    had not considered whether or not it would  have  been  appropriate  or
    useful for the appellant to use the services of a proxy test taker.  He
    accepted, however, that if that issue fell away the  other  factors  to
    which the judge referred could, when taken into account, show that  the
    judge was  entitled  to  decide  as  he  had  that  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof.

12.  Ms Akinbolu asserted that the grounds were  factually  incorrect.   She
    stated that the judge had properly set out the  relevant  law  and  had
    properly found that the Secretary of State had discharged  the  initial
    burden of proof and had then considered whether or  not  there  was  an
    innocent explanation by the appellant with regard to his having  sat  a
    test and passed the test as  he  had  claimed.   She  referred  to  the
    evidence on which the  appellant  relied.   She  took  me  through  the
    relevant documentary evidence and the  various  qualifications  of  the
    appellant.

Discussion

13.  It is accepted that the sole issue in this case is whether or  not  the
    judge had given sufficient and adequate reasons for concluding that the
    appellant had discharged the burden of proof  upon  him  to  show  that
    notwithstanding the evidence from ETS and that  relating  to  the  test
    centre. I can only conclude that  the  judge  properly  considered  all
    relevant factors and was therefore entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion
    which he did that the appellant had sat the test.  The reality is  that
    the judge did consider all the evidence  which  included  evidence,  in
    effect, from an officer of the Secretary of State that he  was  relaxed
    and  fluent  when  interviewed,  as  well  as  his   various   academic
    qualifications, the English language tests he had taken over  a  period
    of time and the references from his employers regarding his fluency  in
    English at work.  While it is correct that the judge did not then state
    in terms that he was considering the alternate explanation  as  to  why
    the appellant would have used a proxy test taker I consider that  there
    was no requirement on the judge to do that.  I consider that the  judge
    was entitled to find that, on the evidence before  her,  the  appellant
    had discharged the burden of proof and that this decision  was  not  in
    any way perverse or not open to the judge.   I  therefore  dismiss  the
    appeal of the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
judge in the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 6 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
