
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20395/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard on 19 January 2021             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|At a remote hearing via Skype        |On 28 January 2021                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                KULWANT SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Nasim, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Buttar, sent on 28  April  2020,  dismissing
         his appeal on Article 8, ECHR grounds.

Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1987.  His  immigration
         status is not in dispute: although he arrived lawfully as a  spouse
         dependent of a student in  2011  (who  he  divorced  in  2017),  he
         remained as an unlawful overstayer when  his  visa  expired  on  23
         September 2012.  He did not  seek  to  regularise  his  immigration
         status until he made his human rights application on 26 July  2019,
         which was refused on 27 November 2019.  This  was  based  upon  his
         relationship with a British citizen partner, who I shall  refer  to
         as P.  This relationship began in 2017 with  a  religious  marriage
         taking place on 7 October 2018.  The relationship has been accepted
         to be genuine and subsisting, and was not challenged by the SSHD at
         the FTT hearing.  It was also  accepted  that  P  suffered  from  a
         chromosomal  disorder  from  early  childhood  and  other   medical
         concerns, such  that  she  was  supported  by  CAMHS  and  received
         disability allowance and personal independence  allowance  ('PIP').
         In addition, P turned to both her mother ('M')  and  the  appellant
         for help and support, in the light of her medical and mental health
         concerns.

FTT's findings

      3. The FTT heard evidence from the appellant and M.  The FTT  accepted
         that the appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         with P, and noted that P's medical  issues  were  accepted  by  the
         SSHD.   The  FTT  then  immediately  turned   to   the   issue   of
         'insurmountable obstacles' and made findings of fact from  [46]  to
         [52], before addressing the likely impact of the interference  upon
         family life pursuant to Article 8 at [60] to [63].   These  can  be
         summarised as follows:

          i) There would be obstacles to the couple enjoying family life in
             India but these would not be 'insurmountable'.  In particular:

               a) P's medical conditions could be treated in India;

               b) P will have the support of the appellant and his family in
                  India;

               c) Although  P  depends  upon  her  mother  for  day  to  day
                  emotional support, she will be able to obtain that support
                  from the appellant and in addition by using the  telephone
                  or other communication methods with M.   When  M  went  to
                  India for eight weeks in 2017, P relied upon support  from
                  a sister in the UK.




         ii) In any event, the appellant could be supported by  her  family
             members and keyworker in the UK, whilst the appellant  returns
             to India to apply for entry clearance.  In the  circumstances,
             the FTT found there would be no 'insurmountable obstacles'  to
             the continuation of family life or 'very serious hardship'  if
             the appellant returns to India  to  make  an  application  for
             entry clearance.




        iii) Having considered R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC  11  and  the
             principle in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40, it would not  be
             a  disproportionate  breach  of  family  life  to  expect  the
             appellant to apply for entry clearance when all the particular
             circumstances of the case  are  balanced  against  the  public
             interest.

      4. The FTT  also  found  that  the  appellant  would  not  face  'very
         significant obstacles'  to  re-integration  to  India  pursuant  to
         276ADE of the Immigration Rules and his  removal  would  not  be  a
         disproportionate breach of his private life pursuant to Article 8 -
         see [53] to [59] of the FTT's decision.  These  findings  have  not
         been appealed and I need say no more about them.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  against  the  FTT's
         decision in four grounds of appeal,  which  can  be  summarised  as
         follows.

          i) In determining whether the requirements in EX.1 of Appendix FM
             to the Immigration Rules  were  met,  the  FTT  took  into  an
             account an irrelevant matter - the separation  would  only  be
             short because the appellant could apply for  entry  clearance,
             and failed to apply the test of 'insurmountable obstacles'  in
             a "practical and realistic sense" (see Agyarko at [43]).




         ii)  The  FTT  failed  to  adopt  a  structured  approach  to  the
             assessment of family life pursuant to Article 8.


        iii) The FTT  unlawfully  speculated  about  the  prospect  of  the
             appellant meeting the requirements for entry clearance.


         iv) The FTT failed to have regard to s. 117B of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'),  which  sets
             out the public interest considerations.

      6. Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission to appeal in a  decision
         dated 16 June 2020.  He observed that the grounds  of  appeal  were
         not easy to follow and read more like submissions but that  it  was
         arguable that the FTT failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding
         there would be no 'insurmountable obstacles' and failed  to  factor
         in the extent to which the appellant met the Immigration Rules when
         assessing proportionality.  Judge Shaerf considered ground (iv)  to
         be weak but granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

      7. Mr Nasim relied upon the four written  grounds  of  appeal.   After
         hearing from Mr Nasim I indicated to  Mrs  Pettersen  that  I  only
         needed to hear rom her in relation to ground  (i).   She  submitted
         that the FTT was entitled to reaching the findings it did.  I  make
         reference to the parties' respective  submissions  in  more  detail
         below.

      8. At the end of the hearing I  reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

Ground (i) - EX.1 and 'insurmountable obstacles'

      9. The FTT clearly accepted that  P's  circumstances  were  such  that
         there would be obstacles to family life  continuing  in  India  but
         they were  not  'insurmountable'.   EX.2.  defines  'insurmountable
         obstacles as "very significant difficulties which would be faced by
         the applicant or their partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
         together outside the UK and which could not be  overcome  or  would
         entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

     10. Contrary to Mr Ahmed's submission the FTT applied this  test  in  a
         "practical and realistic sense" - see Agyarko  at  [43].   The  FTT
         clearly considered the practical and realistic situation for  P  in
         India and made findings of fact accordingly.  The FTT  acknowledged
         there would be obstacles at [48] having set out the evidence as  to
         P's difficulties and the claimed obstacles in relocating  to  India
         in  some  detail  at  [16]  to  [33].   The  FTT   concluded   that
         notwithstanding these difficulties P would be able to cope with the
         support of the appellant in India.

     11. The FTT's finding of fact as to P's ability to cope in  India  with
         the support of her husband but without her mother or the  statutory
         agencies in the UK, in the light of her medical  conditions,  might
         be described as harsh.  The appellant must however  establish  that
         this finding of fact is infected by an error of  law.   I  was  not
         been taken to any material evidence that was omitted  by  the  FTT.
         The finding cannot properly be described as perverse and  Mr  Ahmed
         did not seek to do so.  I note that P had  considerable  experience
         of India (see [31] of the FTT's decision).  Although P  has  always
         relied upon M and continued to do so, M's  own  evidence  described
         the changes in P's source  of  emotional  support  from  M  to  the
         appellant.  Although M continued  to  play  an  important  role  in
         supporting P (which the FTT was clearly aware of - see [52]), I was
         not taken to any evidence to support the submission that this  role
         could not be fulfilled by the appellant in India,  with  additional
         support provided by M via modern methods of communication.

     12. In my judgment the FTT provided tolerably clear reasons for finding
         that the high threshold of 'insurmountable obstacles' was not  met.
         That finding was sufficient to determine the EX.1 issue.   The  FTT
         went on  to  address  'insurmountable  obstacles'  at  [52]  on  an
         alternative footing -  the  FTT  considered  the  eventuality  that
         separation would only be for a short period because  the  appellant
         could apply for entry clearance.  Mr Nasim submitted that  no  time
         period was considered.  Both representatives agreed that any  entry
         clearance  application  should  be  straightforward   because   the
         requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  appear  to  be  met:  in
         particular the genuineness of the marriage was not disputed and the
         SSHD  had  no  concerns  regarding   'suitability'   or   financial
         requirements of the Rules.  In relation to the latter both  parties
         agreed that P's PIP meant that she was exempt  from  the  financial
         requirements.  At the time  of  the  FTT  hearing  (pre-March  2020
         'lockdown') the FTT was therefore entitled to approach  the  matter
         on  this  basis  that  the  entry  clearance  application   was   a
         straightforward one that  could  be  determined  in  a   matter  of
         months.



Ground (ii) - no structured approach to Article 8

     13. Mr Nasim did not pursue this ground in oral submissions.  The FTT's
         Article 8 balancing exercise could have been better structured  and
         the use of a 'balance sheet' would have been helpful.  However,  it
         has not been submitted that when the decision is read  as  a  whole
         that any material  factor  relevant  to  the  Article  8  balancing
         exercise was omitted.  The FTT made findings of fact that were open
         to  it  and  clearly  considered  all  the  relevant  circumstances
         concerning family life and the difficulties P would face in  India,
         having expressly repeated them at [60].  The FTT was clearly  aware
         of the public interest considerations in s. 117B of the  2002  Act,
         having referred to those matters at [55] to [57], albeit there  was
         no explicit reference to the 2002 Act.  The  FTT  was  entitled  to
         regard the public interest in maintaining immigration  controls  to
         be strong in this  case  given  the  appellant's  lengthy  unlawful
         immigration status and disregard for immigration control.

     14. Contrary to the vague submission in the grounds of appeal, the  FTT
         clearly considered the appellant's  case  'outside  the  Rules'  by
         undertaking the requisite balancing exercise.

     15. The suggestion in ground (ii) that the FTT was  wrong  to  consider
         'temporary separation' is difficult to  follow,  particularly  when
         the appellant relied upon the Chikwamba principle.

Ground (iii) - Chikwamba principle

     16. Ground (iii) as drafted is difficult to follow.  Mr Nasim clarified
         that  the  appellant  would  meet  all  the  requirements  of   the
         Immigration Rules in  any  entry  clearance  application  and  this
         together with [51] of Agyarko obliged  the  FTT  to  conclude  that
         there was no public interest in removing the appellant from the  UK
         in order to make an  entry  clearance  application  that  would  be
         certain to succeed.

     17. The President addressed a similar  submission  in  Younas  (section
         117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC) at [83] to
         [99].  When that guidance is applied  to  the  FTT's  findings  the
         following lawful approach on the part of the FTT emerges:  the  FTT
         found that the appellant would probably be granted entry  clearance
         within a few months of his return to India; although  it  would  be
         difficult for P to be separated from her husband during this  time,
         she would be ably supported by M  and  other  members  of  her  own
         family such  that  she  would  not  suffer  serious  hardship;  the
         appellant's immigration history and entry into a relationship  when
         he was a long standing overstayer (see s. 117B(4)(b)  of  the  2002
         Act) when considered alongside all the relevant factor  meant  that
         the impact of the temporary separation did not outweigh the  public
         interest.



Ground (iv) - s. 117B

     18. This ground entirely failed to engage with  [55]  to  [57]  of  the
         FTT's decision. These paragraphs clearly demonstrate that  the  FTT
         applied s. 117B of the 2002 Act, albeit without explicit  reference
         to the 2002 Act.



Notice of decision

The FTT decision does not contain an error of  law  and  I  do  not  set  it
aside.


Signed: Melanie Plimmer                          Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                          19 January 2021


