
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20964/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House, Newport |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17th September 2018               |On 28th September 2018               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 YEE KEI LAU
                       (anonymity not direction made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant: Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by Zelin &
Zelin


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge Easterman in  which
         he allowed the appeal of the Claimant against the decision  of  the
         Secretary of State to refuse her application for leave to remain in
         the United Kingdom as the spouse of Chun Tung Tsang  (the  sponsor)
         who is a British citizen.

      2. The application under appeal was refused on 17  August  2016.   The
         Claimant exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.
         The appeal came before Judge Easterman on 15 January 2018  and  was
         allowed on human rights grounds. The Secretary of State applied for
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  application  was
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 8 May 2018  in  the
         following terms

             The grounds assert that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
             reasons for  findings  on  a  material  matter.  The  Tribunal
             allowed the appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain
             based upon deception for obtaining a  TOEIC  certificate  from
             ETS by using a proxy test taker. The  witness  statements  and
             spreadsheet extract show the Appellant's English language test
             had been invalidated because of evidence of fraud in the  test
             taken by the Appellant. The judge accepted that the evidential
             burden  fell  upon  the  Appellant  to   offer   an   innocent
             explanation. There is no apparent explanation offered for  the
             anomalies which caused the test to be invalidated.  The  judge
             relied upon the Appellant's English language ability  but  the
             test is not whether the Appellant speaks English  but  whether
             on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the  Appellant   employed
             deception. The judge  materially  erred  by  failing  to  give
             adequate reasons for holding that a person who clearly  speaks
             English should be given more weight in the balancing  exercise
             for the  reason  she  practised  deception  than  someone  who
             secured a test  certificate  by  deception  because  of  their
             inability to speak English. The judge failed to give  adequate
             weight  to  the  public  interest   in   his   assessment   of
             proportionality.

    Background

      3. The history of this appeal is detailed  above.  The  Claimant  (the
         Appellant in the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal) is a citizen of
         the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of  China  born  on  28
         June 1989. She first came to the United Kingdom on 3 September 2003
         completing her schooling in the UK before returning to Hong Kong in
         2007. She returned to the United Kingdom on 27 February  2010  with
         leave to enter as a Tier 4 student valid until  15  November  2011.
         This leave was  subsequently  extended  to  30  October  2015.  The
         Claimant left the UK and returned on 18 December 2015  with  a  new
         Tier 4 visa valid until  22  January  2018.  On  7  June  2016  the
         Claimant married the sponsor and on 17 August 2016 she applied  for
         leave to remain on the basis of that marriage. She  used  the  Home
         Office Premium Service and was interviewed in connection  with  her
         application on the same day following  which  her  application  was
         refused.

      4. The basis of the refusal was a single issue. The Claimant  met  all
         the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave  to  remain  as
         the  spouse  of  a  British  citizen  except  for  the  suitability
         requirement. The Secretary of State considered  that  the  Claimant
         had fraudulently used a proxy during a TOEIC speaking  test  on  22
         August 2012 in connection with a  previous  application  to  extend
         leave to remain as a student. The  Secretary  of  State  considered
         that as a result the presence of the Claimant in United Kingdom was
         not conducive to the public  good  and  she  therefore  failed  the
         suitability requirement. It is perhaps strange that whilst deciding
         that her presence was not conducive to the public good on 17 August
         2016 the refusal letter ends not by curtailing her  existing  leave
         to remain but rather by noting  that  the  Claimant  had  leave  to
         remain valid until 22 January 2018 and was not  therefore  required
         to leave the United Kingdom as a result of the decision.

      5. The appeal came before Judge Easterman and was allowed.  The  Judge
         found firstly that the Claimant did not  use  a  proxy  during  the
         English language test and in the alternative that even if  she  had
         done she should not be excluded and therefore allowed the appeal on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds.

    Submissions

      6. At the hearing before me Mr  Howells  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State and Ms Daykin represented the Claimant.

      7. Mr Howells noted that the Judge had made alternative  findings  but
         said that there were nevertheless material errors in his  decision.
         The Judge found that the Claimant did not use a  proxy  test  taker
         but had sat the exam in the normal way. The initial burden of proof
         falls upon the Secretary of State to establish a prima facie  case.
         The burden then shifts to  the  Claimant  to  provide  an  innocent
         explanation and then the burden shifts back to the Home  Office  to
         rebut that explanation. Paragraph 55 of the decision shows that the
         Secretary of State passed the first threshold and so the burden  of
         proof shifted to the Claimant. Paragraph 44 clearly shows that  the
         Presenting Officer said that the only question  was  whether  there
         was an innocent explanation. The Judge, Mr  Howells  submitted  did
         not clearly deal with this. In the finding there is no reference to
         there being an innocent explanation. In any  event  the  Presenting
         Officer challenged the explanation that  was  offered.  Mr  Howells
         further submitted  that  the  Judge  placed  undue  weight  on  the
         Claimant's  English  language  ability.  Just  because  she  speaks
         English does not mean that she did not use  a  proxy  to  take  the
         test. Referring to the decision in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing)  [2016]
         UKUT 450 (IAC) Mr Howells said in the abstract  there  could  be  a
         range of reasons. So far is the alternative  finding  is  concerned
         this  is  one  given  of  convenience  and  there  is  no  adequate
         reasoning. Deception is deception no matter what the motivation and
         insufficient weight was given to the public interest.

      8. For the Claimant Ms Daykin referred to her rule 24 response.  These
         cases  are  fact  specific.  The  Judge  weighs  the  evidence   at
         paragraphs 48 to 55 and makes  clear  findings.  There  is  nothing
         irrational about these findings. The Judge takes into  account  all
         relevant facts. It is clear that the Judge has taken  into  account
         the specific evidence of which  the  Claimant's  ability  to  speak
         English was only a part. The Secretary  of  State  never  explained
         what anomalies caused the Claimant's test to  be  invalidated.  The
         First-tier Tribunal took into account  all  relevant  evidence  and
         reached sustainable conclusions. So far as the alternative  finding
         is concerned it is clear that the  Judge  had  due  regard  to  the
         public interest.

      9. I said that I was satisfied that the Judge had taken account of all
         relevant evidence, including the public interest, and had reached a
         sustainable conclusion on the facts before him.  I  said  that  the
         Secretary of State's appeal would be dismissed, and I  reserved  my
         written decision.

    Decision

     10. This was an appeal that  turned  on  a  very  specific  issue.  The
         Secretary of State refused the application because it was  believed
         that the Claimant had used a proxy in her English language test for
         a previous application and that as a result her presence in  United
         Kingdom was not conducive to the public good. The  Claimant  denied
         that she had used a proxy.

     11. In considering his decision it  is  clear  from  the  statement  of
         reasons that the Judge was fully appraised of the  relevant  facts.
         He records at paragraph 10  of  his  decision  that  he  has  taken
         account not only of the Claimant's and Secretary of State's bundles
         but  also  the  various  witness  statements   and   the   relevant
         authorities. He self  directs  to  MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC  testing)  in
         particular. The Claimant made  a  detailed  witness  statement,  to
         which the  Judge  refers  in  his  decision,  and  also  gave  oral
         evidence.  The  witness  statement  and  the  oral  evidence   both
         concentrate on her memory of the English language test  taken  some
         five years earlier. The Judge's recital of the claimant's  evidence
         is covered extensively from paragraphs 12 to 29 of the decision.

     12. The Judge examines the Claimant's account against the Secretary  of
         State's evidence between paragraphs 48 and 55 of the  decision.  It
         is a detailed if not painstaking consideration. The Judge does  not
         specifically break this down into evidential burdens starting  with
         prima facie case, moving on to innocent explanation  and  finishing
         with rebuttal. However, he does what is, in effect, the same thing.
         He finds, at paragraph 49, that the evidence of  the  Secretary  of
         State is powerful and concludes at paragraph 55  that  the  initial
         burden was satisfied.  He  then  examines  (at  paragraph  51)  the
         Claimant's  explanation  and  discusses  potential  arguments   and
         counter arguments between paragraphs 52 and 54. Having done  so  he
         finds at  paragraph  55  that  whereas  the  Secretary  of  State's
         evidence  meets  the  first  threshold  he  is  persuaded,  by  the
         Claimant's evidence, that she did not use a proxy and sat the  exam
         in the normal way. The Claimant's innocent explanation was that she
         had taken the test herself and the Judge  believed  the  Claimant's
         evidence. It is the function of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
         consider the evidence and to reach  a  decision  and,  unless  that
         decision fails to take account of material facts or  is  irrational
         there is no error of law. In my judgement the Judge has  considered
         that evidence and reached a rational decision upon that evidence.

     13. The Secretary of State complains that in reaching  this  conclusion
         the Judge gives too much weight to the Claimant's ability to  speak
         English. In my judgement he has not done so, this is merely one  of
         the factors that is placed in the balance. I find no error of law.

     14.  Although  this  effectively  finishes  the  matter  it   is   also
         appropriate to turn to the alternate finding. I do  so  not  simply
         because the Judge was, in my judgement, entitled to  make  such  an
         alternate finding but also because of the matter that I have raised
         above but was not raised at the hearing and was the  basis  of  the
         Secretary of State's refusal. It  was  a  refusal  that  said  that
         whilst her continued presence in United Kingdom was  not  conducive
         to the public good her  existing  leave  to  remain  would  not  be
         curtailed and she would be allowed to remain in United Kingdom with
         the benefit of that leave for a further period of 18  months.  This
         does not indicate that the Secretary of State truly  believed  that
         her presence was not conducive to the public good rather  that  the
         refusal of leave to  remain  was  a  penalty,  deferred  until  her
         existing leave expired.

     15. Turning back to the findings of the Judge this is  a  Claimant  who
         has lived, for the most part, in United Kingdom since  the  age  of
         13. She is married to a British citizen  with  whom  she  has  been
         living for a number of years. There can be no doubt  that  she  has
         established a private and family life in the  United  Kingdom.  She
         has not, on the evidence before the Tribunal, been convicted of any
         criminal offences. A finding, as made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge in the alternative, that the Claimant should  not  have  been
         excluded under the suitability provisions even if she  had  used  a
         proxy taker was, in my judgement, sustainable.

     16. For all these reasons the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         dismissed, and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

    Summary

     17. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:     Date: 25 September 2018

[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
