
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20744/2019_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 30 September 2020                 |On 7th October 2020                  |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                               Mrs. Ahida Bibi
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


    This is a decision on the papers without  a  hearing.  The  appellant's
    written submissions did not address the question whether  it  would  be
    appropriate for a decision to be made without a hearing. There were  no
    written submissions from the respondent.  The  documents  described  at
    para 4 below were submitted. A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing
    was not held for the reasons given at paras 7-19 below. The order  made
    is set out at para 76 below. (Administrative Instruction No. 2 from the
    Senior President of Tribunals).


Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:      Mr  F  Chaudhry,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  IIAS
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    (No representation).


                                  DECISION


 1. The appellant, a national of Pakistan born on 1 January  1977,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Hanlon who, in
    a decision promulgated on 12 March  2020  following  a  hearing  on  19
    February 2020, dismissed her appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8)
    against a decision of the respondent of 3 December 2019 to  refuse  her
    application of 3 September 2019 for leave  to  remain  on  human  right
    grounds (Article 8). In support of her application, the  appellant  had
    relied (in summary) on her marriage to  Mr  Saleem  Haider,  a  British
    citizen (thereafter the "sponsor"); the sponsor's medical condition (he
    had suffered a heart attack in December 2014); that she  provides  care
    for her mother-in-law who was bedridden; and her private life claim.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  in
    a decision signed on 6 May 2020 and sent to the parties on 1 June 2020.



 3. On 16 June 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent to the  parties  a  "Note  and
    Directions" issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara dated 12  June  2020.
    Para 1 of the "Note and Directions" stated that, in light of  the  need
    to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,  Judge  Kamara  had
    reached the provisional view, having reviewed the file  in  this  case,
    that it would be appropriate to determine questions (a) and (b) set out
    at para 1 of her "Note & Directions", reproduced at my para 6(i)(a) and
    (b)  below,  without  a  hearing.  Judge  Kamara  gave  the   following
    directions:

      (i)   Para 2 of the "Note  and  Directions"  issued  directions  which
        provided  for  the  party  who  had  sought  permission   to   make
        submissions in support of the assertion of an error of law  and  on
        the question whether the decision of the FtT should be set aside if
        error of law is found, no later than 21 days after  the  "Note  and
        Directions" was sent to the parties; for any other  party  to  file
        and serve submissions in response, no later than 28 days after  the
        "Note and Directions"  was  sent  to  the  parties;  and,  if  such
        submissions in  response  were  made,  for  the  party  who  sought
        permission to file a reply no later than 56 days  after  the  "Note
        and Directions" was sent to the parties.

      (ii)  Para 3 of the "Note and Directions" stated that  any  party  who
        considered that despite the  foregoing  directions  a  hearing  was
        necessary to consider questions (a) and (b) may submit reasons  for
        that view no later than 21 days after the "Note and Directions" was
        sent to the parties.


 4. In response to the "Note and Directions":

      (i)   the Upper Tribunal has  not  received  any  submissions  on  the
        respondent's behalf; and

      (ii)  the Upper Tribunal has received a  document  entitled:  "Further
        Submissions on behalf of the Appellant as  per  Directions  by  the
        Upper Tribunal dated 12 June 2020" by Mr Chaudhry, submitted  under
        cover of a letter dated 16 July 2020 from  IIAS  and  sent  to  the
        Upper Tribunal by email dated 16 July 2020 timed at 17:15 hours and
        again by email dated 17 July 2020 timed at 10:57 hours.

 5. The appellant's submissions were filed and served  outside  the  21-day
    time limit specified by Judge Kamara  at  para  2(i)  of  the  "Note  &
    Directions". I extend the time limit for compliance to 16 July 2020.


The issues

 6. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

      (i)   whether it is appropriate  to  decide  the  following  questions
without a hearing:

            (a)  whether the decision of Judge O'Hanlon involved the  making
           of an error on a point of law; and

            (b)  if yes, whether Judge O'Hanlon's  decision  should  be  set
           aside.

      (ii)  If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's  appeal  against
        the respondent's decision should be re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal
        or whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 7. The appellant's written submissions do not address the question whether
    it would be appropriate for a decision to be made  without  a  hearing.
    There were no submissions from  the  respondent  whether  it  would  be
    appropriate to make a decision without a hearing.

 8. I do  not  rely  upon  the  mere  fact  that  neither  party  has  made
    submissions on the question whether it is  appropriate  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to make a decision on questions (a) and (b) without a  hearing
    as factors that justify proceeding without a hearing. I have considered
    the circumstances for myself.

 9. The appeal in the instant case is straightforward.

10. I am aware of, and take into account, the force of the points  made  in
    the dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta  v  Holmes  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 1104 to the effect, inter alia, that "oral argument is perhaps
    the most powerful force there is, in our legal process,  to  promote  a
    change of mind by a judge"; and the dicta in the decision in R v Sussex
    Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB 256 to the effect that  justice
    must be done and be seen to be done, to mention just two of  the  cases
    in which we have received guidance from judges  in  the  higher  courts
    concerning the importance of an oral hearing.

11. I am aware of and have applied the guidance of  the  Supreme  Court  at
    para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013]  UKSC
    61.

12. Given that my decision is limited to the Issues, there is  no  question
    of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence  or  considering
    any evidence at this stage.

13. In addition, I take into account the seriousness of the issues  in  the
    instant appeal for the appellant. This appeal relates to her Article  8
    claim, the outcome of which will have implications for the human rights
    of her husband as well as her mother-in-law who are both said to be  in
    poor health. The instant case is therefore a case of some seriousness.

14. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

15. Taking a preliminary view at the initial stage of deciding  whether  it
    is appropriate and just to decide  the  Issues  without  a  hearing,  I
    considered Judge O'Hanlon's decision, the grounds and  the  submissions
    before me. I was of the view, taken provisionally at this  stage,  that
    there was nothing complicated at all in the assessment of the Issues in
    the instant case, given that the grounds are simple and straightforward
    and Judge O'Hanlon's decision straightforward. I kept the matter  under
    review throughout my deliberations. However, at the  conclusion  of  my
    deliberations, I was affirmed in the view I had taken on a  preliminary
    basis.

16. I take into account that the Tribunal is now  listing  some  cases  for
    face-to-face hearings and using technology to hold hearings remotely in
    other cases where it is appropriate to do so. However, the fact is that
    it is not possible to accommodate  all  cases  in  one  of  these  ways
    without undue delay to all cases.

17. Of course, it is impermissible, in my view, to proceed to decide a case
    without a hearing if that course of  action  would  be  unfair  in  the
    particular case. If it would be unfair to proceed to decide  an  appeal
    without a hearing, it would be unfair to do so even if there would be a
    lengthy delay in order to hold a hearing face-to-face  or  remotely  or
    even if there is a consequent delay on other  cases  being  heard.  The
    need to be fair cannot be sacrificed.

18.  There  are  cases  that  can  fairly  be  decided  without  a  hearing
    notwithstanding that the outcome of the decision may not be  in  favour
    of the party  who  is  the  appellant.  In  the  present  unprecedented
    circumstances brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, it is my  duty
    to identify those cases that can fairly be decided without a hearing.

19. Having considered the matter with anxious scrutiny, taken into  account
    the overriding  objective  and  the  guidance  in  the  relevant  cases
    including in particular Osborn and others v Parole Board,  I  concluded
    that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my  discretion
    and proceed to decide the Issues without a  hearing,  for  the  reasons
    given in this decision.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether Judge O'Hanlon erred in law and whether  her
decision should be set aside

Background

20. The appellant married the sponsor in Pakistan on  5  August  2002.  She
    entered the United Kingdom on 24 February 2010 with entry clearance  as
    a spouse valid until 10th May 2012. She  has  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully since then.

21. The appellant made an application for leave to remain on 21 April  2018
    which was refused on 8 July 2018. Her appeal against this decision  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Turner  in  a  decision
    promulgated 25  March  2019  following  a  hearing  on  6  March  2019.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, following which her renewed application  for  permission
    to appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal in a decision sent  to  the
    parties on 8 July 2019.

22. The appellant then made the application dated 3  September  2019  which
    was refused in the decision dated 3 December 2019 that is  the  subject
    of the instant appeal.

Judge Turner's decision

23. Given that one of the grounds challenges the fact that, pursuant to the
    guidance in Devaseelan v SSHD * [2002] UKIAT 702, Judge O'Hanlon relied
    upon the findings of Judge Turner, it is necessary  to  set  out  Judge
    Turner's material findings and summarise her reasons for her findings.

24. Judge Turner provided a summary of  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim
    before her at paras 12-16 of her decision which read:

        "12.     The Appellant and her Sponsor have  lived  together  since
             she arrived in the UK in 2010.  The  Appellant's  mother-in-law
             also resides at the family home. The Appellant's  mother-in-law
             has  a  number  of  health  conditions  that  entitles  her  to
             disability living allowance and carer's allowance. The  carer's
             allowance is paid to the Sponsor. The Appellant provides all of
             the necessary care for her mother-in-law.


        13.      The Appellant's sponsor is also  ill,  having  suffered  a
             heart attack. He is not able to care  for his mother alone.


        14.      The Appellant's two sisters-in-law live approximately  10-
             15  minutes  away  in  car  but  cannot  provide  care  to  the
             Appellant's mother in law. The Appellant's  step-daughter  also
             lives a similar distance away but is a teacher and has her  own
             children so cannot provide the care required.


        15.      The Appellant  provides  intimate  personal  care  to  her
             mother in law which no one else can provide.  The  family  have
             attempted  to  get  social   services   involved   to   provide
             assistance, but the mother-in-law was not happy about this.


        16.      The Appellant cannot return to Pakistan. No one  would  be
             available to look after her  mother  in  law  in  the  UK.  Her
             husband is ill and would not be able to afford the health  care
             that he needs in Pakistan. A return would be a disproportionate
             interference with her family and private life."


25. It is clear from Judge Turner's decision that there were aspects of the
    evidence before her that she did not find credible. In summary:

      (i)   Judge Turner rejected the  appellant's  explanation  that  there
        was "no sinister reason" why she did not make  an  application  in-
        time to extend her visa, saying that she and the sponsor  had  both
        referred to their suffering financial difficulties at  around  that
        time. She therefore questioned whether they may not have  satisfied
        the financial  requirement.  She  also  noted  that  there  was  no
        evidence that the appellant would be able to complete  the  English
        language test (para 31 of her decision).

      (ii)  The sponsor's evidence that he helped to care for his mother  as
        it took more than one person to provide such care contradicted  the
        appellant's evidence who had  stated  that  it  was  only  her  who
        provided the care as she would not allow anyone else to do so (para
        33).

      (iii) The sponsor's evidence that they had made  enquiries  of  social
        services for care to be provided by them to  his  mother  and  that
        this  had  been  unsuccessful  was  incredible,  as  there  was  no
        documentary evidence  to  corroborate  the  involvement  of  social
        services and the sponsor's evidence  contradicted  the  appellant's
        evidence who had said in oral evidence that they had not made  such
        enquiries (para 39).

      (iv)  Judge Turner  noted  that  the  sponsor  was  receiving  carer's
        allowance to care for his mother and considered that there  was  an
        element of dishonesty which undermined the credibility of both  the
        appellant  and  the  sponsor,  in  that,  either  the  sponsor  was
        receiving carer's allowance to which he was not entitled because it
        was in reality the appellant who was caring for  her  mother-in-law
        or the appellant had misled the Tribunal (para 34).

26. Judge Turner found that there were some obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    return  to  Pakistan,  the  main  obstacles  being  the  care  of   the
    appellant's mother-in-law  and  accessibility  to  medication  for  the
    sponsor (para 38 of her decision). However, she found that  there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life being  enjoyed  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor in Pakistan and therefore that the  appellant
    does not satisfy EX.1. of Appendix FM. Her reasons may be summarised as
    follows:

      (i)   In relation to the care required by the  appellant's  mother-in-
        law, Judge Turner found that the family did not appear to have made
        any enquiries regarding  alternative  care  for  the  mother-in-law
        (para 32); that, given  that  the  mother-in-law  was  entitled  to
        disability living allowance and carer's allowance, she was entitled
        to social care (para 39); and that the  social  services  would  be
        able to complete a full  assessment  of  the  mother-in-law's  care
        needs and implement a  care  plan  (para  39)  including  care  for
        intimate tasks (para 43). She found, in the alternative (para  39),
        that the appellant had other family members who  live  locally  who
        could assist. The appellant had two sisters-in-law  and  her  step-
        daughter (para 32). She found (para 39) that this would not  entail
        very serious hardship, saying that she would put it  as  no  higher
        than that it may be an inconvenience. The sponsor was not dependent
        upon his mother and could remain in contact with his  mother  using
        modern means of communication (para 39).

      (ii)  In relation to the sponsor's health, Judge  Turner  noted  (para
        37) that the letter from his GP at  page  60  of  the  respondent's
        bundle confirmed that he had had a heart attack and it stated  that
        he continues to require "monitoring and medical" to reduce the risk
        of a further heart attack. She considered,  however,  that  as  the
        letter dated back to 26th February 2016, it was not clear what  the
        current position was. Given that  the  sponsor  had  said  that  he
        helped to care for his mother as it requires more than  one  person
        to care for her, Judge Turner found that the  sponsor's  health  in
        itself was not sufficiently limited to the extent that  he  himself
        would need care or that his  health  was  a  sufficient  reason  to
        prevent his return to Pakistan and that, if treatment  was  needed,
        the  "Country  Policy  Information  Note:  Pakistan:  Medical   and
        healthcare issues" dated August 2018  showed  that  there  were  at
        least four specialist heart treatment centres which  provided  care
        free of charge in Pakistan.

27. Judge Turner found that para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules did
    not apply because there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration in Pakistan. Her reasons may be summarised as
    follows:

      (i)   The appellant had lived in Pakistan  until  2010  and  therefore
        had experience of its culture (para 36). There was no  evidence  to
        disprove the appellant's claim that neither she nor the sponsor had
        family in Pakistan. However, she  found  (para  37)  that,  on  the
        appellant's own evidence, she must have lived in  Pakistan  without
        any support after her mother-in-law and the sponsor had come to the
        United Kingdom. Accordingly, Judge Turner  found  (para  41)  that,
        whether or not the appellant has any family left in  Pakistan,  the
        fact that she was able to live in  Pakistan  until  2010  suggested
        that she would be able to do so again.

      (ii)  Judge Turner  considered  that  the  appellant  could  help  the
        sponsor to adjust himself in  Pakistan  and  to  support  him.  The
        sponsor and the appellant both speak Urdu and so one or both  would
        be in a position to work to support them. The sponsor was also born
        in Pakistan (para 36).

28. In relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the  Immigration
    Rules, Judge Turner  said (para 43) that she  was  concerned  that  the
    appellant had overstayed in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2012  without
    remedying the position.  She did not accept  the  appellant's  evidence
    that this was an oversight and had "no sinister motive". She said  that
    she had to question whether the delay in making the application  was  a
    way of trying to circumvent the Immigration Rules by building  up  more
    time in the United Kingdom. Judge Turner then said, at  para  44,  that
    taking all of the issues in the round and balancing  matters  both  for
    and against the appellant, the respondent's decision was proportionate.

Judge O'Hanlon's decision

29. Judge O'Hanlon set out the basis of the  appellant's  Article  8  claim
    before him at para 20 of his  decision,  the  relevant  part  of  which
    reads:

            "20. ...

                 (f)   The Appellant's marriage with her  husband  is  still
                 subsisting. The Appellant looks after her husband  who  has
                 heart problems and also  looks  after  and  cares  for  her
                 mother-in-law  who is over 80 years of age and bed-bound.

             (g)  The Respondent has indicated there were no  insurmountable
                 obstacles in accordance with Paragraph EX.2 of Appendix  FM
                 in continuing her family life with her husband outside  the
                 United Kingdom. The Appellant contends  that  this  ignores
                 the fact that her husband is  a British citizen permanently
                 settled in the United Kingdom.

             (h)  The Appellant's husband suffers from heart problems and is
                 under  medical  treatment  in  the  UK.   The   Appellant's
                 husband's mother is over 80 years of age and bed-bound. The
                 Appellant cares for her  mother-in-law's  personal  hygiene
                 including cleaning her due to her incontinence.

             (i)  There would be insurmountable obstacles  in  returning  to
                 Pakistan with her husband as her   husband  would  have  to
                 leave his ill mother  and  re-form  family  life  with  the
                 Appellant in Pakistan.

             (j)  The Appellant's husband has severe heart problems and  her
                 mother-in-law  suffers   from    various   illnesses.   The
                 Appellant has performed the duties as  carer  of  both  her
                 husband and her mother-in-law. The Appellant's husband  and
                 mother-in-law cannot afford a carer  from  a  private  care
                 home on a 24 hour/7 day basis.

             (k)  In all of the circumstances there  are  very  exceptional,
                 compelling   and   compassionate   grounds   resulting   in
                 insurmountable obstacles for the Appellant  returning  back
                 to   Pakistan."

30. It can therefore be seen that the basis of the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim before Judge Turner and before Judge O'Hanlon was essentially the
    same.

31. Judge O'Hanlon gave his reasons for dismissing the  appellant's  appeal
    at paras 25-35 of his decision. At para 25, he  stressed  that  he  had
    considered all of the evidence in the appeal, both written and oral. At
    para 26, he referred to the guidance in  Devaseelan  v  SSHD  *  [2002]
    UKIAT 702.

32. Relevant to one of the grounds of appeal is para 29 of Judge O'Hanlon's
    decision where he referred, inter alia, to two letters from the mother-
    in-law's doctor/GP. The first letter was a letter dated 8 February 2019
    at AB/16 and the second letter a letter dated 5 February 2020 at AB/13.



33. Judge O'Hanlon said that the  letters  dated  8  February  2019  and  5
    February 2020 were identical. Judge O'Hanlon then said:

          "29.    ... The content of that letter is identical to the earlier
             letter from the Appellant's GP which  was  dated  8th  February
             2019. Although this letter is not specified in  Judge  Turner's
             determination,   reference   is   made   in   Judge    Turner's
             determination at Paragraph 28 to  the  Appellant's  bundles  of
             documents   including   copy   passport   document,    marriage
             certificate, income  support  and  carer's  allowance  letters,
             medical letters, and tenancy agreement.  It  may  be  that  the
             letter of 8th February 2019 was  before  Judge  Turner  at  the
             hearing on 6th March 2019 but I  have  no  certainty  of  that.
             However given that the letters are in  identical  terms  it  is
             reasonable to assume, as the letters are from  the  Appellant's
             mother-in-law's GP, that they accurately describe  the  medical
             conditions  of  the  Appellant's  mother-in-law  and  her  care
             requirements and on the basis of the medical  evidence  in  the
             Appellant's own bundle, it  would  appear  therefore  that  the
             medical condition and  care  requirements  of  the  Appellant's
             mother-in-law are unchanged since  the  determination  made  by
             Judge Turner. In his submissions the Appellant's Representative
             stated that nothing  of  significance  had  changed  since  the
             previous determination except that the  Appellant's  mother-in-
             law's medical condition had deteriorated but in  the  light  of
             the medical evidence by way  of  the  GP's  letters  previously
             referred to, I do not find that that is the case. I  find  that
             the medical condition and care needs of the Appellant's mother-
             in-law   are   effectively   unchanged   since   the    earlier
             determination of Judge Turner."

                 (My emphasis)

34. Judge O'Hanlon then said, at para 30, that it followed that nothing had
    changed since the decision of Judge Turner  and  therefore  that  Judge
    Turner's decision should be his starting point pursuant to Devaseelan.

35. At para 31, Judge O'Hanlon said that the  only  matter  raised  in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal, at para 9 thereof,  that  had  not  been
    specifically dealt with  in  the  decision  of  Judge  Turner  was  the
    question of the appellant being removed to Pakistan and then making  an
    application to join her husband in the United Kingdom.  He  noted  that
    para 9 of the grounds of appeal relied upon Beoku-Betts v  SSHD  [20081
    UKHL 39 and Chikwamba v SSHD 120081 UKHL 40. He noted that Judge Turner
    had questioned whether or not  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  would
    satisfy the financial test required for entry clearance or whether  the
    appellant would pass the English language test. He  said  that  it  was
    clear from paras 43-44 of Judge Turner's decision  that  these  aspects
    were put into balance in her consideration of proportionality.

36. At para 33, Judge O'Hanlon said that  as  Judge  Turner  had  not  made
    specific reference to Chikwamba and Beoku-Betts, he had considered  the
    issues. Para 33 reads:

            "33. Although Judge Turner did not  refer  specifically  to  the
             cases of Beoku-Betts and Chikwamba, the question of  making  a
             subsequent application was considered at Paragraphs 43 and  44
             of Judge Turner's determination. However, as Judge Turner  has
             not made specific reference to these issues, I have done so. I
             have carried out the proportionality assessment in  accordance
             with the principles established in Hesham Ali  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
             [20161 UKSC 60, using the  structured  approach  to  assessing
             proportionality as established in Bank Mellat  v  HM  Treasury
             (No 2) [20131 UKSC 39. Having done so, and taking into account
             all of the matters both  for  and  against  the  Appellant  as
             referred to in the findings of Judge Turner,  I  do  not  find
             that the consideration of the effect of the  Appellant  having
             to leave the UK and then making an application to  return  are
             sufficient to tip the balance  in  favour  of  the  Appellant.
             Adopting the findings of Judge Turner in relation to all other
             issues and taking into  account  the  reference  to  Chikwamba
             which had not been specifically determined by Judge Turner,  I
             find that consideration of the point made by the Appellant  in
             relation to Chikwamba is not sufficient for  me  to  determine
             that   the   decision   made   by   the   Respondent   was   a
             disproportionate means of  achieving  the  legitimate  aim  of
             securing  the   public   interest   through   the   consistent
             application of immigration controls."

            (My emphasis)

37. Judge O'Hanlon then said, at paras 34-35, as follows:

            "34. I therefore find that insofar as  the  matters  which  were
             previously determined  by  Judge  Turner  are  concerned,  the
             Appellant's  application  relies  upon  facts  which  are  not
             materially different from those considered by Judge Turner  in
             the earlier determination and that accordingly,  I  find  that
             those issues have previously been determined and  accordingly,
             refuse the Appellant's appeal on those grounds.

            35.  For the avoidance of doubt, insofar  as  it  was  suggested
             that  the  issues  of  Beoku-Betts  and  Chikwamba  were   not
             considered by Judge Turner, I have  considered  those  aspects
             and having done so, do not find that the Respondent's decision
             to be disproportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  maintaining
             the public  interest  through  the  maintenance  of  effective
             immigration controls as referred to in  Section  117B  of  The
             2002 Act."

The grounds

38. I have extracted six  grounds  from  the  grounds  of  appeal.  I  have
    provided the numbering below.

39. Grounds 1, 2 and 3 relate  to  Judge  O'Hanlon's  reliance  upon  Judge
    Turner's finding that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family
    life being enjoyed between the appellant and the sponsor  in  Pakistan.
    In summary, they contend as follows:

      (i)   Ground 1: The guidance in Devaseelan was not applicable  because
        Judge O'Hanlon accepted that  there  was  fresh  evidence,  i.e.  a
        letter from the GP dated 5 February 2020.

      (ii)  Ground 2: Judge O'Hanlon said  that  the  GP's  letter  dated  5
        February 2020 was the same as the previous letter dated 8  February
        2019 but in the same breath he accepted that there was no certainty
        that the earlier letter was before  Judge  Turner.  Judge  O'Hanlon
        therefore erred when he resorted to an assumption at para 29 of his
        decision.

      (iii) Ground 3: Judge O'Hanlon interpreted  the  requirement  to  show
        "insurmountable obstacles"  in  a  literal  way,  contrary  to  the
        decision on Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 where it was held  that  it
        was necessary for the " ...Rules to be interpreted  in  a  sensible
        and practical rather than a purely literal way..."

40. Ground 4 relates to the  appellant's  private  life  claim  under  para
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. It contends that Judge O'Hanlon
    erred by failing to make any finding at all  under  para  276ADE(1)(vi)
    which he did not mention at all.

41. Grounds 5 and 6 relate to Judge O'Hanlon's finding  that  the  decision
    was proportionate and that there were no exceptional circumstances.  In
    summary, they contend that Judge O'Hanlon erred in law as follows:

      (i)   Ground 5: Judge  O'Hanlon  failed  to  follow  the  step-by-step
        approach as laid down in R (Razgar)  v  SSHD  (2004)  UKHL  27  and
        considered the issue "in a throwaway line".

      (ii)  Ground 6: Judge O'Hanlon's decision was irrational,  given  that
        the appellant has been in the country for more than 10 years;  that
        she was a lawful entrant  and  had  missed  submitting  an  in-time
        application to extend her leave "due to  devastating  circumstances
        of the family". Her character was unblemished. "It  beggars  belief
        when it is suggested that she should go  back  alone  or  with  her
        husband who is a British citizen and seriously ill."

Submissions

42. I will deal with the appellant's written submissions in  my  assessment
    below, to the extent that I consider it necessary to do so.

Assessment

Ground 1

43. Ground 1 contends that the letter dated 5 February 2020 from the mother-
    in-law's GP constituted fresh evidence. The grounds do not contend that
    there was any other fresh  evidence  before  Judge  O'Hanlon.  In  this
    respect, I have noted that Judge  O'Hanlon  said  at  para  28  of  his
    decision that he was invited by the appellant's representative to  rely
    upon the appellant's  bundle  of  evidence  but  that  the  appellant's
    representative did not particularise the documents that  he  was  being
    invited to consider. Judge  O'Hanlon  then  went  on  to  consider  the
    evidence in the bundles. His assessment at para 28 has not challenged.

44. Ground 1 concerns only the letter from the mother-in-law's GP  dated  5
    February 2020. Plainly, this letter was not before Judge Turner because
    it post-dates her decision. However, Judge O'Hanlon correctly said that
    the letters dated 8 February 2019 and 5 February 2020 were identical in
    content.

45. It is important to  note  that  the  grounds  do  not  challenge  Judge
    O'Hanlon's assessment that the two letters were identical, nor  (and  I
    emphasise this) do they challenge his assessment  that  the  mother-in-
    law's condition was unchanged since Judge Turner's decision.

46. Accordingly, although Judge O'Hanlon had before him the letter dated  5
    February 2020 that was not before Judge Turner, the  significant  point
    is that her medical condition remained unchanged since the decision  of
    Judge Turner. On that basis, I reject the submission in ground  1  that
    there was any fresh evidence in this respect before Judge O'Hanlon. The
    mere fact that the appellant produced yet more evidence of her  mother-
    in-law's condition does not,  of  itself  mean  that  there  was  fresh
    evidence before Judge  O'Hanlon.  By  way  of  analogy,  if  an  asylum
    claimant whose evidence has been wholly disbelieved by a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and who has had his appeal  dismissed  subsequently
    submits, in support of a second appeal,  a  new  witness  statement  in
    which he simply reiterates the same evidence that was  advanced  before
    the first judge, the new witness statement does  not  constitute  fresh
    evidence, as such. It is  the  same  evidence  which  is  simply  being
    repeated.

47. Even if I am wrong about that, and the evidence before  Judge  O'Hanlon
    constitutes fresh evidence, the guidance in Devaseelan was nevertheless
    still applicable. This is because, as Judge O'Hanlon said at para 26 of
    his decision, Devaseelan states, inter alia,  that,  if  the  case  put
    before  the  second  adjudicator  relies  upon  facts  which  are   not
    materially different from those put to the first  adjudicator  and  the
    appellant proposes to support the claim by what is in essence the  same
    evidence as that available to him at that time, the second  adjudicator
    should  regard  the  issues  as  settled  by  the  first  adjudicator's
    determination and make findings in line with  the  first  determination
    rather than allowing the matter to be relitigated.

48. For the reasons given at paras 43-47 above, I reject ground 1, that the
    guidance in Devaseelan was not applicable.

Ground 2

49. At para 29 of his decision, Judge O'Hanlon said that he  could  not  be
    certain that the letter dated 8 February 2019  had  been  before  Judge
    Turner. It is plain that the assumption he made  (which  has  not  been
    challenged) is that both letters, which  he  noted  were  in  identical
    terms, accurately described the medical condition  of  the  appellant's
    mother-in-law as at the dates on which the letters were written. He did
    not assume that the letter of 8 February 2019 was before Judge  Turner,
    as ground 2 contends.

50. To the contrary, what Judge O'Hanlon plainly did was  to  consider  for
    himself what  the  two  letters  showed  about  the  condition  of  the
    appellant's mother-in-law as at the dates of the two  letters.  On  the
    basis of his assumption (which  has  not  been  challenged)  that  both
    letters accurately described the medical condition of  the  appellant's
    mother-in-law as at the dates on which they were written and given that
    the contents of the two letters were identical, he found (and this  has
    not been challenged either) that the medical condition and  care  needs
    of the appellant's mother-in-law had not changed between the  dates  of
    the two letters. He  said  that  "it  would  appear  that  the  medical
    condition and care requirements  of  the  mother-in-law  are  unchanged
    since the determination made by Judge Turner". He made that  assessment
    on the basis of what Judge Turner had said in her  decision  about  the
    medical condition and care needs of the appellant's mother-in-law. As I
    have said in relation to ground 1, Judge O'Hanlon's finding,  that  the
    medical condition and care needs of the appellant's mother-in-law  were
    unchanged, has not been challenged.

51. I therefore reject ground 2. It fails to establish that Judge  O'Hanlon
    had made any speculative assumption that the letter  dated  8  February
    2019 was before Judge Turner.

The remaining grounds

52. It is necessary to consider the following matters before turning to the
    remaining grounds:

      (i)    Whether  there  was  any  other  fresh  evidence  before  Judge
        O'Hanlon.

      (ii)  Precisely what of Judge Turner's findings were adopted by  Judge
        O'Hanlon.

53. In relation to (i) above and as I have said above, the letter  dated  5
    February 2020 was not before Judge Turner and it may also be  that  the
    letter dated 8 February 2019 was not before Judge Turner. However, as I
    have also said already, the significant point is  that  Judge  O'Hanlon
    correctly found that the medical condition of the appellant's mother-in-
    law was unchanged since the date of Judge Turner's decision.

54. There is no suggestion in Judge O'Hanlon's decision that there was  any
    fresh evidence before  him  that  showed  that  the  sponsor's  medical
    condition had changed for the worse, nor do the  grounds  contend  that
    there was. The grounds contend that the sponsor is seriously ill.  This
    simply ignores the fact that there is no suggestion that there was  any
    evidence before Judge O'Hanlon that the sponsor's condition had altered
    for the worse in any material way since  the  date  of  Judge  Turner's
    decision.

55. There is no suggestion in Judge O'Hanlon's decision that there was  any
    fresh evidence before him concerning any obstacles that  the  appellant
    and the sponsor might experience in enjoying family  life  together  in
    Pakistan, nor do the grounds contend that there was.

56. There is no suggestion in Judge O'Hanlon's decision that there was  any
    fresh evidence concerning the quality of the appellant's  private  life
    in the United Kingdom or that she  had  strengthened  or  deepened  her
    private life in the United Kingdom or her ties to the United Kingdom in
    any significant way in the period, just short of one year, that elapsed
    between the date of promulgation of Judge  Turner's  decision  and  the
    date of promulgation of Judge O'Hanlon's decision. The grounds  do  not
    suggest that there was any such fresh  evidence.  They  merely  contend
    that the appellant had strenthened  her  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom by virtue of having lived for a longer  period  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the date of Judge Turner's decision.

57. The period of just under one year that elapsed between the decisions of
    Judge Turner and Judge O'Hanlon is not such that it can be said, in the
    absence of any fresh evidence concerning the appellant's private  life,
    that it is self-evident that there has been a significant  or  material
    change in her private life claim.

58. Indeed, I draw attention to the fact that  there  is  no  challenge  to
    Judge O'Hanlon's finding (at para 34) that the appellant's  application
    relies upon facts  which  were  not  materially  different  from  those
    considered by Judge Turner in her decision.

59. In relation to the issue mentioned at para 52(ii) above, Judge O'Hanlon
    set out at para 26 of his decision the relevant part of the guidance in
    Devaseelan, summarised at my para 47 above. At para 25 of his decision,
    he said that he had considered  all  of  the  evidence  both  oral  and
    written in the round before reaching his conclusions. He then  went  on
    to consider the evidence before him and  made  his  finding  (which  is
    unchallenged) that the material facts were the same as they were as  at
    the date of  Judge  Turner's  decision.  He  then  considered  the  new
    arguments raised before him that had not been specifically mentioned in
    Judge Turner's decision and said that he adopted the findings of  Judge
    Turner "in relation to all other issues".

60. It is therefore clear that he  adopted  Judge  Turner's  findings  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  being  enjoyed
    between the appellant and the sponsor in Pakistan, that there  were  no
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration in Pakistan
    and that the respondent's decision was not disproportionate.

61. Put another way, he made his findings in  line  with  the  findings  of
    Judge Turner, pursuant to the  guidance  in  Devaseelan.  He  therefore
    followed the guidance in Devaseelan.

62. Having made the points above, I turn to the remainings grounds.

Ground 3

63. Ground 3 contends that Judge O'Hanlon interpreted  the  requirement  to
    show "insurmountable obstacles" in  a  literal  way,  contrary  to  the
    decision on Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 where it was held that  it  was
    necessary for the " ...Rules  to  be  interpreted  in  a  sensible  and
    practical rather than a purely literal way..."

64. Ground 3 ignores the fact that Judge O'Hanlon made his findings in line
    with the  findings  of  Judge  Turner,  pursuant  to  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan.

65. I have noted that ground 3 does not contend that there was  any  change
    in the law as it existed or as it was applied  by  the  courts  in  the
    period between Judge Turner's decision and Judge  O'Hanlon's  decision.
    It is difficult to see how that can be argued, given that the Court  of
    Appeal's decision was appealed  to  the  Supreme  Court  and  that  the
    Supreme Court's decision in Agyarko & others v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11  was
    delivered on 22 February 2017, i.e. before Judge Turner's decision  was
    promulgated.

66. For the reasons given at paras  53-65  above,  I  have  concluded  that
    ground 3 does not establish that Judge O'Hanlon made any error of  law.
    He was correct to follow the guidance in Devaseelan.

Grounds 4 and 5

67. Grounds 4 and 5 ignore the fact that Judge O'Hanlon made  his  findings
    in line with the findings of Judge Turner, pursuant to the guidance  in
    Devaseelan. By adopting Judge Turner's  findings,  Judge  O'Hanlon  did
    make a finding, in line with Judge Turner's finding, that the appellant
    did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
    Immigration Rules.

68. Contrary to ground 4, the appellant has had judicial  consideration  of
    whether or not she satisfies para 276ADE(1)(vi), for the reasons  given
    above paras 56-61 above.

69. It is not the case, as ground 5 contends, that Judge O'Hanlon failed to
    follow the step-by-step approach as laid down in  Razgar  and  that  he
    considered the issue "in a throwaway line".  Given  that  he  made  his
    findings in line with the findings of  Judge  Turner  pursuant  to  the
    guidance in  Devaseelan,  the  decisions  of  Judge  Turner  and  Judge
    O'Hanlon have to be read together.

70. I have therefore concluded that grounds 4 and 5 do not  establish  that
    Judge O'Hanlon made any error of law.

Ground 6

71. There is no substance in ground 6. The assertion in  ground  6  and  at
    para 1 of the appellant's written submissions, that the  appellant  had
    not made an in-time application to extend her leave "due to devastating
    circumstances of the family", is not only a bare assertion, it  ignores
    the following: (i) that Judge Turner rejected the  explanation  in  the
    appeal before her that the timing of the  application  was  due  to  an
    oversight and that there was "no sinister motive"; and (ii) that  Judge
    Turner said that she had to question whether the delay  in  making  the
    application was a way of trying to circumvent the Immigration Rules  by
    building up more time in the United Kingdom (para 43 of Judge  Turner's
    decision).

72. The assertion in ground 6 that Judge O'Hanlon's decision was irrational
    is wholly untenable, given that:

      (i)   there was in reality no fresh evidence before Judge O'Hanlon;

      (ii)  the decision of Judge Turner was not successfully challenged;

      (iii) all that had happened since Judge Turner's decision is that  the
        appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  for  another  period  of
        almost a year; and

      (iv)  the material facts in the appeal before Judge O'Hanlon  had  not
        changed since the decision of Judge Turner.

73. Having rejected all the grounds, I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

74. Finally,  the  appellant's  written  submissions  raise  the  following
    matters which were not mentioned or raised in the grounds:

      (i)   The un-numbered paragraph  immediately  before  para  2  of  the
        written submissions refers to "a failure to have regard to relevant
        evidence" and "a failure to make findings on  relevant  facts".  If
        the latter concerns ground 4, I have dealt with ground 4 above. The
        appellant does not  otherwise  have  permission  to  advance  these
        grounds which are in any event unreasoned.

       (ii)   The  penultimate  paragraph   of   the   appellant's   written
        submissions states: "On the  issue  of  exceptionality,  the  Judge
        applied too high a threshold". This is not the  same  as  ground  6
        which contends that Judge O'Hanlon's  decision  on  proportionality
        was irrational.  Accordingly,  in  my  view,  this  constitutes  an
        attempt to raise a ground in respect of which  the  appellant  does
        not have permission. In any event, as  I  have  said  above,  Judge
        O'Hanlon's assessment of the only  new  matter  raised  before  him
        (that is, in relation to Beoku-Betts and Chikwamba, see paras 31-33
        of Judge O'Hanlon's decision) was not challenged in the grounds. In
        the absence of such a challenge and in the absence of any  evidence
        of a change in the material facts since the date of Judge  Turner's
        decision, this ground does not establish any error of law in  Judge
        O'Hanlon's finding, made in line with Judge Turner's finding,  that
        the appellant's removal was proportionate.

75. Given that there was no evidence to show that there was any  change  in
    the material facts since the date of Judge  Turner's  decision,  it  is
    plain that the appellant's appeal before Judge O'Hanlon was a  're-run'
    of her appeal before Judge Turner. Indeed, it is difficult to  see  why
    para 353 of the Immigration Rules was not applied by the respondent  to
    the appellant's application of 3 September 2019.


Notice of Decision

76. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of law such that it fell  to  be  set  aside.  The
    appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.


Signed                                             Date: 30 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email

