
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20042/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 September 2021                          |On 11 October 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                mukhtar begum
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel, instructed by Reiss Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is the  re-making  decision  in  the  appeal  of  Ms  Begum  ("the
    appellant"), a Pakistani citizen born in 1947,  who  had  sought  entry
    clearance to join family members (specifically her son, Mr  Haq  Nawaz,
    "the sponsor")  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  application  for  entry
    clearance was deemed to be a human rights claim and this was refused by
    the respondent on 3 September 2018. The First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed
    the appeal against that refusal. However, by a decision promulgated  on
    24 February 2021, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
    law and that its decision should be set aside. My error of law decision
    is annexed to this re-making decision.



The issues

 2. Although I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision,  a  number  of
    findings made by the judge have been preserved:

          a)  the  appellant  suffers  from  dementia  and  other  physical
             ailments;




          b) care needs would not be appropriately met by a placement in  a
             residential care home in Pakistan;




          c) the sponsor is able to maintain and accommodate the  appellant
             if she were to reside in the United Kingdom.

 3. This is an appeal which is based solely on Article 8.  Ultimately,  the
    core question is whether it would be disproportionate  to  prevent  the
    appellant from coming to the United Kingdom to live with  the  sponsor.
    In answering  this  question,  I  will  have  regard  to  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules"),  in  particular  the  Adult  Dependent
    Relative provisions within Appendix FM to the Rules (, the ADR  Rules")
    together with paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  which,  submits  Mr  Holt,  is
    capable of assisting the appellant's case.  Beyond  the  scope  of  the
    Rules,  I  will  consider  the  appellant's  case  on  a  wider   view,
    incorporating a balancing exercise in which all relevant  factors  will
    be considered on a cumulative basis.



The evidence considered

 4. I have considered the documentary evidence  contained  in  two  bundles
    provided by the appellant back in 2019, AB1, indexed and  paginated  1-
    163 and AB2, indexed and paginated 1-60, together with a recent witness
    statement from the sponsor dated 7 September 2021 and the  respondent's
    original appeal bundle.

 5. Although a  number  of  witnesses  (all  relatives  of  the  appellant)
    attended the remote hearing,  only  the  sponsor  was  called  to  give
    evidence. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Holt confirmed the  identity
    of these potential witnesses.  I  make  two  brief  observations  here.
    First, appellants' representatives should endeavour,  as  a  matter  of
    good practice, to inform  both  the  Tribunal  and  the  respondent  in
    advance of a hearing who will be attending and who will be giving  live
    evidence. It is potentially unfair on the respondent to  be  confronted
    with a long list of witnesses at the outset of a  hearing.  Second,  if
    witnesses are intended to be called, there must be  witness  statements
    for them which have been filed and served in advance.

 6. In this case, and in large part  through  the  pragmatic  and  flexible
    approach adopted by Ms Everett (as  is  her  custom),  no  difficulties
    arose. She confirmed that she would have no questions for the witnesses
    other than the sponsor. On this basis, Mr Holt confirmed that only  the
    sponsor was to be called. Having said that, and without opposition from
    Ms Everett, I was content  to  treat  as  being  adopted,  the  witness
    statements/letters of the other witnesses, Mr  Shah  Nawas,  Ms  Robina
    Shahnawas, Mr Adnan Ali and Mr Hadar Ali.

 7. The sponsor gave evidence with the assistance of  an  Urdu  interpreter
    and I  was  satisfied  that  they  understood  one  another  throughout
    proceedings. The sponsor  adopted  his  recent  witness  statement  and
    answered questions from Mr Holt, Ms Everett, and  me.  In  summary,  he
    provided information about the  appellant's  circumstances  during  his
    stay in Pakistan between January and July 2021. This included  attempts
    at arranging care for the appellant. He explained  that  whilst  family
    members had in the past been able to visit Pakistan to help  out,  this
    was not always  possible  and  Covid-19  had  made  matters  much  more
    difficult.



Submissions

 8. Ms Everett was concise in her submissions. In light  of  the  preserved
    findings, the issue here was narrow: could appropriate care be arranged
    for the appellant at her home in Pakistan? Ms Everett suggested that it
    was surprising that no one had been found who could provide appropriate
    care in that setting. There was a lack of clarity as to the appellant's
    actual situation at the moment. Overall, it was said  that  appropriate
    care could be arranged and that the respondent's decision had been  and
    remained proportionate.

 9. Mr Holt relied on his skeleton argument. He asked me to accept that the
    evidence provided by the  sponsor  was  credible.  There  had,  it  was
    submitted, been a genuine effort to find people to assist the appellant
    whilst family members were not in Pakistan. Those  efforts  had  proved
    unsuccessful. In light of these efforts and the medical  evidence  from
    2019 (it was accepted that no new  evidence  had  been  provided  since
    then), appropriate care could not be provided. It  was  submitted  that
    the  appellant  was  probably  currently  living  below  the   standard
    contemplated by the ADR Rules.

10. In addition, Mr Holt submitted  that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules could apply even though the  appellant  was  not  in  the  United
    Kingdom. If it could not apply directly, it was  nonetheless  possible,
    he submitted, for me to consider, on a hypothetical basis,  whether  or
    not the appellant would be able to satisfy that provision if  she  were
    in the  United  Kingdom.  This  assessment  would  inform  the  overall
    proportionality exercise.

11. I record here my gratitude to both representatives for  the  clear  and
    concise way in which they have presented their respective cases.

12. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



The relevant legal framework

13. The relevant provisions of the ADR Rules state:

           "E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their
           partner are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the
           applicant's partner, must be unable, even with the practical and
           financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of
           care in the country where they are living, because-

           (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country
           who can reasonably provide it; or

           (b) it is not affordable."

14. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules provides:

           "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are
           that at the date of application, the applicant:

           (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
           Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in
           Appendix FM; and

           (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and

           ...

           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18  years  or  above,
           has lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK."

15. There is case-law on the ADR Rules, including Ribeli  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    611. This body of law  confirms  that  appropriate  care  will  involve
    consideration of the particular needs of the individual, that emotional
    needs can be taken into account if there is a causal link with  medical
    conditions, and that the ADR Rules impose a  "rigorous  and  demanding"
    standard.

16. Case-law also indicates that whilst and ability to satisfy  a  relevant
    Rule will in most cases be dispositive of  an  Article  8  appeal,  and
    inability to do so will not be fatal, although it is a relevant  factor
    accounting against an appellant.



Findings and conclusions

17. First, I refer back to the preserved of fact relating to  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal. These narrow down the scope of the findings
    which I now need to make.

18. As a whole, I find that the evidence provided by the  sponsor  and  the
    other individuals has been honestly stated. It is clear that they  have
    the appellant's best interests at heart and  that  they  see  these  as
    requiring her to come to the United Kingdom to live  with  them.  On  a
    purely human level, that is entirely understandable and,  it  might  be
    said, commendable. Having said that, this state of affairs does not  of
    itself render the respondent's decision disproportionate.

19. I find that the sponsor and other family members in the United  Kingdom
    have travelled out to Pakistan to stay with and help the appellant over
    the course of time. The evidence shows that there have been  relatively
    extended periods of  such  residence,  including,  most  recently,  the
    sponsor's six-month stay this year. I accept that it  is  not  easy  to
    make such arrangements and that these might place  certain  strains  on
    the family in this country, financially and otherwise. However,  it  is
    more likely than not that such visits could continue in  the  short  to
    medium term, as they have occurred in the past. The burden (if that  is
    the appropriate term) of going to Pakistan has not fallen solely on the
    sponsor's shoulders and need not do so in the future. In so finding,  I
    have taken the Covid 19 situation into account. This will clearly  have
    made visits more difficult. Yet it did not  prevent  the  sponsor  from
    making his lengthy visit earlier this year. Further, whilst there is of
    course no guarantee as to what may occur, it  is  not  unreasonable  to
    assume that the Covid-19 situation  will  improve  in  the  foreseeable
    future.

20. My finding does not extend to the possibility  of  any  of  the  United
    Kingdom-based family members permanently  relocating  to  Pakistan.  In
    light of the evidence, this would not be  necessary  (even  if  it  was
    reasonable).

21. As to the medical evidence, I have considered the hospital letters from
    2019, referred to in my error of law decision. It is,  I  am  bound  to
    say, somewhat surprising that no  updated  medical  evidence  has  been
    sought or provided. The Shaafi Hospital letter dated  11  May  2018  is
    brief and leaves a number of unanswered questions, given  the  evidence
    as a whole. For example, whilst it is said there that the appellant was
    unable to "take food and medicines  by  herself",  it  would  certainly
    appear as though she has been able to undertake these tasks,  at  least
    during what would appear to be relatively extended periods  when  there
    has been no live-in care at her home. There is no clear  evidence  from
    any professional (or indeed the sponsor) to  indicate  actual  neglect,
    ill-health  caused  directly  by  an  inability  to  eat  and/or   take
    medication, or a danger to self. The hospital letter dated 9  September
    2019 is more detailed,  but  does  not  mention  the  ability  to  take
    nutrition certain other matters.  It  does  state  that  the  appellant
    needed full-time care from "at least two female attendants" in order to
    help her with her overall needs.  The  appellant's  circumstances  have
    not, however, been updated by way of medical report or  what  might  be
    described as a care needs assessment by  any  other  body  all  private
    providers.

22. I do  of  course  take  into  account  the  fact  that  dementia  is  a
    progressive condition and it will not have improved since 2019. This is
    confirmed by the inexpert (but honest) evidence from the sponsor.  That
    is not to say that I should assume that the situation has deteriorated.
    I do not make such an assumption.

23. The foregoing leads me to the important question of the  attempts  made
    by the family to arrange for appropriate live-in care for the appellant
    in Pakistan.

24. On the sponsor's evidence, attempts in the past to  arrange  care  have
    been unsuccessful. It is said that one individual had  in  fact  stolen
    from the appellant. I am prepared to accept that this occurred.  As  to
    more recent attempts, the sponsor told me that he  had  undertaken  the
    following during his last visit to Pakistan:

          a) approached a 15/16 year old boy who only seemed to have worked
             for "a few days" before leaving;




          b) found a woman with an eight-month old baby  who  wanted  other
             members of the family to come and live in at  the  appellant's
             house. This was not possible and so the lady left;




          c) asked what was described  as  an  "older  relative"  to  help.
             However, the appellant ended up "helping" the lady instead and
             the arrangement did not work out.

25. As far as I could tell, no  further  arrangements  were  put  in  place
    before the sponsor had to come back to the United Kingdom in  order  to
    have a medical test here.

26. Having considered matters in the round, and intending no disrespect  to
    the sponsor or other family members in this country, I have come to the
    conclusion that the evidence does not demonstrate that appropriate care
    for the appellant in  her  own  home  could  not  be  arranged  through
    reasonable efforts. My reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

27.  First,  I  accept  that  the  United  Kingdom-based  family  are   not
    particularly affluent. However, as a collective body, there  are  funds
    which have been and  can  be  utilised  for  the  appellant's  care  in
    Pakistan.  The  cost  must  presumably  be  relative  to  the   general
    costs/standards of living  in  that  country.  I  have  no  independent
    evidence from the appellant on this issue and I am having to draw  what
    I consider to be a reasonable inference.

28. Second, there is no evidence  from  either  the  family  or  any  other
    company/organisation in Pakistan confirming  what,  if  any,  enquiries
    have   been   made   as   to   the   recruitment    of    appropriately
    suitable/qualified/professional carers for the appellant.  The  sponsor
    asserted that there were no such "professionals", although he  accepted
    that they may be present in cities. That may be his honestly held view,
    but it is not in my  view  sufficient.  They  have  not  been  relevant
    enquiries made. I find it unlikely in the extreme that no  such  carers
    would exist, even outside of major cities. Further, Mirpur  city  is  a
    sizeable urban area in any event.

29. Third, and following from the  last  point,  there  is  no  independent
    evidence to demonstrate  that  appropriate  care  for  this  particular
    appellant is unavailable in Pakistan, through a lack  of  provision  or
    prohibitive cost.

30. Fourth, the attempts made by the  sponsor  during  his  last  visit  to
    Pakistan rather speak for themselves  as  regards  a  lack  of  what  I
    consider to be reasonable steps to seek appropriate care provision  for
    the appellant. The first attempt related to a  teenage  boy.  That,  it
    seems to me, was obviously inappropriate. The reliability  of  a  15/16
    year old would be open to question. The hospital letter from  2019  has
    suggested two female attendants, which makes an approach to  a  teenage
    boy  appear  incongruous.  It  is  entirely  unsurprising   that   this
    arrangement lasted only "a few days".

31. The second attempt was to approach a woman with a young baby. I was not
    told about  her  experience/qualifications/general  suitability  for  a
    caring job. Again, it appears as though she was not suitable, given her
    familial circumstances. This, with respect, might  have  been  apparent
    from the outset.

32. The third and final attempt was in some ways as  inappropriate  as  the
    first. The  sponsor  contacted  a  relative  who  was  older  than  the
    appellant herself. It is rather telling that  the  appellant  ended  up
    helping the older relative.

33. Fifth, the hospital letter indicated that the appellant required round-
    the-clock  care  by  two  female  assistants.  A  difficulty   in   the
    appellant's case is that 24-hour care has never seemingly been provided
    since 2019 and that at no time  have  the  family  sought  to  actually
    employ two female live-in carers at the same time. The evidence  before
    me does not  indicate  that,  notwithstanding  was  identified  in  the
    hospital letter the appellant has been a danger to herself, or that her
    health has  significantly deteriorated as a result of a lack  of  care,
    and it does indicate that she has in  fact  been  left  alone  for  not
    insubstantial periods of time.

34. Sixth, I take into account Mr Holt's submission that the appellant  may
    have been living at a  sub-standard  level  over  time,  when  assessed
    against the test stipulated in the ADR Rules. The evidence itself  does
    not actually bear this out. Mr Holt has suggested  that  the  appellant
    may now be living in sub-standard  conditions  or  circumstances,  when
    compared to the  level  contemplated  by  the  ADR  Rules.  That  is  a
    relatively difficult issue to address, in part because of the  lack  of
    updated medical or other relevant evidence from Pakistan. In  light  of
    the evidence as a whole and my specific assessment of aspects  thereof,
    I do not accept that she is  living  in  the  circumstances  which  are
    materially below those reasonably  experienced  by  persons  living  in
    Pakistan in general or her home area in particular.  This  involves  me
    drawing what I consider  to  be  reasonable  inferences  as  to  living
    standards (given the lack of independent  evidence),  and  I  take  the
    appellant's age and health into account. As discussed  previously,  the
    evidence does not show that she is suffering from self-neglect, or that
    she is a danger to herself or others. Nor does  it  show  that  she  is
    living in sub-standard accommodation. All-told, I do not  consider  her
    current living circumstances to constitute a basis  for  success  under
    the ADR Rules or a particularly strong or  compelling  feature  of  her
    wider Article 8 case.

35. Seventh, there is very regular communication between the appellant  and
    her family in this country. In terms of the taking of medication, there
    is no reason why she cannot be assisted by messages or telephone  calls
    by family members at appropriate times of the day.

36. Eighth, Mr Holt has put forward the perfectly respectable argument that
    appropriate care might act as an indicator  of  the  unavailability  of
    such care in Pakistan. To put it another way, how  many  times  must  a
    family try before the ADR Rule or Article 8 on a  wider  basis  can  be
    satisfied?

37. I have no difficulty with the general concept of that  position.  There
    will undoubtedly be cases where, on the evidence provided, numerous and
    reasonable attempts have been made to  arrange  suitable  care  for  an
    individual in their country of origin, but without success due to,  for
    example, the cost, unavailability of suitable, all the specific  nature
    of the individuals care needs. The all-important proviso is the  nature
    of the evidence provided in any given case. Here, that evidence, whilst
    honestly provided, is not, for the reasons stated above, sufficient  to
    discharge the burden (on the balance of probabilities) of showing  that
    suitable care is not available in Pakistan.

38. The consequence of  my  conclusion  on  the  availability  of  care  in
    Pakistan is that the appellant cannot satisfy the ADR  Rules.  This  in
    turn acts as what I consider to be a  significant  factor  against  her
    when it comes to the assessment of proportionality on  a  wider  basis.
    The Rules reflect the  Executive's  view  of  where  the  balance  lies
    between the interests of individuals on the one hand and those  of  the
    public  on  the  other.  Numerous  authorities  make  it   clear   that
    significant  or  "considerable"  weight  should  be  afforded  to   the
    respondent's view of where the balance lies when the Rules  are  deemed
    to be compatible with Article 8 (see, for example, paragraphs 47 and 48
    of Agyarko [2017] Imm AR 764).

39. As to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), I conclude that it cannot apply  in  the
    appellant's case. The wording of the provision itself clearly indicates
    that it relates to persons already in the United Kingdom. I also reject
    Mr Holt's point concerning a hypothetical assessment. It is  artificial
    to place the appellant in the United Kingdom and then ask  whether  she
    would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to  a  re-integration   into
    Pakistani society. The fact is that she is already integrated into that
    society by virtue of her life-long residence there. It is true that she
    is elderly and  is  unwell.  However,  that  of  itself  would  is  not
    rendering her "an outsider". There is no evidence to suggest  that  she
    has been rejected by her community. Indeed, the opposite  seems  to  be
    the case: they have helped her on  a  fairly  regular  basis  over  the
    course of some years now. The need for suitable care does  not  act  to
    create very significant obstacles to continued integration.

40. My conclusion that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) cannot be satisfied does not
    count against the appellant.  The  provision  simply  cannot  apply  to
    anyone in the appellant's situation. It is not a  relevant  factor  one
    way or the other.

41. I now turn to additional matters. I accept that the  sponsor  would  be
    able to maintain and accommodate the appellant were she to come to  the
    United Kingdom. Given the nature of dementia, I hold a concern that, in
    the course of time, her dementia will in fact require residential  care
    and therefore a cost to the public purse, but I do not factor this into
    my assessment as it is too speculative at this juncture. The ability to
    maintain  and  accommodate  cannot  in  my  judgment  be  considered  a
    particularly weighty matter in the appellant's favour when  considering
    proportionality, however. If the appellant was in  the  United  Kingdom
    and I was considering  section  117B(3)  of  the  2002  Act,  financial
    independence would be regarded as a  neutral  factor.  Non-recourse  to
    public funds if an  individual  were  to  come  to  this  country  from
    overseas cannot in my view represent anything much beyond neutrality.

42. As regards the  appellant's  probable  inability  to  speak  reasonable
    English, I regard this as simply a neutral factor  given  her  age  and
    state of health.

43. I take account of the evidence from all  the  family  members  in  this
    country as to their concern for the appellant and their desire have her
    live with them. I accept that there are close familial  bonds  already,
    and that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom would be likely
    to strengthen these.  There  would  be  an  increased  opportunity  for
    younger members of the family to spend more time with the appellant.

44. All of the factors resting on  the  appellant's  side  of  the  balance
    sheet, when considered individually and  cumulatively,  do  not  go  to
    outweigh  the  strong  public   interest   in   maintaining   effective
    immigration control, which itself is an inability to  satisfy  the  ADR
    Rules.

45. It follows from the above that the respondent's decision to refuse  the
    human  rights  claim  was  and  remains  proportionate  and  that   the
    appellant's appeal must be dismissed.



Anonymity


46. The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction and there is no
    sound reason for me to do so. I make no such direction.



Notice of Decision

47. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

48. I re-make the decision by dismissing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 10 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                      Date: 10 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20042/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2021                          |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                mukhtar begum
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel, instructed by Reiss Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born in 1947, appeals against  the
    decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  K  Hussain  ("the  judge"),
    promulgated on 20 November 2019, by which he dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of her human rights claim, made
    in the context of an  application  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
    dependent relative of her son ("the sponsor") who resides in the United
    Kingdom. The human rights claim was made on 26 May 2018 and the refusal
    decision is dated 3 September of that year.



The judge's decision

 2. In many respects, the judge's decision  is  careful  and  thorough.  In
    summary form, the following relevant findings of fact were made:

              a) the appellant suffered from dementia and other ailments  as
                 result of which she required long-term personal care;




              b) she lived in a house of which she had ownership;


              c) she had been living alone and without any home  help  since
                 February 2017;


              d) previous attempts  at  employing  home  carers  had  proved
                 unsuccessful due to the unreliability of services provided;


              e) the appellant was assisted by neighbours who checked in  on
                 her four or five times a day, took her to see her doctor if
                 required, and could assist in trying to employ home carers.
                 This arrangement could continue;


              f) she had siblings residing in Pakistan, two of whom lived  a
                 significant distance away whilst  the  other  resided  some
                 40km from her house;


              g) it would be possible for the appellant to  move  closer  to
                 her siblings;


              h) there was "no indication" that the siblings  could  provide
                 the requisite care required by the appellant;


              i)  care  home  provision  in  Pakistan  was   available   and
                 affordable;


              j) the appellant's family in the United Kingdom  travelled  to
                 Pakistan  relatively  frequently  and  assisted  with   the
                 appellant's care whilst there;




              k) the sponsor  would  be  able  to  adequately  maintain  and
                 accommodate the appellant were she to reside in the  United
                 Kingdom.

 3. Following on from the findings of primary  fact,  the  judge  correctly
    directed himself to the relevant Immigration Rules,  namely  E-ECDR.2.4
    and 2.5 of Appendix FM. Satisfaction of the former  was  common  ground
    between the parties.

 4. In respect of E-ECDR.2.5, the judge concluded that whilst care homes in
    Pakistan existed and were affordable, such a solution  would  not  meet
    the appellant's needs, particularly on an emotional  and  psychological
    level (see [36]).

 5. At [37] the judge asked himself the question as to whether the  present
    situation  surrounding  the  appellant's  personal  care  needs   could
    continue into the foreseeable future. He concluded that the  assistance
    of the neighbours indicated  "some  commitment"  to  those  needs.  If,
    however, this source of support was not viable, the judge  went  on  to
    conclude that the appellant's siblings could step in as substitutes for
    the neighbours. They, like the neighbours, could help to  arrange  home
    carers and check in on the appellant at  regular  intervals.  The  fact
    that home carers had proved unsatisfactory in the past did not preclude
    a more positive outcome in the future. In all  the  circumstances,  the
    judge concluded at [39] that:

           "... the appellant can with the practical and financial help  of
           the sponsor, his son, his brother  and  their  families  in  the
           United Kingdom as well as her family  in  Pakistan,  obtain  the
           required level of care that she needs in Pakistan."

 6. As result of this conclusion, the appellant was unable  to  satisfy  E-
    ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM. The judge went on to address Article 8 outside
    the context of the Rules and concluded that the  respondent's  decision
    was proportionate. The appeal was duly dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. In essence, the grounds of appeal challenge two aspects of the  judge's
    conclusions. First, it is said  that  he  failed  to  address  relevant
    medical evidence, particularly a letter from the Shaafi Hospital, dated
    9 September  2019  ("the  hospital  letter"),  which  stated  that  the
    appellant required full-time care from  immediate  family  members  and
    that this would involve at least two female carers. Second,  the  judge
    is criticised for failing to adequately address the limited  nature  of
    the assistance provided by the neighbours and/or the possibility of her
    siblings acting as substitutes.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted without restriction.

 9. There has been no rule 24 response from the respondent. Therefore,  the
    judge's conclusion that a  placement  in  a  care  home  would  not  be
    appropriate stands unchallenged.




The hearing before me

10. Mr Holt relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
    essential problem with the judge's analysis  and  conclusions  was  the
    failure to address the hospital letter. Went to the issue of the nature
    of the care required by the appellant. The judge had focused  entirely,
    and erroneously, on the ability of the  neighbours,  and  possibly  the
    siblings,  to  assist  in  whatever  way  they  could.  Such  help  was
    incongruent with the appellant's actual needs. Mr Holt  also  submitted
    that the judge had failed to take any proper account of the  fact  that
    past attempts had simply not worked.

11. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge had adopted a  balanced  and  careful
    approach to the evidence and  that  his  conclusions  were  sound.  The
    hospital letter was  thin  and  substance  but  it  was  in  any  event
    tolerably clear that the judge had taken it into account. The judge was
    not required to address what might be  the  perfect  scenario  for  the
    appellant, but had simply to reach a conclusion as  to  level  of  care
    which would reasonably meet her needs. The assistance provided  by  the
    neighbours could indeed continue. There was  nothing  perverse  in  the
    judge's findings or conclusions.



Decision on error of law

12. I conclude that the judge has erred in law by failing to have  any,  or
    any adequate, regard to the  hospital  letter,  or,  alternatively,  by
    failing to provide any, or any adequate,  reasons  for  rejecting  this
    evidence, when setting out his findings and conclusions. My reasons for
    this conclusion are as follows.

13. It is clear that the judge was aware of  the  hospital  letter;  it  is
    referred to at [6] and [21]. The latter reference is in the context  of
    the finding that the appellant suffered from dementia. Nothing is  said
    at that point about the nature of the care required as result  of  that
    condition.

14. I acknowledge the point made by Mr Kotas to the effect that  it  should
    be presumed that the judge had the hospital letter in mind when  making
    his findings and reaching his conclusions, even if it is not  expressly
    referred to after [21]. However, whilst the letter is undoubtedly light
    on detail, it nonetheless states in  clear  terms  that  the  appellant
    required "full time care from her immediate family  members"  and  that
    this should be provided  by  "at  least  two  female  attendants."  The
    standing of the author and the diagnosis of dementia had been  accepted
    by the judge. There was no on the face of the evidence not also to have
    accepted the doctors opinion as to the nature of the care required.  In
    light of the foregoing, the hospital letter constituted a central  item
    of evidence in the appeal and required express consideration  when  the
    judge's conclusions were set out.

15. When the judge  came  to  assessing  the  assistance  provided  by  the
    neighbours, nothing is said about the hospital letter and the  author's
    opinion. This omission has to be set in the context of  what  help  the
    judge found the neighbours to have been providing: checking in  on  the
    appellant four or five times a day;  taking  her  to  her  doctor  when
    necessary; and having attempted to arrange home  carers  in  the  past.
    None of these activities, whilst commendable, amounted to actual direct
    care for the appellant's daily needs. In that sense, the judge was  not
    comparing like with like.

16. It follows from the foregoing that the failure to expressly address the
    hospital letter constitutes an error. Alternatively,  if  it  were  the
    case that the judge had hospital letter in mind, there is an absence of
    adequate reasons for rejecting the relevant aspects of this evidence.

17. The same error afflicts the judge's consideration of any assistance the
    siblings may have been able to offer.  Whether  or  not  the  appellant
    moved home to live closer to any of them was in reality  rather  beside
    the point. That is  because  the  judge  himself  accepted  that  these
    individuals would not have been  able  to  provide  the  personal  care
    required by the appellant. All they could have  done  was  to  seek  to
    replicate the help provided by  the  neighbours.  Thus,  the  potential
    import of the hospital letter and  the  failure  to  address  it  bears
    relevance to this alternative scenario as well. There is  an  error  of
    law here.

18. As to the question of whether  home  help  could  be  arranged  in  the
    future, I agree with Mr Kotas to the extent that  past  problems  would
    not be decisive of successful future provision. On the other hand,  the
    history of unreliability was a relevant factor.  In  my  judgment,  the
    judge has failed to take this into account. In any event, of  paramount
    significance in the determination  of  the  appeal  was  the  appellant
    situation as at the date  of  hearing  and,  at  most,  the  short-term
    future. The previous unsuccessful attempts at  employing  home  carers,
    combined with  the  actual  role  undertaken  by  the  neighbours  (and
    potentially the siblings),  went  to  further  highlight  the  need  to
    expressly engage with the hospital letter and what it  said  about  the
    nature of the care required.

19. Mr Kotas cited the lack of detail in the hospital letter. He  is  right
    to have done so. If the threshold of materiality was higher than it is,
    I might well have concluded that the judges errors should not result in
    his decision being set aside. However, the test is relatively  low.  In
    my view, the hospital letter  might  have  made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome; I am certainly not concluding that it would have (see  Degorce
    v HMRC [2017] EWCA Civ 1427; [2018] 4 WLR 79, at paragraph 95).

20. In all the circumstances, I set the judge's decision aside.



Disposal

21. Mr Holt suggested that if the decision were to be set aside, the appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Mr  Kotas  urged  me  to
    retain the matter in the Upper Tribunal.

22. Having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement  and  all  the
    circumstances of the case, I have concluded that the appropriate course
    of action is to retain this appeal in the Upper Tribunal  and  have  it
    listed for a resumed hearing.

23. The following findings made by the judge are preserved:

              a) the appellant suffers from dementia;




              b) the appellant's  overall  needs  would  not  be  met  by  a
                 placement in a residential care home in Pakistan;


              c) the  sponsor  is  able  to  maintain  and  accommodate  the
                 appellant if she were to reside in United Kingdom.

24. My provisional view is that the resumed hearing can fairly be conducted
    on a remote basis. However, I will  issue  directions  to  the  parties
    relating to this issue, amongst others (see below).



Anonymity


25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and there
    is no reason for me to do so. I make no such direction.



Notice of Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


27. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

28. I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.



Directions to the parties

        1) No later than 7 days after this decision  is  sent  out  to  the
           parties, the appellant may fil's e and serve any  objections  to
           the resumed hearing being conducted on a remote  basis.  At  the
           same time, the appellant is directed to confirm  whether  it  is
           intended to call any  further  oral  evidence  and,  if  it  is,
           whether an interpreter will be required;


        2) No later than 14 days after this decision is  sent  out  to  the
           parties, the respondent may file and serve any objections to the
           resumed hearing being conducted on a remote basis;

        3) Any further evidence relied on by either party  shall  be  filed
           and served no later than 28 days after this decision is sent out
           to the parties. Such evidence must be accompanied  by  a  notice
           under rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
           Rules 2008;

        4) No later than 7 days before the  resumed  hearing  (in  whatever
           form it may take), the appellant is to file and serve a skeleton
           argument;

        5) With liberty to apply.

Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions may  be  sent
by, or attached to, an email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's  reference
number (found  at  the  top  of  these  directions)  as  the  subject  line.
Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.  This address is not generally  available
for the filing of documents.

Service on the Secretary of State may be to  [email]  and  to  the  original
appellant, in the absence  of  any  contrary  instruction,  by  use  of  any
address apparent from the service of these directions.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  23 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

