
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: HU/20284/2019 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2020                             |                              |
|                                               |On 17 December 2020           |
|                                               |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                  ELVIR [M]

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Ms E Mottershaw, instructed by Berwicks Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Bosnia &  Herzegovina  with  date  of
   birth given as  15.2.88,  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   18.2.20 (Judge Cox), dismissing  his  human  rights  appeal  against  the
   decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  26.11.19,  to  refuse  his
   application made on 16.7.19 for Leave to Remain in the UK  on  article  8
   ECHR private and family life grounds.

2. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 1.5.20,  considering
   it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred by applying  a  too-narrow
   test for family life and did not consider the prospect  of  contact  with
   his child being granted by the Family Court rather than  the  appellant's
   intentions in seeking contact.

3. On 12.6.20 the Upper Tribunal issued directions proposing that the  error
   of law determination be made on the papers without a hearing but  offered
   the opportunity to objection to be taken and invited further  submissions
   in writing on the error of law issue. Following submissions  in  response
   to the directions, on 24.9.20 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith  directed  the
   error of law issue to be determined a  remote  oral  hearing.  Thus,  the
   matter came before me on 9.12.20.

4. Judge Smith raised the possibility that if an error of  law  were  to  be
   found, the Tribunal may need to consider whether this is a case  for  the
   invocation of the Protocol between the Tribunal and the Family  Court  in
   order to obtain documentation as to family proceedings.

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

6. The relevant background and chronology can be summarised as follows:

   i. The appellant first came to the UK in 2001 at the age of 12, with  his
      parents and sister. He returned to Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2006.

  ii. The appellant re-entered the UK clandestinely, either in 2007 or 2008,
      having been refused entry clearance in March 2008. He met and  married
      Ms  KS,  and  their  daughter  SM  was  born  in  2010.  However,  the
      relationship broke down and he has not seen his daughter since 2015.

 iii. He had a subsequent relationship with Ms KB, and their  child  HB  was
      born in 2013. That relationship also broke down and he  has  not  seen
      his son since 2017.

  iv. He was arrested as an illegal entrant  when  encountered  in  February
      2015.

   v. He is currently in a romantic relationship with GS, who has a child LS
      from a previous relationship, and both  of  whom  have  recently  been
      granted settled status in the  UK  under  the  EU  Settlement  Scheme.
      However, he lives not with GS but with a friend.

  vi. In early 2020, he issued Family Court  proceedings  for  contact  with
      this son.

7. The appellant's representative accepted that Ms GS was not a partner  for
   the purposes of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  Neither  was  the
   judge  satisfied  that  he  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
   relationship with her child, LS, that could meet the requirements of  the
   Rules. These findings  have  not  been  challenged.  The  fact  that  the
   appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  was  a  relevant
   consideration in the article 8 proportionality balancing exercise outside
   the Rules.

8. In respect of the claim of family  life,  Judge  Cox  accepted  that  the
   appellant enjoyed a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  current
   partner but concluded on the evidence that neither  that  nor  any  other
   relationship, was sufficient in the circumstances  to  constitute  family
   life engaging article 8. The judge took into account that whilst they see
   each other 3-4 times a week and intend to live together at some uncertain
   time in the future, the appellant did not in fact live  with  GS  or  her
   son. The judge also accepted that the appellant had a close  relationship
   with the child LS and was a positive  male  influence  on  him.  However,
   whilst his relationship with GS  was  "developing",  the  judge  did  not
   accept their relationship could be described as a family unit  or  family
   life engaging article 8. In reaching  this  conclusion,  the  judge  took
   account of the absence of evidence that the  appellant  had  any  say  or
   control in the direction of LS's upbringing and that when GS worked,  the
   child was cared for not by the appellant but another. On the evidence the
   judge did not accept that the appellant had a  parental  relationship  or
   played any parental role.

9.  With  regards  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  biological
   children fathered as a result of  previous  relationships,  he  told  the
   judge that his former partner refused to let him see  his  son,  HB.  The
   judge disbelieved the claim that the family proceedings for contact  with
   his son had commenced in May 2019; the limited information suggested that
   these had only begun  recently.  At  [63]  of  the  decision,  the  judge
   concluded that the family proceedings "primarily represented  an  attempt
   by the appellant to bolster his chances of staying in the UK." Similarly,
   it appears from [39] that the appellant had only recently  approached  Ms
   KS about access to his daughter, whom he had not seen for about 5 years.

10. In the premises, the judge  was  not  satisfied  that  despite  the  low
   threshold, his relationships with GS, LS, or either of his two biological
   children  were  such  that  the  refusal  decision   was   a   sufficient
   interference with family life so as to engage article 8.

11. The judge went on to consider private life,  considering  whether  there
   were very significant obstacles  to  integration  pursuant  to  paragraph
   276ADE, taking into account health issues, and, outside the  Rules,  with
   reference to the public interest considerations under s117B of  the  2002
   Act and that the relationship with GS began in the full knowledge of  his
   illegal status in the UK, so that little weight could be accorded to  it,
   or his private life in the UK. Applying the R  (Razgar)  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2004] UKHKL 27 stepped approach, making  a
   proportionality balancing exercise, taking into account the  factors  set
   out . The judge also found that there were  no  compelling  circumstances
   sufficient, exceptionally, to render the refusal decision  unduly  harsh.
   Ultimately, the judge found the decision proportionate to the appellant's
   limited article 8 rights, such as they were.

12. The grounds of  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal raise four grounds:

     i. That in finding family life between the appellant, his partner  and
        stepson did not engage article 8, the judge  applied  an  incorrect
        test and failed to take into account relevant evidence;

    ii. That the judge erred in considering current lack of contact between
        the appellant and  his  biological  children  as  determinative  of
        whether article 8 is engaged;

   iii. That the judge failed to  consider  exceptional  circumstances  and
        failed to apply  RS  (immigration/family  court  liaison:  outcome)
        India [2013] UKUT 82 (IAC) by making an assessment of the potential
        material impact of family court proceedings;

    iv. That the judge failed to consider whether there were  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences and failed to  strike  a  fair  balance  between
        competing public and private interests.

13. At the Upper Tribunal remote hearing Ms Mottershaw, who represented  the
   appellant in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  made  a  lengthy  and  detailed
   critique of the First-tier Tribunal decision, relying on the grounds  and
   her  written  submissions  of  1.7.20,  which,  together  with  the  oral
   submissions of the two  representatives,  I  have  carefully  taken  into
   account in considering the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

14. The primary ground is the submission that the judge applied too  high  a
   test to the assessment of family life between the appellant,  Ms  GS  and
   her son LS, without which a different conclusion could have been reached.
   Ms Mottershaw pointed to evidence in support of the appellant,  including
   the  letter  from  the   child   describing   a   close   father-son-like
   relationship. However, it is clear from a reading of the  decision  as  a
   whole that the judge took that evidence  and  other  supportive  evidence
   into account in the context of the evidence in  the  round.  The  child's
   letter is specifically addressed  at  [27]  of  the  decision.  Whilst  a
   different judge may have reached a different conclusion, that is not  the
   test for an error of law. I am satisfied that the finding that there  was
   not family life sufficient to engage article 8,  or  one  in  respect  of
   which any interference caused the refusal decision  was  insufficient  to
   engage article 8, was open to the judge on the evidence and was justified
   by cogent reasoning. The fact is that there was no 'family unit' and even
   describing Ms  GS  as  the  appellant's  partner  could  be  regarded  as
   something of an exaggeration. Whilst the appellant and  Ms  GS  saw  each
   other 3-4 times a week and he had a good  relationship  with  her  child,
   they did not and have never lived together. That the reason was to  avoid
   a reduction in her single parent benefits is not  determinative.  Despite
   Ms Mottershaw's attempts to put a post-hearing spin on her  evidence,  at
   [29] the judge was entitled to take at face value GS's statement evidence
   that at some point in the future they hoped to move in together and start
   a family life. In other words, family life was a hope for the future. She
   did not attend as an oral witness in his support.  The  judge  also  took
   into account that the appellant had no say or control or direction of the
   child's upbringing and that when the mother is  working  his  aunt  looks
   after him. He only sometimes sees the child when he visits. The judge was
   entitled to conclude at [31] that the appellant did not play  a  parental
   role and at [32] that he does not yet have a parental  relationship  with
   the child. On the evidence, the appellant had not stepped into the "shoes
   of a parent" as referred to in RK v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC)). In the
   article 8  proportionality  balancing  exercise,  S117B  required  little
   weight to be accorded to family life with a  partner  given  his  illegal
   immigration status, a relationship entered into in full knowledge of  his
   status. That he could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  was  also
   relevant. These were all matters considered by the judge.

15. Whilst none of these factors were  necessarily  determinative  on  their
   own, they were all relevant in the overall assessment, together with  the
   appellant's declared intentions for family life with Ms GS and  her  son.
   Ms Mottershaw relied on a series of  case  authorities  set  out  in  the
   grounds and her written submissions to the effect that family life is not
   static. However, Ahmadi [2005] EWCA Civ 1721, cited by Ms  Mottershaw  in
   support of the  proposition  that  authorities  should  not  inhibit  the
   development of future family life, also stated that "where there has been
   no pre-existing family life and there exists only  a  future  intention,"
   would not be sufficient to engage Article 8. A reading  of  the  impugned
   decision reveals that the assertion that the judge applied  a  hard-edged
   bright line test to family life is not sustainable; the judge set  out  a
   host of factors considered and taken into account. The judge did  make  a
   careful consideration of all the circumstances. In the premises, no error
   of law is disclosed.

16. With regard  to  the  second  and  third  grounds  and  the  appellant's
   relationship with  his  biological  children,  the  evidence  adduced  in
   support of any genuine family life was entirely inadequate. He  had  only
   recently sought contact with his daughter after almost 5  years  and  the
   judge found he had only recently started family proceedings  for  contact
   with his son, whom he had not seen for 3 years.  Ms  Mottershaw  was  not
   able to tell me exactly when the proceedings  had  been  instituted.  The
   evidence strongly  suggested  no  previous  interest  in  either  of  the
   children. Mr Clarke referred me to Mohan v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1363  and
   the list of questions to be considered by a judge where there are  family
   proceedings. The judge found that  the  appellant's  motivation  was  not
   genuine interest in the children but to assist his claim to remain in the
   UK. There were also compelling public interest factors in this  case.  In
   the premises, little would have been gained by waiting for the outcome of
   family proceedings that had yet to have an effective  first  hearing  and
   which  the  evidence  suggested  had  been  launched  to  frustrate   the
   appellant's removal. Any judge would be  entitled  to  conclude  that  in
   these circumstances there was no more than a  fanciful  prospect  of  the
   proceedings having a material impact; on the evidence the prospect of any
   meaningful relationship with either children was tenuous at best.

17. I am satisfied that there is no merit  at  all  in  the  fourth  ground,
   which in reality is no more than a disagreement with the decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and an attempt to reargue the appeal.  Ms  Mottershaw
   effectively argued that removal of the appellant would have unjustifiably
   harsh consequences and that the judge failed  to  adequately  assess  the
   public interest in removal, relying on Akinyemi v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
   2098. It was difficult to see how this  point  could  really  assist  the
   appellant when, if anything,  on  the  facts  of  this  case  the  public
   interest was enhanced by the appellant's unlawful entry into the  UK.  He
   has never had leave to remain and only sought such after  being  arrested
   in 2015. Ms Mottershaw criticised the  decision,  but  nothing  in  these
   submissions disclosed any error of law.

18. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

Decision

      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and the  human  rights
      appeal remains dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       9 December 2020







