
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20182/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 October 2019                            |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  MIAH [T]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel appearing by Direct Access

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andonian  on  18  July  2019,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against her decision to refuse this  application  for
    leave to remain.

 2. The claimant is a Bangladeshi citizen who entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely on 4 July 2005.  He appeared in person before the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.   There  was  no  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  to
    represent the Secretary of State.

 3. The claimant is the father of a son born on 13  February  2015  in  the
    United Kingdom to his now  estranged  wife.   His  wife  is  a  British
    citizen, so the child is a qualified child.  The boy is still only four
    years old. Based on his relationship with his wife,  the  claimant  was
    granted leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as
    amended) from 13 June 2014 to 13 December 2016,  but  by  the  time  he
    applied to renew his leave in November 2016, the  marriage  had  failed
    and leave to remain was refused.

 4. The First-tier Judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant,  which
    stands  unchallenged  as  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not   arrange
    representation in order to cross-examine the claimant or  make  written
    or oral submissions.   The  effect  of  that  is  that  the  claimant's
    evidence stands unchallenged.

 5. The First-tier Judge at [44] found that:

         "44. Based on the evidence given by the [claimant], the  fact  that
             he was unrepresented, had not properly prepared the papers for
             his appeal, he told me that he sees his son in the presence of
             his wife at the nursery approximately once every twelve  days,
             noting  also  correspondence  from  a  family  mediator,   and
             payments being made to his son from time to time by  his  bank
             account on file, I thought this was  an  appropriate  case  to
             give the [claimant] the benefit of the doubt in regard to some
             parts of his evidence, in particular the fact that he sees his
             son once every two weeks at  the  nursery  supervised  by  his
             former wife, and the fact that he and his wife have  divorced.
             ...

         46.  The [claimant] had told me that he had not  started  mediation
             proceedings as a prelude to a contact  order  for  immigration
             purposes but he  wanted  to  make  sure  there  was  something
             concrete in terms of the court order, or a  settled  agreement
             endorsed by the court, so that he could fall back on it if his
             wife changed her mind and suddenly refused him even supervised
             contact to their son.  That is why he was  going  through  the
             process.  He said that his wife was unpredictable."

 6. The Judge at [49] considered that the Secretary of State would no doubt
    grant appropriate leave, but held that in any event, the  claimant  had
    discharged the burden of proof to show that he was entitled to leave to
    remain on human rights grounds based on his relationship with his  son.



 7. The basis of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, albeit  not  expressly
    stated,  is  the  public  interest  provisions  of  part  5A   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended),  and  in
    particular, Section 117B(6) thereof:

         "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         117B(6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.


 8. Regular contact, payments to the child, and engaging with mediation  in
    order to ensure that the contact would  be  maintained  are  more  than
    sufficient evidence to support the First-tier Judge's finding  of  fact
    that there was a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  between
    this claimant and his British citizen child.  Section 117(6)(a) is met.

 9. I am satisfied also that it was open to the First-tier  Judge  to  find
    that it was not reasonable for this British citizen  child,  who  lives
    with his British citizen mother, to leave the United Kingdom, such that
    section 117(6)(b) is also met.

10. On that basis the First-tier Judge's decision  was  neither  irrational
    nor unlawful and was plainly open to him on the facts.

11. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed, and the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     14 November 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
