
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20457/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th October 2020                 |On 22nd October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                              MR FAISAL AHAMMAD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, instructed by Haque & Hausman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Colvin promulgated on 17th April 2020.  The underlying decision that
    was the subject of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    was the decision of the respondent dated 29th November 2019 to refuse
    the appellant's application for leave to remain in the UK on human
    rights grounds.


 2. The hearing before me on 13th October 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using Skype for Business. Neither party objected.  At the
    outset, I was informed by Mr Maqsood that the appellant is aware of the
    hearing, and that the appellant would not be joining the hearing.  Mr
    Maqsood confirmed the appellant is happy for the hearing to proceed in
    his absence. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the
    hearing room and building were open to the public. The hearing was
    publicly listed, and I was addressed by the representatives in exactly
    the same way as I would have been, if the parties had attended the
    hearing together.  I was satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in
    open court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no
    party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
    proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice
    and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a
    remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions against
    the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a
    remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly
    in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
    complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
    resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
    that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
    proceedings.


 3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  His immigration history is
    set out in the respondent's decision and summarised at paragraph [2] of
    the decision of Judge Colvin.  At paragraph [3] of her decision, Judge
    Colvin noted that the appeal was due to be heard on 11th February 2020,
    but, by email dated 10th February 2020 the appellant's representatives
    had requested that the appeal be determined on the papers.  They also
    requested further time to submit documents in support of the appeal.
    She noted that on 11th February 2020, Judge Paul granted an adjournment
    and a further two weeks for any documents relied upon, to be submitted.
       She noted that no documents had been submitted by the appellant or
    his legal representatives by 2nd March 2020 when the appeal was
    allocated for determination on the papers.  At paragraph [4] of her
    decision, Judge Colvin said:


         "In the circumstances and in the absence of bundles from both the
         appellant and the respondent I am determining this appeal on the
         limited documents of a copy of the appeal notice together with a
         copy of the respondent's refusal letter dated 29 November 2019 ..."




 4. Judge Colvin went on to consider the appeal based upon the limited
    information before her, and dismissed the appeal for reasons set out in
    her decision.


 5. In the grounds of appeal filed, the appellant claims that contrary to
    what is said by Judge Colvin, the parties had served upon each other,
    and filed with the Tribunal, the documents that they each relied upon.
    The respondent's bundle was received by the appellant's representatives
    on 7th February 2020.  The appellant's representatives had by email on
    6th February 2020 sent to the respondent and the Tribunal, a bundle
    comprising of 56 pages in two PDF attachments.  For reasons that are
    not apparent, it appears that the parties bundles did not reach the
    Tribunal file, and were not before Judge Colvin when she went on to
    determine the appeal on the papers.


 6. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge O'Brien on 14th July
    2020. The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
    the FtT involved the making of a material error of law.


 7. I have carefully considered the Tribunal file and note that neither the
    respondent's bundle nor the appellant's bundle appears, even now, to
    have been reached the Tribunal file.  The appellant's representatives
    had emailed a copy of the bundle relied upon by the appellant to the
    Tribunal during the morning of the hearing before me.  Mrs Aboni
    emailed a copy of the respondent's bundle to me after the hearing and a
    copy has been placed in the Tribunal file.


 8. At the hearing of the appeal before me, Mrs Aboni, rightly in my
    judgment, concedes that Judge Colvin erroneously proceeds upon the
    basis that neither party had submitted their bundles and she accepts
    that in the circumstances, the decision of the FtT cannot stand.  She
    accepts that the decision of Judge Colvin fails to have regard to the
    evidence relied upon by the appellant and she accepts that the decision
    of the FtT contains a material error of law and should be set aside.
    There can be no criticism of Judge Colvin because, as I have said, the
    bundles filed by the parties do not appear to have reached the Tribunal
    file.


 9. I remind myself that in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that where there is a defect or
    impropriety of a procedural nature in the proceedings at first
    instance, this may amount to a material error of law requiring the
    decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside.  The
    authorities referred to by the Upper Tribunal in MM (unfairness; E & R)
    Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) make it clear that upon an appeal such as
    this, the criterion to be applied is fairness and not reasonableness.


10. As to disposal, it is common ground between the parties that the appeal
    should be remitted to the FtT for determination afresh.  As the Upper
    Tribunal did in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC), I
    consider that where a first instance decision is set aside on the basis
    of an error of law involving the deprivation of the appellant's right
    to a fair hearing, the appropriate course will be to remit the matter
    to a newly constituted FtT for a fresh hearing.


11. The appeal is allowed.


Notice of Decision


12. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Colvin promulgated
    on 17th April 2020 is set aside.


13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
    of the appeal with no findings preserved.


14. The appellant's representatives shall confirm within seven days whether
    the appellant still wishes for the appeal to be determined on the
    papers.  In the event that the appellant's representatives request an
    oral hearing, the appeal will be listed for hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal on the first available date.  The parties will be
    notified of the date of any such hearing in due course.


15. No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no
    application for an anonymity direction before me.





Signed   V. Mandalia                Date:    14th October 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

