
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20836/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 October 2017                     |On 20 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                              MRS JYOTSNA SINHA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bryce
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in  1939.   She  applied  for
      entry clearance to join her daughter in the UK as an  adult  dependent
      relative.  The application was refused by the respondent on  9  August
      2016 under paragraph EC-DR1.1(d) of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.  The paragraph states that to meet the eligibility requirements
      for entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent  relative  all  of  the
      requirements in paragraphs EC-DR2.1 to 3.2 must be met.

   2. The respondent accepted that all the  requirements  of  the  paragraph
      were met except 2.5.


   3. Paragraph  2.5 reads:-


           'The applicant ... must be unable, even with the practical and
           financial help of the sponsor,  to obtain the required level of
           care in the country where they are living, because -


   a) It is not available and there is no person in the country who can
      reasonably provide it, or


   b) It is not affordable.'


   4. The basis for the refusal was that no research or enquiries  had  been
      made to support the claim that the  level  of  care  required  is  not
      available in India.  It was also noted that she has a daughter in  UAE
      and a son in USA who would be able to support her.  It was  considered
      that they are in a position to share the responsibility and assist her
      when the need arises.

   5. She appealed.


   6. Following a hearing at Glasgow on 31 March 2017, Judge of  the  First-
      Tier Bradshaw dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on
      human rights grounds.  During the  hearing  it  was  accepted  by  the
      respondent that affordability of care was not at issue (2.5(b)).  Thus
      the only matter in dispute was whether the required level of  care  is
      available and there is no person in India who can  reasonably  provide
      it (2.5(a)).


   7. The judge heard evidence from the appellant's daughter, Mrs Datta  and
      son-in-law, Dr Datta.


   8. His findings are at para 65ff.  In summary, he noted  that  Dr  Datta,
      who had visited India in summer 2016 to investigate  care  homes,  had
      looked at only two; also that the appellant although she requires long
      term personal care has not  required  to  be  taken  to  hospital  for
      anything other than check-ups.  The judge  found  that  there  are  no
      family  members  other  than  Mrs  and  Dr  Datta   who   have   taken
      responsibility for the appellant who was widowed in 2014.


   9. The judge went on from [71] - [92] to comment on documentary  evidence
      from several medical sources in India.  The gist of their evidence was
      that there are no care homes in  the  appellant's  home  area,  Howrah
      which is near Kolkata.  Also, that India cannot offer the standard  of
      care that Western societies offer and the appellant  needs.   Further,
      that the appellant has nobody available locally or in India who  could
      help with her personal care needs.  Evidence was also given that  care
      homes are predominantly privately owned and require the presence of  a
      next of kin to be available in the case of an emergency.   One  source
      indicated that residents of the few private care homes in Kolkata  are
      referred  back  to  their  homes/relatives   at   times   of   medical
      emergencies.


  10. The judge's findings from the wealth of material before him  were,  in
      summary, that it had not been established  that  there  were  no  care
      homes beyond  Howrah.  Also,  that  although  care  homes  are  mainly
      privately owned and may require  a next of kin to be available in  the
      case of an emergency, such could be available through  Mrs  Datta  and
      her husband by telephone or other modern means of communication.  They
      could also travel at short notice to India.


  11. The judge also found that home care packages including  rehabilitation
      and care giving assistance could be  arranged  for  the  appellant  in
      India particularly in Kolkata.


  12. The judge concluded (at [90]) that it had not be established that  the
      appellant would be unable even with the practical and  financial  help
      of her sponsors, to obtain the required level of care in India because
      it is not available and there is no person in  that  country  who  can
      reasonably provide it.


  13. Having concluded that the case could not succeed under the  Rules  the
      judge in the final  paragraph  [98]  considered  that  there  were  no
      compelling circumstances whereby the matter should  be  allowed  under
      Article 8 outside the Rules.


  14. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  alleging  that  the  judge
      erred  in  the  assessment  of  the  evidence  concerning   the   non-
      availability  of  care  in  India  and  the  mitigation  afforded   by
      electronic means of communication, and that for the purposes of  leave
      outside the Rules the decision was not in accordance with the  law  in
      that she can meet the Rules and in any  event  there  were  sufficient
      grounds to allow the appeal.


  15. Permission to appeal was granted on 31 July 2017, a judge noting:


           ...


           '(ii) ... combining the potential vulnerability of the appellant
           aged 77, and the  Judge's  analysis  of  her  evidence  entirely
           within the boundaries of the adult dependent relative provisions
           in the Rules save for one very brief closing  paragraph  stating
           that she had failed to show good grounds  for  leave  to  remain
           outside the Rules, and thereby an Article 8 assessment  was  not
           necessary, given the appeal was only on human rights grounds the
           absence of a Razgar thorough family life  assessment,  not  only
           with reference to the Rules  but  also  ECHR  jurisprudence  and
           statutory  provisions,  Robinson  applied  there  was  disclosed
           arguable error of law.'


  16. At the error of law hearing before me Mr  Bryce,  who  lodged  written
      submissions, acknowledged that appropriate Article 8 analysis had  not
      been followed.  However, it was evident he had proceeded on the  basis
      of the existence of family life.  The judge's main error  was  not  to
      give consideration to  the  appellant's  psychological  and  emotional
      needs (per BritCits v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368) and not  just  medical
      needs.  Had he done so there was ample evidence before him to conclude
      that there was not in India any person who  could  reasonably  provide
      the required level of care. The  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
      remade in the appellant's favour.

  17. Ms O'Brien said that if the appeal  succeeded  under  the  Rules  such
      would disclose a breach of Article 8.  However, whilst the  judge  had
      not  followed  the  Razgar  structured  family  life  assessment   his
      analysis, which carefully considered all the evidence before him,  was
      sustainable for the reasons given by him.


  18. In considering this matter, the only right of appeal was  against  the
      refusal of  a  human  rights  application  (section  82(i)(b)  of  the
      Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002),  namely  that  the
      decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


  19. The respondent's decision is deemed to be a refusal of a human  rights
      claim.   In  such  a  case  the  reasons  for  refusal  focus  on  the
      Immigration Rules even though the appeal is in relation to  Article  8
      only.


  20. As Ms O'Brien accepted, if the appellant meets the requirements of the
      Rules, then the public interest in excluding  her  must  be  very  low
      because UK immigration policy permits those who meet the  requirements
      of the Rules to be admitted.


  21. Unfortunately, in this case the judge failed to appreciate  that  this
      was solely a human rights appeal.  By treating it as an  appeal  under
      the Immigration Rules with only the briefest reference to Article 8 in
      the final paragraph where he said there was  no  need  to  go  on  and
      consider it, the judge erred in law.


  22. Such was a material  error  because  of,  as  the  judge  who  granted
      permission pointed out, the absence of a  Razgar  thorough  structured
      family life assessment not only with reference to the Rules  but  also
      ECHR jurisprudence and statutory provisions (section  117A  and  B  of
      2002 Act).


  23. The result is that the decision must be set aside to be remade.


  24. In deciding how the decision should be remade  I  noted  Ms  O'Brien's
      comment that the respondent did not accept that there was family  life
      between the appellant and her daughter and son-in-law.


  25. It is also notable from the judge's decision that  he  concluded  that
      the approach to paragraph ECDR was limited  to  medical  needs.   That
      appears now to have been in error, given what was stated  in  BritCits
      at [76]:-


           '76.  Thirdly, for the reasons I have given  the  appellant  has
           not established that the  conditions  for  entry  and  right  to
           remain for ADR's under  the  new  ADR  Rules  are  incapable  of
           practical fulfilment in virtually all  cases  for  parents,  let
           alone for all the categories of ADR's entitled to  apply,  whose
           family life engages Article 8.  In particular, rejection on  the
           basis of the availability of adequate care  in  the  ADR's  home
           country turns upon  whether  the  care  which  is  available  is
           reasonable for the ADR to receive and of the level required  for
           that applicant.  Contrary to the  submission  of  the  appellant
           those considerations are capable, with appropriate evidence,  of
           embracing the  psychological  and  emotional  needs  of  elderly
           parents.'


  26. Also, at [59]:-

           '59. Second, as is apparent from the  Rules  and  Guidance,  the
           focus is on whether the care required by the ADR  applicant  can
           be "reasonably" provided and to "the required  level"  in  their
           home country.  As Mr Sheldon confirmed in his oral  submissions,
           the provision of care in the home  country  must  be  reasonable
           both from the perspective of the provider and the perspective of
           the applicant, and the standard of care must be what is required
           for that particular applicant.  It is possible that insufficient
           attention has been paid in the  past  to  these  considerations,
           which focus on what care is both necessary  and  reasonable  for
           the  applicant  to  receive  in  their  home   country.    These
           considerations  include  issues  as  to  the  accessibility  and
           geographical location of the provision of care and the  standard
           of  care.   They  are  capable  of   embracing   emotional   and
           psychological requirements verified by expert medical  evidence.
           What is reasonable is, of course, to be objectively assessed.'


  27. Mr Bryce stated that in light of Ms O'Brien's comment that family life
      was not accepted, he would  wish  to  lead  evidence  on  the  matter.
      Further,  additional  evidence  relating  to  the  situation  of   the
      appellant such as any medical reports or other reports  commenting  on
      her psychological and emotional needs, may now be necessary.


  28. Whilst I am aware of the difficulties that  there  may  be  given  the
      restrictions of what can and cannot be taken into account in an appeal
      against entry clearance to which section 85 of the 2002 Act applies, I
      nonetheless consider that the matter needs to be remitted to the First-
      Tier for fresh consideration.

Notice of Decision

  29. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and I set it aside. No findings of fact are preserved.


  30. The case is remitted to a  judge  other  than  Judge  Bradshaw  for  a
      further consideration on human rights grounds.


      No anonymity order made.



Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

