
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20232/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2021                    |On the 11th October 2021             |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               Mr Nasir Iqbal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
(Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13 March 1983.  He appeals
under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 20 November 2019 to
refuse his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  His
appeal against that decision was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 5
March 2020 and for the reasons set out in the decision of 29 April 2020
that was refused.  For the reasons set out in my decision of 23 October
2020 (a copy of which is annexed) that decision was set aside.

The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 26 September 2013 with a visit
visa but remained here without leave and whilst here formed a relationship
with Miss Jabeen, who is also a citizen of Pakistan.  Miss Jabeen, who I
refer to as the sponsor, has a son who is a British citizen from a previous
relationship.  It is her case that there is no longer any contact with the
child's father and it is the appellant's case that he has formed now a
parental relationship with the appellant.  The family live together and
until relatively recently the sponsor was employed.

The Secretary of State's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that the
appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules nor was it
accepted that the appellant had established a parental relationship.

The judge in the First-tier Tribunal made a number of findings.  She found
that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met, which is not
challenged, that there was a subsisting relationship between the appellant
and the sponsor and that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship,
paragraph 18, and that the appellant enjoyed a family life in the United
Kingdom with his partner and her son.  The judge also found at paragraph 20
that it was in the son's best interests to remain in the United Kingdom and
it would be on balance not reasonable to expect him to leave the United
Kingdom away from all his ties.  The judge did not, however, find that it
would be a disproportionate interference with the appellant's right to
respect for his family life to leave the United Kingdom and dismissed the
appeal on that basis.

The appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision, which was
granted on 15 June 2020 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio.  Subsequent to
that the Secretary of State in a letter made pursuant to Rule 24 of the
Procedure Rules on 2 September 2020 stated that she did not oppose the
application for permission and asked the Tribunal to determine the appeal
with a fresh oral decision.  It was on that basis that on 23 October 2020 I
found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of an
error of law, albeit without the need for a hearing.  Certain findings of
the First-tier Tribunal were preserved, first, that there was a subsisting
family life between the appellant, his partner and her son, and identified
that it was necessary, however, to consider whether there was a parental
relationship between the appellant and his stepson.

I heard evidence from the appellant and the sponsor, both of whom adopted
their witness statements and gave evidence with the assistance of a court
interpreter.  They were both cross-examined by Mr Tufan on behalf of the
Secretary of State.  I find some of the evidence of the appellant confusing
about whether his wife was working or not and the nature of her work.
There is unfortunately no documentary evidence as to the nature of her work
beyond the payslips but taking their evidence together and looking at it in
the round, I accept that she has ceased to work although she did work in
the past.  The confusion about there being an online company is that I
think that the company fulfilled online orders but the matter is not
entirely clear and I do accept the sponsor's evidence that she is not
familiar with computers and she was not working in an online capacity but I
find that despite some misgivings I might have about the evidence on that
point I am satisfied that the relationship subsists and I accept that the
sponsor is in receipt of Universal Credit, which would make sense, given
that she had previously been employed, which is not in dispute, and she is
also in receipt of child benefit, which, again, would be normal in the
circumstances.

It is for the appellant to show that his removal from the United Kingdom
would be disproportionate in terms of Article 8.  It is accepted that he
does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and that is the
starting point for any assessment of his position with respect to his
Article 8 rights.  This is a case in which I must have regard to Section
117B of the 2002 Act.  The starting point is that the appellant does not
meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He is here unlawfully and
has never had any expectation of being able to stay here.  Taking that as a
starting point, I consider then whether and how the subparagraphs of
Section 117B apply.

First, the starting point would normally be that there is heavy weight to
be attached in favour of removal given the failure to meet the requirements
of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant has not shown much of an ability
to speak English nor for that matter is he now financially independent and
these are factors which would normally weigh against him.  Similarly,
private and family life little weight can be attached to, given the terms
of Section 117B(4) and 117B(5).  The question then turns on Section
117B(6), which requires me to make a finding of fact.

Whether a parental relationship exists between somebody who is not the
biological parent and a child is a fact-sensitive matter.  There are a
number of factors which I take into account.  First, it is not in doubt and
I accept that the appellant and the sponsor live together as a married
couple.  I accept also that the child has had no contact with his
biological father and I accept the evidence, albeit somewhat unusual, that
at the age of 13 he is taken to and from school by the appellant.  There is
also sufficient evidence in the witness statement evidence of a close
relationship between the appellant and his stepson.  Factors which would
tend to go against that is that it is a relatively recent relationship of
some three years but I find, looking at the evidence as a whole, that I am
satisfied on a balance of probabilities that a parental relationship does
exist between the appellant and his stepson.  It follows on that basis that
I am satisfied that Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act applies in this case.

Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State urges me to dismiss the appeal on the
basis primarily of the decision in Younas [2020] UKUT 129 on the basis that
it would be proportionate to expect the appellant to return to Pakistan and
make an application for entry clearance.

The first point to be made about Younas is that it can be distinguished on
the basis that the Tribunal in Younas found that Section 117B(6) did not
apply, having found that it had not been established that it was
unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  The facts of
that case were very different and the child was much younger.  Secondly,
and perhaps more importantly, as the Tribunal noted in Younas, Section
117B(6) is in effect a standalone provision, that is it is described as
self-contained.  The discussion in Younas revolves around how a Tribunal
should establish whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave, and
they concluded in that case it should. That finding is what distinguishes
this appeal.

I turn next to the more recent decision of the Court of Appeal in NA
(Bangladesh) [2021] EWCA Civ 953.  It is important to note what is said in
that case at paragraphs 29 and 30.  At paragraph 30 the Court of Appeal, in
this case Lord Justice Underhill, with whom Lord Justices Singh and Warby
agreed, said:

"It is important, however, to emphasise that the approach approved by Lord
Carnwath in KO (Nigeria) does not provide for a presumption in the opposite
direction.  It represents no more than a common sense starting point
adopted for the reasons given at paras 18 to 19 of his judgment.  It
remains necessary in every case to evaluate all the circumstances in order
to establish whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave
the United Kingdom with his or her parents",

I emphasise the following passage:

"If the conclusion of the evaluation is that this would not be reasonable,
then the hypothesis that the parents will be leaving has to be abandoned
and the family as a whole will be entitled to leave to remain.  To spell it
out, in the case of a qualifying child that will be under paragraph
276ADE(1), in the case of the parents it will be under Article 8, applying
Section 117B(6)."

Applying that to this case, I find that as Section 117B(6) is engaged, then
there is no public interest in requiring the appellant to leave the United
Kingdom.  That is because of the express requirement of Section 117B (6).
Further, given that there is no public interest, then the factors set out
in the remainder of section 117B do not attract materially adverse weight.

Mr Tufan's submissions proceeds on the basis that there is a public
interest in removal, and that notwithstanding the preserved finding that
section 117B (6) is met, it is still proportionate to remove.

With respect, the fact that Section 117B(6) is met means that there is no
public interest in removal and on that basis it is difficult to understand
how in the circumstances of this case it could be proportionate, given that
whilst the appellant might be able to stay with family in Pakistan, how
long he would have to stay there is, given that it is on the Red List,
unclear and it is unclear how long it would be before he would be able to
be returned.  Certainly, it would not be reasonable to require his wife and
stepson to go to stay with him in Pakistan, given that for the same reasons
it would be difficult for them to live there and to return within any
proper period without significant difficulty and certainly, the advice as
far as I understand it , the current advice from the UK Government is that
nobody should be going to Pakistan (it being on the Red List) unless there
is a very good reason to do so.

Further, the fact that the appellant has a parental relationship with a
child who cannot be expected to leave the United Kingdom is, given that
section 117B (6) applies, a sufficiently compelling circumstance such that
removal would not be proportionate.

For all these reasons and taking into account all the factors relevant
within section 117B, I conclude that requiring the appellant to leave the
United Kingdom amounts to a disproportionate interference with his Article
8 rights and I allow the appeal on that basis.  In conclusion therefore,
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and I set it aside.  I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on
Article 8 grounds.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.



No anonymity direction is made.



Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul    Date 07 September 2021






ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/20232/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 23 October 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 NASIR IQBAL
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Phull promulgated on 29 April 2020, dismissing his
    appeal under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against a
    decision of the respondent made on 20 November 2019 to refuse him leave
    to remain and his human rights claim.

 1. The appellant sought leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship
    with his partner, who is settled her,  and  her  son  from  an  earlier
    relationship. He is a British Citizen.

 2. The judge found [18] that the appellant has established a  family  life
    in the United Kingdom with his partner and her son; that it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the son to leave the UK [20] but  that  removal
    would be proportionate as the sponsor could go  there;  or,  she  could
    support his application to return.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in not  making  any  finding  whether  there  is  a  parental
    relationship between the appellant and his partner's son which would be
    material as if so, then section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  would  be
    engaged; and, having found that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the son to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  erred  in  her  assessment  of
    proportionality.

 4. On 29 April 2020, First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio granted permission  on
    all grounds.

 5. On 30 July 2020, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  gave  directions
    which  provided amongst other matters:

      1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the light of the present
         need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and  the
         overriding objective expressed in the Procedure  Rules[1],  I  have
         reached the provisional view,   that  it  would  in  this  case  be
         appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

          a) whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

          b) whether that decision should be set aside.

      2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:

          i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of the
             assertion of an error of law, and on the question whether  the
             First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside if error of
             law is found, to be filed and served on all other  parties  no
             later than 14 days after this notice is sent out (the date  of
             sending is on the covering letter or covering email);

         ii) Any other party may file and serve submissions in response, no
             later than 21 days after this notice is sent out;

        iii) If submissions are made  in  accordance  with  paragraph  (ii)
             above the party who sought permission to appeal may  file  and
             serve a reply no later than 28 days after this notice is  sent
             out.

         iv) All submissions that  rely  on  any  document  not  previously
             provided to all other  parties  in  electronic  form  must  be
             accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

      3. Any party who considers that despite  the  foregoing  directions  a
         hearing is necessary to consider the questions set out in paragraph
         1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons for  that  view  no
         later than 21 days after this notice is sent out and they  will  be
         taken into account by the Tribunal.  The directions in paragraph  2
         above must be complied with in every case.

 6. On 2 September 2020, the respondent replied stating that  she  did  not
    oppose the application for permission, and invited the  Upper  Tribunal
    to determine the appeal at a further oral hearing to consider whether a
    parental relationship exists between the appellant  and  his  partner's
    son.

 7. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Bearing in mind the overriding  objective
    in Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,
    and bearing in mind the concession by the respondent,  I  am  satisfied
    that in the particular circumstances of this  case  that  it  would  be
    correct to make a decision being made in the absence of a hearing.

 8. I am satisfied that the judge did err in reaching her  decision  as  is
    claimed in the grounds of appeal and as is accepted by the  respondent.
    The decision clearly involved the making of an error of law as  claimed
    as these errors went to  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest by operation of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. That required
    a finding as to whether a  parental  relationship  exists  between  the
    appellant and his partner's son. That error  infects  the  findings  on
    proportionality which must also be set aside. Further, the judge  erred
    in considering that it would be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's
    partner to go back to Pakistan, given the finding made  that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect her son to leave the United Kingdom.

 9. I consider that the findings as to family life made by Judge Phull  can
    be preserved. It will, however, be necessary for the Upper Tribunal  to
    make findings as  to  whether  there  exists  a  parental  relationship
    between the appellant and his partner's son and to make fresh  findings
    as to proportionality in any event, given the finding that it would not
    be reasonable to expect the appellant's  partner's  son  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.



Notice of Decision & Directions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

 3. Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and  the  UTIAC  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of the view that
    the forthcoming hearing in this appeal can and should be held  face-to-
    face on a date to be fixed as it may be necessary to have further  oral
    evidence via a court interpreter.

 4. Any party wishing to adduce further evidence must serve it at least  10
    working days before the next hearing,  accompanied  by  an  application
    made pursuant  to  rule  15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 explaining why it should be permitted







       Signed                                Date 23 October 2020


       Jeremy K H Rintoul
             Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).


