
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19686/2018
                                                               HU/20672/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2020                      |On 17 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 AKISSI [N]
                                    [P K]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Aminu, Aminu Aminu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellants are nationals of Cote d'Ivoire and the 2nd Appellant  is
    the 1st Appellant's eight year old daughter.

2.   The 1st Appellant entered the United Kingdom, as a  student,  in  March
    2000 and her leave was extended in  this  capacity  until  31  December
    2004. She applied for further leave to remain on 29 December  2004  but
    her application was subsequently found to be invalid. On  18  May  2005
    she applied for leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  This
    application was not refused until 15 December 2014.

3.   The 1st Appellant made a human rights claim on 16 July 2015.  This  was
    refused on 29 July 2015 and she appealed. Her appeal was  dismissed  on
    30 January 2018 and she had exhausted her  appeal  rights  by  27  July
    2018. Meanwhile the Appellants had applied for leave  to  remain  on  3
    April 2018 on the basis that the 2nd Appellant had been resident in the
    United Kingdom for more than seven years. This application was  refused
    on 7 September 2018.

4.   The Appellants appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup  dismissed
    their appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  24  September  2019.  They
    appealed and Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, sitting as  a  Judge  of  the
    First Tribunal granted them permission to appeal on  14  January  2020.



ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   The  Appellant's  representative  submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Widdup had erred in law by relying on the reasons given by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Clark  for  dismissing  the  Appellants'  previous
    appeal  when  the  circumstances  before  him  were  now  significantly
    different.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  the
    Appellants' grounds of appeal had force and  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Widdup had not properly factored into his decision the fact  that
    the 2nd Appellant was now eight years old. It was also noted  that  the
    1st Appellant would have been in the United Kingdom for 20 years on  13
    March 2020 and would be making an application for leave on this basis.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.    In the decision under  challenge,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup
    referred to the five stage test established in R v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and  found  that
    the Appellant's family and private life rights  were  engaged  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights and
    that  their  proposed  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  have
    consequences of sufficient gravity.  He also found that  their  removal
    was lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.

7.   He then reminded  himself  that  the  issue  between  the  parties  was
    whether their removal would be a proportionate response.

8.   He referred to  the  earlier  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clark, who had found that the 1st Appellant did not qualify  for  leave
    as a parent under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules and  that  there
    were no very significant obstacles to her  re-establishing  herself  in
    Cote d'Ivoire for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

9.   He did not explicitly make any findings of fact in relation to the  2nd
    Appellant in the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  Immigration
    Rules, which states:

         "(1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
         on the grounds of  private  life  are  that  at  the  date  of  the
         application the applicant:

             ...

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK".

10.  He also failed to give sufficient consideration to the 2nd  Appellant's
    best interests as someone who had lived in the United Kingdom for eight
    years; having been born here.

11.  Instead, he relied on the provision  relating  to  the  1st  Appellant,
    namely section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, which states:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom".

12.  When considering the question  of  reasonableness  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Widdup did take into account the fact that the 2nd Appellant  was
    not at a critical stage of her education, that she  spoke  some  French
    and that First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark had not accepted that the  1st
    Appellant had lost touch with her mother and brother in  Cote  d'Ivoire
    and that she would be able to obtain education there. He also  accepted
    the finding of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark that the  2nd  Appellant
    would not be at risk of FGM in Cote d'Ivoire.

13.  However, in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53 Carnwath LJ found:

         "17. As has been seen, section 117B (6) incorporated the  substance
         of the rule [paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)] without material change,  but
         this time in the context of the right of the parent  to  remain.  I
         would infer that it was intended  to  have  the  same  effect.  The
         question again is what is "reasonable" for the child. As  Elias  LJ
         said in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there  is
         nothing in the subsection to import a reference to the  conduct  of
         the parent. Section 117B sets out a number of factors  relating  to
         those seeking leave to enter or remain, but criminality is not  one
         of them. Subsection 117B (6) is on its face free-standing, the only
         qualification being that the person relying on it is not liable  to
         deportation. The list of  relevant  factors  set  out  in  the  IDI
         guidance (para 10 above) seems to me wholly appropriate  and  sound
         in  law,  in  the  context  of  section  117B(6)  as  of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv).

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here and having to leave. It is only if, even on  that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:

             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

14.  In paragraph 40 First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup reminded himself  that
    "there can be no question of penalising the daughter for the fact  that
    her mother is an overstayer". But he then went on to find that  he  was
    "entitled to take into account as part of the factual  background  that
    the mother did overstay and that her evidence before  the  Tribunal  in
    2017 was found in some ways to be lacking in credibility". This appears
    to me to be contradictory and to fall into the error of penalising  the
    2nd Appellant on account of her mother's immigration history  when  the
    actual question should have been was  whether  the  1st  Appellant  had
    leave to remain.

15.  In paragraph  43  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup  also  took  into
    account the fact that the 1st Appellant was reliant  on  public  funds.
    The evidence confirms that the Applicants are  being  accommodated  and
    supported by the London Borough of Lambeth  under  section  17  of  the
    Children Act 1989. This is not a  factor  which  was  relevant  to  the
    question of whether it was reasonable to expect the  2nd  Appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom, as she could not be made responsible for  her
    mother being in receipt of public  funds  and  in  any  event  she  was
    entitled to such support as a child in need under this Act.

16.  I also find that the  decision  did  not  properly  focus  on  the  2nd
    Appellant's best interests but conflated those with  a  proportionality
    assessment relating to the 1st Appellant.

17.  As a consequence, I find that there were  material  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup's decision.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Widdup,
    Martin or Clark.

(4)  The First-tier Tribunal is asked to delay listing the appeal until  the
    first open date after 5 June 2020 to give the Respondent  the  time  to
    consider any application for leave made  by  the  1st  Appellant  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules.

Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 6 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

