
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/20463/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2019                            |On 04 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                      mrs Isabelita Estricomen Belarma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Noor, counsel instructed by Kings Cross
Barristers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of the Philippines date  of  birth  7  January
    1962 appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 11 August  2016,
    to refuse an application made in April 2016 for leave to remain on  the
    basis of her private and family life.  The appeal  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge K Swinnerton who on 12 November 2018 dismissed  the
    appeal both with reference to the Immigration  Rules  (The  Rules)  and
    under Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

2.   The immigration history is clear in  that  the  Appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor in 2001 and overstayed.   She  waited  some
    fourteen years before making her application.   After  the  application
    was made but before the decision upon the claim was dealt  with,  sadly
    her partner, Mr [M], a UK national, had died. At the hearing before the
    Judge the position  was  effectively  accepted  that  there  were  real
    difficulties to the possibility of her succeeding at the material times
    under The Rules.  However, what was pressed on behalf of the  Appellant
    was a variety of personal factors, family connections in  the  UK,  the
    substantive relationship which she had had with  her  deceased  partner
    and the connections which she had in  the  UK.   The  Judge  found  the
    evidence of the Appellant to be credible and that there was  a  genuine
    relationship as claimed up until the time of her partner's death.

3.   The Judge accepted that the Appellant  did  have  some  family  members
    residing in the UK and whilst she did not  have  accommodation  in  the
    Philippines the Judge  accepted  that  she  was  candid  and  that  her
    financial situation was such that she would  be  able  to  provide  for
    herself on a  return  to  the  Philippines.   The  Judge  concluded  in
    addressing private life provisions under paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  The
    Rules  that  there  would  be  no   very   significant   obstacles   to
    reintegration into the Philippines.

4.   The case was essentially put to the Judge by Mr Noor in the context  of
    the case of Treebhawon and Others,  (NIA  2002  Part  5A  -  compelling
    circumstances  test  [2017]  UKUT   00013   ((IAC)   for   there   were
    circumstances which warranted the consideration of her claim.  He  also
    relied for the purposes of  his  case  and  its  understanding  of  the
    circumstances on TZ (Pakistan) and PG India [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 and in
    particular the analysis by the Court of Appeal of the exercise and  the
    judgment that has to be made on the various factors including of course
    the public interest and the maintenance of immigration controls.

5.   It is clear of course that in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC  60  guidance  was
    given as to a convenient  way  to  carry  out  the  analysis  including
    listing the "pros" and "cons" in the form of a balance  sheet  approach
    which has become more widely followed.

6.   Mr Wilding argued that the  Judge  correctly  addressed  the  evidence,
    made the relevant findings of fact and in paragraph 25 of the  decision
    effectively set out  the  points  that  weighed  for  and  against  the
    Appellant and her claim to remain based  on  amongst  other  things  of
    course the impact of her having to leave the  United  Kingdom.   Having
    set those matters out the Judge in relatively terse fashion said:-

         "Taking account of all these circumstances in this case  I  do  not
         find that the circumstances of the Appellant are compelling  and  I
         do not find it disproportionate for the appeal of the Appellant not
         to succeed.  I  would  add  that  I  make  this  decision  with  no
         enthusiasm given the very sad circumstances  that  prevail  in  the
         case."


7.   Mr Noor argued in effect that a more thorough and adequate setting  out
    of the factors, perhaps their individual weight, should have been given
    to them and set out and there was an absence of adequate or  sufficient
    reasons.

8.   It is not for me to find an error of law simply because I  might  reach
    a different decision.  I take into account, insofar as it is  necessary
    to do so, the materiality of any error and whether there  is  any  real
    likelihood that a different decision  might  have  been  reached  by  a
    different Tribunal fully  setting  out  reasons  in  the  way  the  law
    required.  For my part whilst  I  again  have  no  enthusiasm  for  the
    outcome of this appeal, given the impact upon this unfortunate lady who
    has been caught out by the Rules and events and the needs of  the  case
    law.  It seemed to me that the grounds are essentially  a  disagreement
    with an outcome rather  than  a  reasons  challenge  which  showed  any
    arguable error of law in failing to address the material.
9.     It was not said for example that the Judge has failed to have  regard
    to material factors or given weight to immaterial factors and therefore
    made errors of law in the analysis of the issues. This appeal's outcome
    was as good an example of the hard edge that has been  given  to  human
    rights appeals through the case law  and  legislation.   I  necessarily
    have to operate in that framework whatever my sympathies may  be.   For
    these reasons therefore I conclude that the Original Tribunal  made  no
    material error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity order is made nor is one required.

Signed                                  Date 22 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 22 February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

