
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20677/2018
                                                               HU/20675/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2019                   |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  BP AND PP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma, instructed by London Imperial Immigration

For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are husband and wife and are  citizens  of  India,  born
    respectively in 1984 and 1979. They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 27 September  2018
    to refuse their human rights  claim.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Pedro), in a decision  promulgated  on  22  July  2019,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellants  now  appeal,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Mr Sharma, who appeared for the appellants, told me that there was only
    one issue before the Upper Tribunal. The  appellants  do  not  seek  to
    obtain leave to remain in United Kingdom on account of  long  residence
    but do continue to argue that the statelessness (or otherwise) of their
    child, SP, who was born in October 2017 in the United Kingdom,  renders
    their return to India disproportionate. The appellants argue  that,  as
    the child has not been registered as an Indian citizen  born  overseas,
    she will not be admitted to India  or,  if  admitted,  not  allowed  to
    reside there. Judge Pedro at [10] recorded:

         "10. I note that in [the appellants'] application to the respondent
         the appellants indicated that the primary reason that they would be
         unable to return to India is the  claimed  statelessness  of  their
         child. Indeed, this remains at the core of their claim  and  appeal
         before me. However, the respondent has made it clear that there  is
         no intention to return the appellants to India without their  child
         and that all three would be returned as a family unit. The  ability
         of the respondent to return the appellants' child to India with the
         appellants  obviously  depends  upon  the  consent  of  the  Indian
         authorities. Pertinent to this is the issue of registration of  the
         child as an Indian citizen with the Indian High Commission  in  the
         United Kingdom  (an  issue  I  shall  return  to  shortly  in  this
         decision)  or  some  other  form  of  permission  from  the  Indian
         authorities for the child to travel with the appellants and  remain
         in India. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE I  cannot  see  that
         the issue of the child's claimed statelessness can have any bearing
         on the appellants' integration into India upon return there,  given
         that they would only be returned as a family unit with their  child
         with the consent of the Indian authorities as regards  their  child
         which the respondent has made it clear  would  be  expected  to  be
         after the registration of their child as an Indian citizen."

 3. Judge Pedro was referred to  the  judgement  in  MK  [2017]  EWHC  1365
    (Admin). The judge's analysis and reasons for his  decision  appear  at
    [19-22] which I set out below in full:

         "19. Bearing in mind that the appellants' child  is  now  past  her
         first birthday, it is pertinent also to note the content of [11] of
         MK:-

             "Much more to the point in question what is meant  by  needing
             the permission of the Central Government for registration. The
             evidence of  the  defendant's  witnesses...indicates  that  in
             practice there is no difference  between  registration  before
             the child's first birthday and registration after  that  date.
             The Indian officials said that there is  "no  restriction"  on
             later registration. This  is  important:  it  means  that  the
             statutory provision requiring the permission  of  the  Central
             Government does not  in  practice  imply  the  exercise  of  a
             discretion: permission is given routinely."

         20.  I interject at this point to  note  that  notwithstanding  the
         delay in proceeding with the registration of the appellants'  child
         at the Indian High Commission, which I consider to be entirely  due
         to the actions of the appellants and for which they  are  culpable,
         it is to be noted that the child's  prospects  of  registering  for
         citizenship with the Indian authorities do not appear to have  been
         extinguished or endangered. I find that the lack of registration to
         date is the culpability of the appellants and  not  the  respondent
         because the appellants have claimed that the only reason that  they
         could not register their child at the Indian  High  Commission  was
         the absence of their original passports which were  being  held  by
         the  respondent.  Yet,  in  the  respondent's  decision  dated   27
         September 2018 under appeal before me, the respondent  has  clearly
         stated "The documents that  you  have  provided  are  enquiries  to
         obtain a passport for your child, not to  register  your  child  as
         Indian. You could have wrote (sic) to the Home  Office  to  request
         that your passports were sent to the High Commission  in  order  to
         process your child's application for a passport to  enable  you  to
         return to India, once you had registered your child as Indian.  You
         have had the opportunity to register your child and have failed  to
         do so. This does not warrant granting leave to remain in  the  UK."
         Therefore,  if  the  appellants  had  made  any  approach  to   the
         respondent for assistance in providing their original passports  to
         the Indian High Commission for the purpose of registration of their
         child the respondent clearly says their  request  could  have  been
         accommodated  and  Ms  Gledhill  submitted  that  the  respondent's
         removal team would ensure that such cooperation from the respondent
         would be forthcoming when removal is on the agenda for the  purpose
         of removing the appellants and their child  as  a  family  unit  to
         India.

         21.  The first appellant confirmed in her evidence before  me  that
         despite  knowing  that  they  required  the  production  of   their
         passports to the Indian High Commission  to  register  their  child
         they made no contact with the respondent to request assistance with
         this. The second appellant confirmed that they discovered the  need
         for their passports when they contacted the Indian High  Commission
         some 3 or 4 weeks after their child's birth.  The  first  appellant
         claimed in evidence that she had been under the impression that  if
         they contacted the respondent with such a request their application
         would have been treated as withdrawn but she  confirmed  that  they
         did not contact the respondent and that this misconception  on  her
         part did not arise from  any  information  given  to  them  by  the
         respondent as they made no contact  with  the  respondent.  Despite
         having legal representation since 2014 and approaching their  legal
         representatives for advice regarding  registration  at  the  Indian
         High Commission  it  appears  that  no  contact  was  made  by  the
         appellants or their representative with the  respondent  concerning
         the passports. Instead, the appellants did not complete any  formal
         application at  the  Indian  High  Commission  in  any  attempt  to
         register their child but instead  some  time  later,  in  September
         2018, they paid a fee to the Indian High Commission with the second
         appellant attending there to obtain a  letter  dated  29  September
         2018 appearing at page 25 of the appellant's bundle. That letter is
         from the Indian High Commission. It gives full details of  the  two
         appellants and their Indian passports and citizenship, as  well  as
         full details of their child. It does not say that the child  cannot
         be registered but simply confirms that the child has not  yet  been
         registered. Indeed, the letter  implies  that  there  would  be  no
         difficulty in achieving registration consistent with  the  position
         under Indian law as referred to in MK. I find the letter to be self-
         serving and obtained by the appellants as  part  of  their  refusal
         even to contemplate proceeding with any attempt to  register  their
         child in order to pursue their  aim  of  remaining  in  the  United
         Kingdom by this spurious means. I do not consider  that  they  have
         been acting in the best interests of  their  child  in  effectively
         withholding from the child her entitlement to be registered  as  an
         Indian citizen with all the rights that that  entails  and  placing
         her in a position of statelessness which it is apparent could  have
         been and still can be easily avoided and remedied. As was concluded
         at [12] of MK, "There is  no  evidence  before  me  of  any  actual
         difficulty in registering  a  child  whom  the  parents  wanted  to
         register." I find that the appellants  did  not  want  to  register
         their child as was essentially confirmed  by  the  first  appellant
         towards the conclusion of her evidence before me when she said that
         she was not sure that she and her spouse did want to register their
         child at the Indian High Commission because in their view they  and
         their child would have a better future in  the  United  Kingdom.  I
         consider that the appellants' motivation for ostensibly relying  on
         their child's  position  of  statelessness  created  by  their  own
         actions must be taken into account in the proportionality balancing
         exercise as, in my view,  it  gives  added  weight  to  the  public
         interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

         22.  I would make one final observation concerning the  appellants'
         reliance on the decision in MK. The issue in MK was set out at  [4]
         thereof. It was whether or not for the purpose of  paragraph  3  of
         Schedule 2 to the British Nationality Act 1981 the  child  in  that
         case, who was  aged  6  at  the  time,  was  and  had  always  been
         stateless. It was concluded that because the child had  never  been
         registered with the Indian High Commission that child was  and  had
         always been stateless. I am aware that this would  currently  apply
         to the appellants' child in the case before me as she has  not  yet
         been registered notwithstanding that I consider the fault for  this
         lies entirely with the appellants. However, the  appellants'  child
         is under 2 years of age and is not eligible for registration  as  a
         British citizen as she is not yet 5 years of age for the purpose of
         paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to the 1981 Act. This was not the case in
         MK  where  it  was  decided  that  that  child  was  eligible   for
         registration as a British citizen. That is  not  the  case  in  the
         appeal before me. Whilst I accept that pursuant to the guidance  in
         MK  the  appellants'  child  is  currently  stateless  she  is  not
         currently  eligible  for  British  citizenship  but   only   Indian
         citizenship. The latter is being withheld from her only as a result
         of a planned course of action by the  appellants  in  pursuance  of
         their desire to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  evidence
         before me strongly indicates that this situation  could  easily  be
         remedied with the cooperation of the appellants in proceeding  with
         the registration with which the respondent has always indicated  he
         would cooperate and facilitate any such registration by making  the
         appellants' passports available to the Indian  High  Commission.  I
         consider that this distinguishes the facts of this case from  those
         in MK and that these are material considerations to be  taken  into
         account in the proportionality balancing exercise under  Article  8
         which is the issue before me and was not the issue in  MK.  Indeed,
         it  was  recognised  in  MK  that  the   conclusions   reached   on
         statelessness in that case arising from a lack of registration  and
         that appellant's consequential right to British  citizenship  could
         open an obvious route to abuse. I find that in the  present  appeal
         before me there has been demonstrated the type of  abuse  envisaged
         in MK but in circumstances where the  appellants'  child  does  not
         currently have a consequential right  to  British  citizenship  and
         this calls for appropriate weight to be given by me to  the  public
         interest in  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise  I  have  to
         conduct."

 4. Mr Sharma challenged that analysis. He submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had perpetrated 'errors of approach'. He submitted that MK had
    shown that connivance by parents in manufacturing a situation whereby a
    child was, in effect, stateless should not be held  against  the  child
    him or herself; the only relevant  consideration  was  whether  or  not
    registration as a citizen had taken place.  Without  registration,  the
    child could not return to India  and,  as  a  consequence,  his  carers
    (parents) would  not  be  able  to  return  to  the  country  of  their
    nationality.

 5. MK makes it clear that registration of a child born in this country can
    take place in the United Kingdom prior to a family returning  to  India
    [12-13]:

         "There are other provisions of the law, to which  I  was  referred,
         but on which I do not need to make any specific finding. There  are
         possibilities for applying for registration as a  citizen  where  a
         person born outside India comes to live  in  India  while  still  a
         minor, and there are provisions for the backdating  (if  necessary)
         of the Central government permission. There is no  evidence  before
         me of any actual difficulty in registering a child whom the parents
         wanted to register.

         The Indian law and practice as revealed from the evidence is that a
         child born to an Indian parent outside India has a right to  Indian
         citizenship, which, if the child was born on or  after  3  December
         2004 is obtained by registration  at  the  Indian  consulate  after
         fulfilling  appropriate  administrative  procedures   directed   to
         identification of the child and the parents and their  nationality.
         The child's age has no impact on the process."

 6. Further, at [38], Mr Ockelton, sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge  in
    MK stated:

         "Given the importance of actual nationality rather than the ability
         to acquire it, a claimant's ability to show that he  or  she  meets
         the  statutory  requirement  of  not  having  or  having  had   any
         nationality becomes an individual issue. If the  question  depended
         on the possibility of the acquisition of nationality  it  could  be
         answered, or largely answered, by an examination  of  the  relevant
         foreign law; but if it depends on actual acquisition,  the  foreign
         law is merely the background against which the individual's  actual
         acts and their effect are to be seen."

 7. In my opinion, the appellants have misconstrued the reasoning of  Judge
    Pedro. Whilst it does appear at [21] that the judge finds  unattractive
    the parents' refusal to register the  child's  birth  with  the  Indian
    Consulate  purely  as  a  means  to  prolong  the  family's  continuing
    residence in the United Kingdom, I find that it  emerges  clearly  from
    the judge's analysis that he considered that the  parents  would  apply
    for registration should the return of the family to India be  required.
    The First-tier Tribunal was required  to  make  findings  of  fact;  by
    reference to the detailed passages of analysis quoted above, I consider
    that one such finding is that the parents currently have  an  intention
    to apply for registration if required to return to India. As the  judge
    stated at [21], the  only  obstacle  to  the  parents  registering  the
    child's birth was that the child 'would have a  better  future  in  the
    United Kingdom'; if the child is not in the United Kingdom, then it  is
    obvious that, in order to protect her best interests, the parents would
    register as a citizen of India. Moreover, if there is  any  doubt  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  has  not  articulated  that  finding  clearly
    enough, then, were I to remake the decision on the same facts, I  would
    certainly make such a finding. As a consequence, any problem concerning
    the judge's observation that the parents 'could' apply for registration
    (as opposed to whether they 'would' do so)  is  removed.  Applying  for
    registration is, therefore, simply be one of several arrangements which
    the family would need to make in order to prepare for their  return  to
    India.

 8. In the light of what I say above, I find that the First-tier Tribunal's
    analysis is legally accurate and represents a  clear  analysis  of  the
    relevant facts. Even if the judge has concentrated too much  upon  what
    the parents could do as opposed to what they would do, I have indicated
    that, if I were to remake the decision, I would find that parents  have
    a present intention to apply for registration while still in the United
    Kingdom  and  before  departure  notwithstanding   their   refusal   or
    reluctance hitherto to do so. Accordingly, I see no reason to set aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed


Signed                              Date 31 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
