
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/20178/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 August 2019                        |On 09 September 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     EG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Abraham, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                   DECISION AND REASONS (given ex tempore)

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FtT') Judge R D Taylor sent on 2 April  2019  dismissing
         his appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  Although the appeal
         was also dismissed on asylum grounds, the grounds of appeal  relate
         solely to Article 8.

    Background

      2. The appellant has claimed to be a citizen of Eritrea but  that  has
         not been accepted and the respondent has treated him on  the  basis
         that he is a citizen of Ethiopia, with the intention that  he  will
         be deported there.  The appellant was convicted of being  concerned
         in supplying class A drugs as well as assault and  possession  with
         intent to supply on 13 February 2017.   He  was  sentenced  to  two
         years and three months' imprisonment  on  6  March  2017.   He  was
         therefore imprisoned until September 2017 before being  transferred
         to immigration detention where he remained until April 2018.  Prior
         to his imprisonment the  appellant  had  a  relationship  with  his
         daughter whom he saw regularly.  By the time he was  released  from
         detention he had a second child.  After his release  the  appellant
         saw both children two  to  three  times  a  week.   The  respondent
         refused the appellant's protection and human  rights  claim  on  20
         September 2018 and made a deportation  decision,  that  necessarily
         followed from the appellant's  sentence  of  imprisonment  of  over
         twelve months.  The appellant appealed against that decision to the
         FtT.

    FtT Decision

      3. The FtT set out the relevant background as well as the respondent's
         position, as set out in the decision letter.  Before detailing  the
         evidence available to it, the FtT at [10] recorded the  appellant's
         evidence as set out in  his  witness  statement  that  he  met  the
         children's mother in 2012 and although they did not  live  together
         his first daughter was born in 2013 and he helped look after her on
         most days.  The FtT set out the appellant's evidence  under  cross-
         examination in  some  detail,  as  well  as  re-examination  before
         turning to the  evidence  of  the  mother  of  the  children.   She
         confirmed her witness  statement  which  said  that  she  lived  in
         Manchester and the appellant lived in Liverpool, but that  he  came
         to visit the children two to three times a week and  that  included
         collecting the older child from school.  She  described  the  older
         child as being upset when her father was in  prison  and  described
         the close nature of the relationship between the appellant and  his
         children.

      4.  The  FtT  then  set  out  the   submissions   provided   by   both
         representatives, again in some  detail.   The  FtT  summarised  the
         submissions regarding Article 8 at [17].   These  referred  to  the
         relevant case law as well as an independent social worker's ('ISW')
         report that was available to the FtT.  The FtT  expressly  recorded
         the submissions made on behalf of the appellant that the ISW report
         sets out the likely impact of the appellant's  deportation  on  the
         children and on their mother and refers to the appellant  being  an
         integral part of the family and  without  him  there  would  be  no
         stability.  The FtT also referred to the legal submission  made  on
         behalf of the appellant in these terms "undue  harshness  is  self-
         standing but these factors weigh against the  public  interest  and
         the undue harshness here is that the children are British  and  the
         nature of the country to which they are to be removed makes ongoing
         contact  more  difficult".   Having   summarised   the   respective
         submissions, the FTT then went on to make findings both in relation
         to the protection claim and in relation to Article 8.  I  need  say
         no more about the protection claim because those findings  are  not
         challenged.  The FtT's findings in relation to Article  8  are  set
         out at paragraphs [20] to [22] and it is helpful to have these  set
         out in full at this stage:

             "20. As far as Article 8 is concerned  the  deportation  order
                  has been made on  the  basis  of  the  appellant  being  a
                  foreign criminal guilty of an offence to which he has been
                  sentenced to more than twelve months but  less  than  four
                  years.  Under paras 398, 399 and 399A  of  the  Rules  the
                  public interest requires deportation  unless  one  of  the
                  exceptions apply.  The first exception in 399A  does  have
                  to be considered as the children are now British  citizens
                  even though they have not been in  the  UK  for  at  least
                  seven years and this is the exception on which Ms Motashaw
                  primarily relies.  Their best interests of course have  to
                  be a primary consideration.  I indicated in the course  of
                  submissions that I did not consider it to be in their best
                  interests to go with their father to  Ethiopia  especially
                  as on the evidence including the  social  worker's  report
                  there is no prospect that their mother would accompany him
                  as the relationship between the two of them  is  not  that
                  strong, has been severely strained by his offending and as
                  a refugee from Eritrea herself now with status in  the  UK
                  it has no appeal whatsoever.  It would clearly  be  unduly
                  harsh in all these circumstances to expect the children in
                  these circumstances to go to live in Ethiopia  with  their
                  father.  As far as staying in the UK whilst the  appellant
                  is deported in terms of their best interests  it  is  also
                  clear that it is in their best interests that their father
                  should remain here and be able to  continue  to  have  the
                  level of contact that he has so far been able to  maintain
                  albeit punctuated as it has been by his time in prison and
                  by the fact that he does not live with them or in the same
                  town or city.  It would also be in  their  best  interests
                  for that contact to improve although whether it  would  do
                  must be a matter of speculation given the history  of  the
                  relationship between the appellant and  their  mother  and
                  the inevitable uncertainties as to the appellant's  future
                  behaviour if the  prospects  of  deportation  were  to  be
                  removed.  I note  that  the  independent  social  worker's
                  report at 14.7  says  Mr  [G]  is  acutely  aware  of  the
                  negative impact on Ms [A] and the children  should  he  be
                  deported and is also concerned  for  his  own  safety  and
                  wellbeing  in  Ethiopia.   He   is   understandably   very
                  concerned  about  [various  matters   affecting   him   in
                  Ethiopia] should he be deported.

             21.   Accepting though that  it  is  in  the  children's  best
                  interests for their father to remain in the UK that is not
                  the ultimate  issue  as  Ms  Motashaw  acknowledged.   The
                  ultimate issue is taking account of those  best  interests
                  as a primary consideration would it be  unduly  harsh  for
                  the children to remain in the  UK  without  their  father.
                  The Supreme Court case of KO is reported in  the  skeleton
                  including para 23 where Lord  Carnwath  having  previously
                  said it  is  self-contained  (that  is  unduly  is  not  a
                  reference to the relative  seriousness  of  the  level  of
                  offending) says:

                      'On the other hand the expression unduly harsh  seems
                      clearly intended to introduce a  higher  hurdle  than
                      that of reasonableness under Section 117B(6),  taking
                      account of the public interest in the deportation  of
                      foreign criminals. ... It assumes that there is a due
                      level of harshness ... Unduly implies something going
                      beyond that level. ... One is looking for a degree of
                      harshness going  beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
                      involved for any child faced with the deportation  of
                      a parent'.

              22. Bearing in mind those observations I find  it  impossible
                  to say on the basis of the relationship of  the  appellant
                  with the children in this case including  everything  said
                  about it in the independent social  worker's  report  even
                  taking into account that it  is  in  the  children's  best
                  interests for him to stay to be able to maintain and  have
                  the possibility to build on that level of relationship and
                  even bearing in mind  what  Ms  Motashaw  said  about  the
                  difficulties  (but  not  impossibilities)  of  maintaining
                  contact from Ethiopia but the harshness involved in  these
                  facts goes beyond that which would  be  involved  for  any
                  child faced with the deportation of a parent  or  for  any
                  other reason  could  be  said  to  be  unduly  harsh  when
                  balanced  against  the   very   strong   public   interest
                  identified by the legislation and  by  the  Rules  in  the
                  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  as  defined  and   as
                  applying to the appellant.  I conclude  that  taking  into
                  account all the evidence before me on the facts  it  would
                  not be unduly harsh and the exception in para 117B(5)  and
                  para 399A of the Rules is not made out".

         Pausing there the reference to para 117B(5) is  clearly  a  mistake
         and  that  should  be  a  reference  to  section  117C(5)  of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').

      5. In grounds of appeal prepared  by  another  Counsel,  that  is  not
         Counsel who represented the appellant  before  me  or  Counsel  who
         represented the appellant before the FtT, the focus  was  upon  the
         failure to take into account and/or give reasons for rejecting  the
         conclusions of the ISW.  FtT Judge Gumsley  granted  permission  to
         appeal in a decision dated 1 July 2019.  The following  observation
         was made:

             "In relation to the assertion that the judge failed  to  apply
             the  correct  legal  test   when   considering   whether   the
             appellant's removal would be unduly harsh although it  is  not
             set out in specific terms within the grounds of  appeal  I  am
             satisfied that it is arguable that the  judge  has  failed  to
             consider the unduly harsh test  in  accordance  with  relevant
             case law namely KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC  53  and
             has taken into account factors that he should  not  have  done
             namely the public interest in removal  of  criminals  at  that
             stage of his consideration of the case ... Although I can  see
             less force in the other ground of appeal  as  drafted  in  the
             circumstances permission to argue both matters is granted".

      6. In a Rule 24 notice dated 16 July 2019,  the  respondent  submitted
         that the  grounds  merely  disagree  with  the  findings  and  also
         submitted that any reference to the public interest at [22] of  the
         decision is a reflection of the fact that the  public  interest  is
         already established within the Immigration  Rules  and  legislation
         rather than the misapplication of the legal test required.

    Hearing

      7. At the hearing before me,  in  clear  and  helpful  submissions  Mr
         Abraham relied upon two grounds of appeal.   The  first  ground  of
         appeal was taken from Judge  Gumsley's  grant  of  permission.   Mr
         Abraham submitted that there was  a  degree  of  ambiguity  in  the
         judge's approach to  KO  (Nigeria)  and  the  extent  to  which  he
         factored in  public  interest  considerations  when  analysing  the
         effect of the appellant's deportation on the children  and  whether
         it would be unduly harsh.  Mr Abraham also relied on the grounds of
         appeal as drafted and submitted that there were two limbs to  those
         grounds.  Firstly, the FtT failed to take into account the relevant
         factual  background  as  set  out  within  the   mother's   witness
         statement.  This spoke to the  close  nature  of  the  relationship
         prior to the appellant being imprisoned and  was  relevant  to  the
         assessment of the likely future development of  that  relationship.
         Mr  Abraham's  second  limb  relied  upon  the  FtT's  failure   to
         adequately refer to the ISW evidence and failure to  give  adequate
         reasons for not following the conclusions of the ISW.

      8. Mr Bates submitted that the first ground was simply a misreading of
         the FtT's decision and when it is read as a whole, it is clear that
         the FtT had given itself the correct self-direction  regarding  the
         unduly harsh test.  As to the second ground,   Mr  Bates  submitted
         that the ISW did not raise any specific issues of concern regarding
         the children, that is to say they were healthy and  there  were  no
         specific reasons provided as to why the effect on these  particular
         children got anywhere close to the high threshold of  unduly  harsh
         and in that context the reasons provided by the FtT in relation  to
         the ISW report were adequate.

    Legal Framework

      9. Paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  reflected
         within section 117C of the the 2002 Act.  This is a case  in  which
         the FtT found that Exception 2 could not be met.   Exception  2  is
         set out in this way:

             "Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh".

     10. It is noteworthy that paragraph 399 of the Rules divides  Exception
         2 into two limbs.  The first limb 399(a) says  this  "it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the child to live in  the  country  to  which  the
         person is to be deported".  The first limb in this case is  not  in
         dispute because the FtT clearly accepted that it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for these children to live in Ethiopia.  The second  limb  to
         399(b) states as follows "it would be unduly harsh for the child to
         remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported".  It  is
         this aspect of the unduly harsh test that was in dispute before the
         FtT and which continues to be in dispute.  The correct approach  to
         the unduly harsh test has been considered by the Supreme  Court  in
         KO (Nigeria) (supra).  It was made clear by Lord Carnwath that  the
         unduly harsh test is self-contained, that is to  say  it  does  not
         require a balancing of the  relative  levels  of  severity  of  the
         parent's offence other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by
         Section 117C itself.  Lord Carnwath also made  it  clear  that  the
         unduly harsh  test  requires  an  elevated  threshold  to  be  met.
         Paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria) says this:

             "On the other hand the expression unduly harsh  seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             reasonableness under Section 117B(6), taking  account  of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word unduly implies an element of comparison.   It
             assumes that there is a due level  of  harshness,  that  is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context.  Unduly implies something going  beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by Section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence".

         The approach in KO has been underlined in a recent decision by  the
         President of the Upper Tribunal, see  RA  (s.117C  "unduly  harsh":
         offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC).

    Error of Law Discussion

     11. I shall deal with the two grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

     12. It is clear that the FtT was fully aware of KO (Nigeria).  The  FtT
         quoted the submissions made on the appellant's behalf  in  relation
         to KO.  There was also a comprehensive skeleton argument before the
         FtT which set out the relevant legal  framework.   The  FtT  in  my
         judgment  did  not  make  an  incorrect  self-direction  and   when
         paragraphs [21] and [22] are considered together and then read as a
         whole with the remainder of the decision, the FtT was clearly aware
         that the unduly harsh test is a self-contained  one  and  does  not
         require any balancing with the relative levels of severity  of  the
         parent's offending.  Indeed, the FtT says this expressly  at  [21].
         The FtT refers to Lord Carnwath having described the test as a self-
         contained one.  Where at [22] the  FtT  refers  to  "when  balanced
         against the very strong public interest", the FtT is doing no  more
         than  clumsily  summarising  that  which  Lord  Carnwath  said   at
         paragraph [23] of KO (Nigeria).  When applying the relevant test at
         paragraphs [21] and [22] it is noteworthy  that  the  FtT  made  no
         specific  reference  to  the  nature  and/or  seriousness  of  this
         appellant's offending.  Had the FtT added this as an ingredient  in
         some sort of balancing exercise, one would have expected the FtT to
         have referred to the nature and/or seriousness of  offending.   The
         absence of any reference to  this  appellant's  offending  in  [22]
         supports the view that the  FtT  did  not  undertake  any  form  of
         balancing exercise when applying the unduly harsh test, but applied
         the test as set out by Lord Carnwath.

Ground 2

     13. Mr Abraham took me to the witness statement prepared on  behalf  of
         the children's mother in 2017 to make the point that the  appellant
         had a very close relationship with his first child before  he  went
         into prison.  In my judgment this is evidence that the FtT  clearly
         had in mind and is referred to at [10] to [14] of its decision.

     14. I now turn to the submission relevant  to  the  ISW  report.   When
         summarising the evidence available to it, the FtT referred  at  [9]
         to "a very lengthy independent social worker report".  The FtT also
         referred to the ISW's report and its contents when summarising  the
         submissions on behalf of the appellant  at  [17].   The  FtT  again
         referred to the ISW's report when addressing best interests and the
         likely future relationship between the appellant and  his  children
         at [20], and then when summarising its conclusion at [22] expressly
         took into account a number of factors  including  "everything  said
         about it in the independent social worker's report".  It  is  clear
         from reading the decision as a whole that when applying the  unduly
         harsh test, the FtT had the ISW report fully in mind.   Mr  Abraham
         took me to the conclusions of the ISW  to  support  his  submission
         that it was inevitable that the effect on these children  would  be
         unduly harsh.  I acknowledge that the ISW sets out  the  effect  on
         the children in robust terms - see paragraphs 14.29 to 15.3 of  the
         ISW's report in particular.  This includes reference to the  impact
         on the children being inevitably damaging and significant  both  in
         the short and long term.  In my judgment the FtT did  not  need  to
         refer to the specific wording of the ISW report when giving reasons
         for its ultimate conclusion, as it is clear that it had  the  ISW's
         opinion fully in mind.

     15. It is important when considering the duty to give adequate  reasons
         to place that duty in context.  The context of  this  case,  as  Mr
         Bates pointed out, is as follows: the children  are  both  healthy;
         the mother has demonstrated an ability to cope without  the  father
         whilst he was in prison or detention for a period in  excess  of  a
         year; the mother and father have never lived together; contact does
         not take place every day although the first child  saw  the  father
         more regularly before he was detained; the father now  lives  in  a
         different city to the mother and only  sees  the  children  two  to
         three times a week.  When that is considered  alongside  the  ISW's
         views that the impact  would  be  very  significant,  the  FtT  was
         nonetheless entitled to conclude that the effect  would  not  reach
         the very high threshold  of  unduly  harsh.   In  my  judgment  the
         reasons provided by the FtT are tolerably clear when  the  decision
         is read as a whole and it cannot be said  that  the  FtT  left  the
         ISW's opinion out of account when reaching its ultimate conclusion.
          For those  reasons  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  not  made  out,
         notwithstanding Mr Abraham's  efforts.   He  said  all  that  could
         possibly have been said on behalf of the appellant.

Notice of decision

     16. The FtT's decision does not contain an error of law and  I  do  not
         set it aside.

Anonymity

     17. The FtT did not make an anonymity direction but  as  this  decision
         refers to the circumstances of two children I make the  appropriate
         anonymity direction.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 23 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
