
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/20561/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 April 2018                          | On 09 May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                            Mr Mohammed ALAUDDIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State.  However,  the  sake  of
      convenience, I shall continue to refer to the  parties  as  they  were
      referred to in the First--tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 December 1980.   He
      appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 11  August  2016
      refusing him indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  under
      the Immigration Rules as the  Secretary  of  State  claimed  that  the
      appellant produced a false ETS  certificate  document  for  indefinite
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


   3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet allowed the appellant's  appeal  in  a
      decision promulgated on 11 January 2018.


   4. The respondent appealed against the decision and a Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 26 January 2018  stating
      that it is arguable that the Judge may have erred in  the  failure  to
      accept  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  discharged  her  initial
      evidential burden  of  proof  relying  on  the  generic  evidence  and
      evidence that at that particular test centre at  which  the  appellant
      sat exams, 75% of the certificates were obtained fraudulently on  that
      particular day and when the appellant sat his exam, it was as high  as
      97%. It is also arguable that the Judge applied the burden of proof in
      correctly.


   5. Thus, the appeal came before me on an error of law hearing.

             The First-tier Tribunal's findings

   6. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings which I summarise.
      The burden of proof is on the appellant and the civil standard of  the
      balance of  probabilities  applies.  This  case  revolves  around  the
      appellant's Article 8 rights under the European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights because it is accepted that he cannot satisfy  the  Immigration
      Rules. The appellant and his wife have three children who were born in
      the United Kingdom on 29 July 2011, 1 July 2013 and 22 August 2017.


   7. The appellant has achieved a number of educational  qualifications  in
      the United Kingdom including an MBA certificate from the University of
      Wales in November 2013 and an MBA certificate from American University
      in Bangladesh in 2007, an advanced diploma in  business  studies  from
      Barbican University in Washington DC in February 2008 and completed  a
      number of ACCA exams in December 2016. He has also successfully  taken
      in IELTS exam in June 2006 and February 2009.


   8. The TOEIC certificate which the appellant took on 28  August  2013  is
      the subject of this  appeal.  The  appellant  did  not  rely  on  that
      certificate for his further application, but  the  respondent  submits
      that it was obtained fraudulently based on expert and  other  evidence
      which has been obtained in respect of a number of  ETS  test  centres.
      The respondent has produced evidence, including an expert report  from
      Prof  French  a  witness  statement  from  Rebecca   Collings,   Peter
      Millington and Oliver Addy. There has also been evidence  produced  by
      another expert, Dr Harrison. The important case of SM and Kadir [2016]
      (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) UTI AC of 21 April  2016  has  been
      considered.


   9. In essence the respondent satisfies  the  burden  of  proof  that  the
      certificate was obtained  fraudulently.  There  is  some  evidence  on
      behalf of the respondent that at that particular  centre  75%  of  the
      certificates were obtained fraudulently through proxy  takers  and  on
      the day in question, it was as high as 97%. However, this  methodology
      has been challenged by contrary expert evidence and case law.


  10. Taking all this into account, I do not consider  that  the  respondent
      has satisfied the burden of proof that the certificates were  obtained
      fraudulently.


       The respondent's grounds of appeal


  11. The respondent in his grounds of appeal relies on the case of  SM  and
      Qadir which  he  maintains  makes  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  e
      Secretary  of  State's  generic  evidence   combined   with   evidence
      particular to an appellant did,  in  fact,  discharge  the  evidential
      burden of proving that  a  TOEIC  certificate  had  been  produced  by
      dishonesty. The grounds of appeal state that the test  is  whether  on
      the balance of probabilities, the appellant employed deception.


  12. The witness statements  and  the  spreadsheet  provide  the  necessary
      evidence to demonstrate  that  the  appellant  did  employ  deception.
      Furthermore, in the case of Sheizad and another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615
      stated "the question in these appeals may concern  the  initial  stage
      and whether with the evidence of Mr Millington  and  Mr  Collins,  the
      evidential burden is on the Secretary of State  is  satisfied.  It  is
      then incumbent on the individual whose leave  has  been  curtailed  to
      provide evidence in response  raising  an  innocent  explanation.  The
      guidance in this decision makes it clear  that  there  is  "in  limine
      rejection of the Secretary of State's evidence is even  sufficient  to
      shift the evidential burden was  an  error  of  law".  Therefore,  the
      respondent had satisfied her evidential burden of proof.


  13. The Judge placed weight on the fact that  the  appellant  is  able  to
      recall details of the examination process, however this does not  mean
      that  the  appellant  personally  took  the  test.  The  BBC  panorama
      programme showed students at Eton College standing next  to  terminals
      while proxy test takers did the test for them which would not preclude
      the candidates from having travelled to the  test  centre  and  having
      knowledge of the procedures and contents  of  the  test  itself,  even
      though they had not taken it personally.


  14. The Judge finds that there is no reason  for  the  appellant  to  have
      taken  the  test   fraudulently   because   he   has   other   English
      qualifications. It is submitted that  this  is  not  determinative  of
      whether or not the appellant cheated. Plainly, there  may  be  reasons
      why a person who is able to speak English to the required level  would
      nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate to undertaking ETS  test
      on their behalf, or otherwise to cheat. The case of MA Nigeria  [2016]
      UKUT 50 at paragraph 57 was referred.


  15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has materially erred by failing to  give
      adequate reasons for holding that a person who  speaks  English  would
      have no reason to secure a test certificate by deception.

            The Hearing

  16. I heard brief submissions from both parties as to whether there is  an
      error of law in the decision.

          Findings as to whether there is an error of law

   17. In respect of the respondent's refusal the precedent fact  on  which
       this application of this provision depends  is  that  the  appellant
       produced a false English test result and the burden of  establishing
       this fact lies on the respondent. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  at
       paragraph 27 stated that "the burden of proof is  on  the  appellant
       and the civil standard of the  balance  of  probabilities  applies".
       This is a clear error of law and it is also  material.  The  Judge's
       error in this respect has clearly impacted his reasoning.

   18. The Judge did not take the step-by-step approach set out in the case
       of Secretary of State for the Home Department v Shehzad and  Another
       [2016] EWCA Civ 61 referred to me by the respondent and thereby fell
       into material error. He failed to appreciate that the  Secretary  of
       State bears the initial burden of furnishing proof of deception  and
       that this burden  is  an  evidential  burden.   That  means  if  the
       Secretary of State provides prima facie evidence  of  deception  the
       burden shifts back  onto  the  individual  to  provide  a  plausible
       innocent explanation and if  the  individual  does  so,  the  burden
       shifts back to the Secretary of State.


  19. The main reason the Judge gave for why the appellant had  no  need  to
      use deception and not take the English language test  is  because  the
      appellant is fluent in English and has obtained  previous  educational
      certificates in the English language from IELTS in 2006 and  2009  and
      has completed a number of significant academic qualifications, all  of
      which will have been conducted in the English language.


  20. The Judge did not take into account the case of MA Nigeria [2016] UKUT
      50 which states at paragraph 57.


           "an acknowledgement of this suggestion that the appellant has no
           reason to engage  in  deception  which  we  have  found  proven.
           However, this does not deflect it in any way from  reaching  our
           main finding and conclusion. In the abstract of course, there is
           a range of reasons why persons proficient in English may  engage
           in  TOEIC  fraud.  This  includes,  not  exhaustively,  lack  of
           confidence, fear of failure, lack of  time  and  commitment  and
           contempt  for  the  immigration   system.   The   reason   could
           conceivably overlap in individual cases and there is  scope  for
           other explanations for deceitful conduct in this sphere. We  are
           not required to make the further finding of  why  the  appellant
           engaged in deception and in this we add that this issue was  not
           explored  during  the  hearing.  We  resist  any  temptation  to
           speculate about this discrete matter".


   21. The Judge failed to give reasons for rejecting respondent's evidence
       including the fact that at this particular test centre  and  on  the
       day that the appellant claims that  he  sat  the  test,  proxy  test
       takers were up to 97%. It was not for the Judge to  speculate  about
       the appellant's motivations and make a finding that he had no reason
       to cheat.


   22. For the reasons given above, I set aside the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
       heard by any judge other than Judge Sweet.



Notice of Decision

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Dated this 3rd day of May 2018.

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Ms S Chana

