
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20711/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 17 March 2021                 |On 01 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                         emmanuellla atuweni tambala
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Eteko, of Iras and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ") promulgated on the 6 April 2020, in which  the  appellant's
         appeal against the decision to refuse her human rights  application
         dated 10 October 2019 was dismissed.

      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 17 March 2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face -to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant  who  was  able  to  see  and  hear  the
         proceedings being conducted. There were no issues regarding  sound,
         and no substantial technical problems were encountered  during  the
         hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

Background:

      4. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  She  entered  the  United
         Kingdom on 18 January 2008 with entry clearance to working  holiday
         maker which was valid from  December  2007  to  18  December  2009.
         Following the end of her visa, the  appellant  remained  in  United
         Kingdom and took no steps  to  regularise  her  immigration  status
         until 2019.

      5. On the 10 October 2019 she made a human rights  application  in  an
         application for leave to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  her
         family life with her partner and on the basis of her private life.

      6. The application was refused in a decision made on  the  2  December
         2019. The decision letter states that  the  appellant  had  made  a
         human rights claim in an application for leave to remain in the  UK
         under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  of  her
         family life with her partner.

      7. It was accepted that the eligibility relationship  requirement  was
         met (on the basis that that the appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship).

      8. The reasons given for refusing the application can be summarised as
         follows. The respondent considered her application under paragraphs
         R-LTRP of Appendix FM but considered that she could  not  meet  the
         eligibility immigration  requirements (  E-LTRP 2.1 of Appendix FM)
         because she had not demonstrated that she had been living with  her
         partner in a  relationship  akin  to  marriage  of  the  two  years
         immediately preceding the application.  This  is  because  she  had
         provided no documents to demonstrate that the parties  were  living
         together during 2017 or 2018. Consequently, she could not meet  the
         definition of a partner as defined in GEN 1.2 of Appendix FM.

      9. The appellant also  could  not  meet  the  eligibility  immigration
         requirement (paragraphs E-LTRP 2.1 -2.2) because her previous leave
         as a working holidaymaker ended on 18 December  2009  and  she  had
         been without valid leave  in  United  Kingdom  for  3583  days  and
         paragraph 39E did not apply.  She  was  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
         immigration laws and paragraph EX1 did not apply.

     10. The respondent considered whether the  appellant  would  be  exempt
         from  meeting  certain  eligibility  requirements  of  Appendix  FM
         because paragraph EX1 applied. It was accepted that  the  appellant
         had a genuine and subsisting relationship with her partner who  was
         a refugee from Zimbabwe. However the respondent did not accept that
         there  were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  in   accordance   with
         paragraph  EX2  of  Appendix  FM  which  means   "very  significant
         difficulties which will be faced by the appellant or her partner in
         continuing their family life together outside of the UK, and  which
         could not be overcome or entail very serious hardship for  her  and
         her partner". The respondent accepted that her partner could not be
         expected to return to  Zimbabwe,  however  there  was  no  evidence
         before the respondent to suggest that he would be in any danger  if
         he were to accompany the appellant to Malawi.  There  had  been  no
         evidence as to a child in the UK. Therefore paragraph EX1  did  not
         apply.

     11. Her application was considered under the private life  rules  under
         paragraph 276 ADE, where it was noted  that  the  appellant  was  a
         national of Malawi who had entered the UK in January 2008. She  had
         lived in the UK for 11  years and it  was  not  accepted  that  she
         lived in the UK continuously for 20 years;  she was not between the
         ages of 18 and under 25 having lived in the UK for more  than  half
         her life and was over the age of 18 and therefore  could  not  meet
         the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1 (iii)(iv) and  (v).  As  to
         paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the respondent did not accept that  there
         would be very significant obstacles to her integration into  Malawi
         if required to leave the UK because  she resided in  Malawi  up  to
         the age of 27, which included her childhood, formative years, and a
         portion of her adult life. It was considered that  she  would  have
         retained cultural and linguistic connections to Malawi  during  his
         time in the UK. Consequently, she failed to meet  the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules.

     12. The respondent did not consider that  there  were  any  exceptional
         circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain and  considered
         the issues that had been raised as to why it would be unjustifiably
         harsh for her to return to Malawi. The respondent took into account
         the basis of the application and that  her  partner  could  not  be
         expected to  return  to  Malawi  due  to  its  close  proximity  to
         Zimbabwe, where he was a refugee from. It was stated that  she  had
         no criminal convictions and not claimed benefits since arrival  and
         that she would be contributing to the  economy.  However,  although
         she claimed to wish to remain in the UK to work, it was  considered
         that she could return to Malawi and gain employment  there.  As  to
         her partner's return to  Malawi  due  to  its  close  proximity  to
         Zimbabwe, the respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  provided  no
         evidence to support the claim that a Zimbabwean national  would  be
         in any danger in Malawi.

     13. It was noted that she commenced a  relationship  in  the  knowledge
         that her immigration status in the UK was as  an  over  stayer  and
         that she had no legitimate expectation  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom indefinitely and therefore from the  outset,  both  parties
         should have been aware of the possibility the family life might not
         be able to continue in the UK. As her private life, the  respondent
         took into account that she held no formal immigration status in the
         UK for a significant period  of  time  and  there  was  nothing  to
         suggest any of the ties made in the UK went above those  of  normal
         emotional ties between adults. The claim to be a good character was
         not considered as an  "exceptional  circumstance"  because  it  was
         accepted that all those who wish to enter and remain United Kingdom
         must adhere to the laws are set out. It was considered that as  she
         was able to integrate  into  British  culture  after  spending  her
         entire life in Malawi, it was considered that should be able to use
         the same resourcefulness to reintegrate into Malawi in  culture,  a
         country where she has spent the majority of  her  life  and  health
         social and family ties.

     14. The respondent noted that a mere wish or desire or preference  live
         in the UK did not amount to an  exceptional  circumstance.  It  was
         noted  that  obtaining  employment  and  accommodation  in  another
         country may be an inconvenience, but a degree of inconvenience  did
         not amount to an exceptional circumstance. The ECHR did not  oblige
         the UK to accept the choice of someone as  to  which  country  they
         would simply prefer to reside in.

     15. Therefore the respondent did not find that there was  any  evidence
         to demonstrate that  there  were  any"  exceptional  circumstances"
         established in her case.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     16. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Clarke) on the  14
         February 2020.

     17. In a determination promulgated  on  the  5  March  2020,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rule in question and on Article 8  grounds.  The  judge
         heard evidence from the appellant and also heard evidence from  her
         partner.

     18. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  could
         not meet the requirements for a grant  of  leave  to  remain  under
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules; specifically  she  could  not
         meet the eligibility immigration requirements of the rules  as  her
         leave ended in 2009 and failed to meet E-LTRP 2.2.

     19. By reference to  her  relationship  with  her  partner,  the  judge
         accepted that she was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with
         her partner who had been granted refugee status and that  they  had
         been living together in a relationship akin to marriage at least  2
         years before the application had been made ( at [13-14]).

     20.  At  paragraphs  [15-26]  the   FtTJ   addressed   the   issue   of
         "insurmountable obstacles"

     21. The FtTJ concluded that the evidence was insufficient to  meet  the
         high test for insurmountable obstacles in paragraph EX1(b)  of  the
         rules because there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life
         continuing outside of the United Kingdom.

     22. The FtTJ made the following findings of fact:

           . the appellant entered the United Kingdom on  18  January  2008
             having entered as a  working  holidaymaker  with  leave  valid
             until December 2009. She has had no valid  status  since  that
             date (at [15]).

           . She was born and educated in Malawi and was aged 27  when  she
             came to the United Kingdom.

           . She had employment experience and worked as a sales  executive
             in publicity and advertising and  has  worked  in  the  United
             Kingdom in social care. She therefore had the education skills
             and able to support herself financially in Malawi (At [16]).

           . The appellant has family in Malawi  although  she  is  not  in
             regular contact with them (at [17]).

           . She would not be returning to a  country  whose  language  and
             customs are unfamiliar to her (at [17]).

           . Her partner is a Zimbabwean national who  entered  the  United
             Kingdom in 2002 as a student. His claim for asylum in 2007 was
             initially refused following a  successful  challenge  she  was
             granted refugee status in 2008/9. In March  2017  was  granted
             ILR at [18]).

           . Her partner has worked in  the  social  care  sector  and  has
             obtained further qualifications having  completed  studies  in
             higher education. He therefore has transferable  skills  which
             will enable him to find work in Malawi (at [19]).

           . When questioned why the appellant had not made an  application
             before 2019  both  witnesses  confirmed  that  they  had  been
             focused on her partner's status. They had sought legal  advice
             in the past, but the advice was to wait until her partner  was
             granted ILR (at [20]).

           . The appellant's partner stated he had no intention  of  moving
             to Malawi. In evidence in chief he referred  to  being  active
             and continuing to militate for true  change  in  Zimbabwe  and
             that he would not take the risk of relocation to a country  as
             close to Zimbabwe as Malawi. However the judge found  "I  have
             no cogent information before me concerning the reasons for the
             partner's application  for  asylum.  There  is  no  persuasive
             evidence before  me  of  X  being  active  in  any  political,
             military or other platform in Zimbabwe since arriving  in  the
             United Kingdom" at [23]).

           . No cogent evidence in place before  the  tribunal  as  to  the
             reasons why the appellant or her partner would be in danger if
             relocated to Malawi (at [24]).

           . At [25] the FtTJ considered the medical evidence  relating  to
             the appellant but  considered  that  there  was  "scant  other
             information as the medical  difficulties  experienced  by  the
             appellant". When asked why relevant  medical  treatment  could
             not be obtained in  Malawi,  the  appellant  referred  to  the
             better facilities and United Kingdom that she could not afford
             to pay for treatment in Malawi.

           . The judge concluded that having considered all  the  evidence,
             was not persuaded that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles
             family life continuing  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom  and
             therefore the provisions of paragraph EX 1 (b) were not met.

     23.  At  paragraphs  [27]-[35]  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
         proportionality of the appellant's removal under Article 8  of  the
         ECHR  but  concluded  that  it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with her right to respect for private and family life.



     24. The FtTJ took into account that the appellant and her partner could
         not show compliance with the immigration rules(paragraph EX1 (b) as
         regards  insurmountable  obstacles  and  paragraph   276ADE)   .The
         appellant has been in the UK unlawfully since her leave ended  2009
         (see [31]).

     25. When considering the section 117  public  interest  considerations,
         the FtTJ that took into account that the  appellant  spoke  English
         and  whilst  the  judge  was  not  given  full  details,  including
         documentary evidence of his income as at the date  of  the  hearing
         there  was  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been   financially
         supported by her partner.

     26. The judge took into account that she had entered the United Kingdom
         lawfully but that she had no valid status since December  2009  and
         made the decision not to return to Malawi in  2009  when  her  visa
         expired and no application was made to regularise her status  until
         October 2019, two years after her partner was granted ILR.

     27. He concluded that the  appellant  and  her  partner  established  a
         private life  together  when  both  parties  were  aware  that  the
         appellant's  immigration  status  was  precarious  and  that  their
         relationship continued for some 11 years when both had  been  aware
         that the  applicant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.  He
         therefore attached little weight to those factors.

     28. The judge finally concluded at [35] that having taken into  account
         and considered the submissions from both representatives and all of
         the  documentary  evidence  and  taking  into  account  the  public
         interest in the maintenance of immigration control, the judge found
         that the respondent's decision was proportionate  and  a  justified
         interference with the appellant's family and private life.

     29. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.

     30. Permission to appeal was issued on the 20 March 2020 and on  4  May
         2020, permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Adio stating:-

             "It is arguable that the appellant's husband would have  still
             been considered a refugee following his  grant  of  indefinite
             leave to remain and no reasons given by  the  respondent  that
             the reasons for the ground no longer exists. It is argued that
             the judge therefore erred at paragraph 23 and her finding that
             there is no persuasive evidence before her of X  being  active
             in any political, military,  or  other  platform  in  Zimbabwe
             since arriving in the  UK.  This  therefore  obviously  had  a
             bearing on the judge's decision as to whether it is reasonable
             for the appellant and her husband to return to  either  Malawi
             or Zimbabwe. The fact remains that X  is  not  a  national  of
             Malawi. The grounds of the application are arguable and  there
             is an arguable error of law. It is argued that  the  issue  of
             insurmountable obstacles has not been  properly  assessed  and
             likewise the consideration of the matter outside the rules."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     31. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the  15 July 2020, inter alia, indicating that it was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face -to -face hearing.  It  does  not  appear
         that any reply was provided to those directions and on 24  November
         2020 directions were given for a remote hearing to take  place  and
         that this could take place via Skype. Both parties  have  indicated
         that they were content for the hearing to proceed by  this  method.
         Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the  hearing  to   enable   oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties with the  assistance
         of their advocates.

     32. Mr Eteko on behalf of the appellant relied upon the written grounds
         of appeal.

     33. There was a Rule 24 response filed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated 26 October 2020.

     34. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear and helpful  oral  submissions
         during the hearing.

     35. I intend to consider the  submissions  made  by  the  parties  when
         considering the grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.

Discussion:

     36. In the the written submissions at paragraph 8 of the grounds, it is
         submitted that the decision of the FtTJ under the Immigration Rules
         was flawed as it did not disclose clearly which of the  Immigration
         Rules consideration was given to (Immigration Rules or asylum), nor
         does it provide any satisfactory reasons as to why the requirements
         of those (unidentified) Rules were not met.

     37. In my judgement, this  is  a  submission  based  on  form  and  not
         substance. Whilst the FtTJ did not specifically make  reference  to
         the individual numbers of the Immigration Rules under Appendix  FM,
         the FtTJ plainly addressed  each  of  them  when  carrying  out  an
         assessment of the appellant's overall claim and  as  referenced  in
         the respondent's decision letter.

     38. By reference to Appendix FM, the  respondent  considered  that  the
         appellant failed to establish that she resided with her partner  in
         a relationship  akin  to  marriage  for  two  years  prior  to  the
         application (GEN 1.2) however the FtTJ found that the appellant met
         GEN 1.2 for the reasons set out at paragraphs [13]-[14] in view  of
         the evidence that they had resided with each other since 2008.

     39. The judge found at [15] that the appellant was in  the  UK  without
         leave to remain. It therefore follows that  on  that  analysis  the
         appellant failed to meet the IR requirement under E-LTRP 2.2.

     40.  At  paragraphs  [15-26]  the   FtTJ   addressed   the   issue   of
         "insurmountable obstacles" (under EX1(b) of Appendix FM). The  FtTJ
         concluded that the evidence was insufficient to meet the  test  for
         insurmountable obstacles in paragraph EX1(b) of the  rules  because
         there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
         outside of the United Kingdom. At [27] the  FtTJ  expressly  stated
         that the appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

     41. At [27] the FtTJ again expressly considered the  immigration  rules
         relevant to private life under paragraph 276ADE.

     42. Consequently in my judgement the decision of the FtTJ made it plain
         on what basis the appellant had  failed  to  meet  the  immigration
         rules. I agree with the submission made on behalf of the respondent
         that whilst it might have been of greater assistance to have stated
         the relevant provisions under Appendix FM, it could not  amount  to
         an error  of  law  given  that  the  considerations  were  properly
         considered when the decision is read as a whole.

     43. In his oral submissions Mr Eteko stated that he advanced  2  issues
         on behalf of the  appellant.  Dealing  with  the  first  issue,  he
         submitted that the FtTJ erred in law on the assessment of the issue
         of insurmountable obstacles and by reference to the ability of  the
         parties to integrate to Zimbabwe or Malawi.

     44. In his submissions he particularly identified paragraphs  [23]  and
         [24] of the decision and submitted that  the  judge's  approach  at
         [23] was to "open a debate  on  an  issue  that  had  already  been
         settled", namely that the  appellant's  partner  had  been  granted
         refugee status. In addition at [24] Mr  Eteko  submitted  that  the
         judge was wrong where he stated that there was no evidence that the
         appellant's partner would be in danger in  Malawi  when  there  was
         material at pages 63 - 66 of the appellant's bundle and  the  judge
         failed to engage with that evidence.

     45. I have not been addressed upon the relevant law by either advocate.
         However the relevant legal principles can be addressed as follows.

     46. Paragraph EX.1. reads as follows (so far as relevant):

             " EX.1. This paragraph applies if.

             (a) ...; or

             (b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK.

             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner."

     47. The  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko  considered  the  meaning  of  the
         "insurmountable obstacles" requirement  at  [43]  to  [45]  of  the
         judgment as follows:

             "43. It appears that the  European  court  intends  the  words
             "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a practical and
             realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to  obstacles
             which make it literally impossible  for  the  family  to  live
             together  in  the  country  of  origin  of  the   non-national
             concerned. In some cases, the court has used other expressions
             which  make  that  clearer:  for  example,  referring  to  "un
             obstacle majeur" ( Sen v The Netherlands (2003) 36  EHRR  7  ,
             para 40), or to "major  impediments"  (  Tuquabo-Tekle  v  The
             Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798 , para 48), or to  "the  test  of
             'insurmountable obstacles' or 'major  impediments'"  (  IAA  v
             United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19,  paras  40  and  44),  or
             asking itself whether  the  family  could  "realistically"  be
             expected to move ( Sezen v The Netherlands (2006) 43 EHRR 30 ,
             para  47).  "Insurmountable  obstacles"   is,   however,   the
             expression employed by the  Grand  Chamber;  and  the  court's
             application of it indicates that it is a  stringent  test.  In
             Jeunesse, for example, there were said to be no insurmountable
             obstacles  to  the  relocation  of  the  family  to  Suriname,
             although the children, the eldest of  whom  was  at  secondary
             school, were Dutch nationals who had  lived  there  all  their
             lives, had never visited  Suriname,  and  would  experience  a
             degree of hardship if forced  to  move,  and  the  applicant's
             partner was in full-time employment in  the  Netherlands:  see
             paras 117 and 119.

             44.  Domestically, the expression  "insurmountable  obstacles"
             appears in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the  Rules.  As
             explained in para 15 above, that paragraph  applies  in  cases
             where an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route
             is in the UK in breach of immigration laws and  requires  that
             there should be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
             that  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.  The   expression
             "insurmountable obstacles" is now defined by paragraph EX.2 as
             meaning "very significant difficulties which would be faced by
             the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life
             together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
             would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  their
             partner." That definition appears to me to be consistent  with
             the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg case law.
             As  explained  in  para  16  above,  paragraph  EX.2  was  not
             introduced until after the  dates  of  the  decisions  in  the
             present cases. Prior to the insertion of that  definition,  it
             would nevertheless be reasonable to infer,  consistently  with
             the Secretary of State's statutory duty to act compatibly with
             Convention rights, that the expression was  intended  to  bear
             the same meaning in the Rules as in the  Strasbourg  case  law
             from which it was derived. I would therefore interpret  it  as
             bearing the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX.2.

             45.   By  virtue   of   paragraph   EX.1(b),   "insurmountable
             obstacles" are treated as a requirement for the grant of leave
             under the Rules in cases  to  which  that  paragraph  applies.
             Accordingly, interpreting the expression in the same sense  as
             in the Strasbourg case law, leave to remain would not normally
             be granted in cases where an applicant  for  leave  to  remain
             under the partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration
             laws, unless the applicant or their partner  would  face  very
             serious difficulties in continuing their family life  together
             outside the UK, which could not be overcome  or  would  entail
             very serious hardship. Even in a case where such  difficulties
             do not exist, however, leave to  remain  can  nevertheless  be
             granted outside the Rules in "exceptional  circumstances",  in
             accordance  with  the  Instructions:  that  is  to   say,   in
             "circumstances in which refusal would result in  unjustifiably
             harsh consequences for the individual such that refusal of the
             application would not be proportionate."

     48. The Supreme  Court  held  that  the  requirements  were  Article  8
         compliant,  recognising  that  the   requirements   reflected   the
         Minister's view of where the public interest lay.

     49. As the Supreme Court also made clear, even where those requirements
         are not met, an  applicant  may  still  be  granted  leave  if  the
         consequences of removal result are "unjustifiably harsh".  However,
         as the Supreme Court went on to say when looking at  the  grant  of
         leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules,  this  will  only  arise  in
         exceptional circumstances.  The  rationale  for  that  approach  is
         explained at [54] and [55] of the judgment as follows:

             "54. As explained in para 49 above,  the  European  court  has
             said that, in cases concerned with precarious family life,  it
             is "likely" only to be in exceptional circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of article 8. That reflects the weight  attached  to
             the contracting states' right to control their borders, as  an
             attribute of their sovereignty, and the limited  weight  which
             is generally attached to family life established in  the  full
             knowledge that its continuation in the  contracting  state  is
             unlawful or precarious. The court has repeatedly  acknowledged
             that "a state is entitled, as  a  matter  of  well-established
             international law, and subject to its treaty  obligations,  to
             control the entry of  non-nationals  into  its  territory  and
             their residence there" ( Jeunesse, para 100). As the court has
             made clear, the Convention is not intended to  undermine  that
             right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control
             by establishing a family life while present in the host  state
             unlawfully or temporarily, and then presenting it with a  fait
             accompli. On the  contrary,  "where  confronted  with  a  fait
             accompli the removal of the non-national family member by  the
             authorities would be  incompatible  with  article  8  only  in
             exceptional circumstances" (Jeunesse, para 114).

             55.  That statement reflects the strength of the  claim  which
             will normally be required if the contracting state's  interest
             in immigration control is to be outweighed.  In  the  Jeunesse
             case, for example, the Dutch  authorities'  tolerance  of  the
             applicant's unlawful presence  in  that  country  for  a  very
             prolonged period, during which she developed strong family and
             social  ties  there,  led  the  court  to  conclude  that  the
             circumstances were exceptional and that a fair balance had not
             been struck (paras 121-122). As the court put it, in  view  of
             the particular circumstances of the case, it was  questionable
             whether general immigration considerations could  be  regarded
             as  sufficient  justification  for  refusing   the   applicant
             residence in the host state (para 121)."

     50. In the case of Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 at paragraph  35  of
         that decision the Court of Appeal gave its view as to  the  correct
         interpretation of insurmountable obstacles.  The  Court  of  Appeal
         indicated in paragraphs 36 and 37:

             "36. In applying this test, a logical approach is first of all
             to decide whether the alleged obstacle  to  continuing  family
             life outside the UK amounts to a very significant  difficulty.
             If it meets this threshold requirement, the next  question  is
             whether the difficulty is one which would make  it  impossible
             for the applicant and their partner to  continue  family  life
             together outside the UK.  If  not,  the  decision-maker  needs
             finally to consider whether, taking account of any steps which
             could reasonably be taken to avoid or mitigate the difficulty,
             it would nevertheless entail very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner (or both).

             37.  To apply the test in what Lord Reed in the  Agyarko  case
             at para 43 called 'a practical and  realistic  sense',  it  is
             relevant and necessary in addressing these questions  to  have
             regard to the particular characteristics and circumstances  of
             the individual(s) concerned. Thus, in the present  case  where
             it was established by evidence  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
             tribunal  that  the  applicant's   partner   is   particularly
             sensitive to heat, it was relevant for the  tribunal  to  take
             this fact into account in assessing the  level  of  difficulty
             which Mr Wilmshurst would face and the degree of hardship that
             would be entailed if he were required  to  move  to  India  to
             continue his relationship. We do not accept, however, that  an
             obstacle to the applicant's partner moving to India  is  shown
             to be insurmountable - in either of the ways  contemplated  by
             paragraph EX.2. - just by  establishing  that  the  individual
             concerned would perceive the difficulty as insurmountable  and
             would in fact be deterred by it from relocating to India.  The
             test  cannot,  in  our  view,  reasonably  be  understood   as
             subjective  in  that  sense.  To  treat  it  as   such   would
             substantially dilute the intended stringency of the  test  and
             give an unfair and perverse advantage to  an  applicant  whose
             partner is less resolute or committed  to  their  relationship
             over one whose partner is ready to endure greater hardship  to
             enable them to stay together".

     51. I have given careful  consideration  to  the  submissions  made  on
         behalf of the appellant, but I am satisfied that the FtTJ  did  not
         err in law in her approach to the status of the appellant's partner
         when considering the issue of " insurmountable  obstacles."  As  Mr
         Avery submits, the FtTJ was plainly aware of the  sponsor's  status
         as a refugee  and  it  was  accepted  by  both  the  FtTJ  and  the
         respondent in the decision  letter  that  in  those  circumstances,
         family life could not be established in Zimbabwe.

     52. Whilst Mr Eteko has directed the tribunal's attention to  paragraph
         [23] of the decision,  it  is  necessary  to  read  that  paragraph
         alongside the earlier paragraph at [22]. The issue was not  whether
         family life could be established in Zimbabwe (which both the  judge
         and the respondent accepted would  not  be  possible)  but  whether
         there were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
         established in Malawi. At paragraph  [22]  the  FtTJ  recorded  the
         evidence of the appellant's partner who had been asked  whether  he
         and the  appellant  had  discussed  living  in  Malawi.  The  judge
         recorded the sponsor's evidence where he referred to  being  active
         and continuing to militate for true change in Zimbabwe and that "it
         would be suicidal for him to take  the  risk  of  relocation  to  a
         country as close to Zimbabwe as Malawi". At paragraph [23] the FtTJ
         stated:

             "23.  However,  I  have  no  cogent  information   before   me
             concerning the reasons for X's application for  asylum.  There
             is no persuasive evidence before me of X being active  in  any
             political, military, or other platform in  Zimbabwe  or  since
             arriving in the United Kingdom.

             24.  Further, no cogent evidence been placed before me  as  to
             the reasons why x or the  appellant  would  be  in  danger  if
             relocated to Malawi."

     53. By stating that she had  no  "cogent  information"  concerning  the
         reasons of his application for asylum, the judge was not seeking to
         go behind the grant of  refugee  status  but  was  considering  the
         sponsor's claim that he would be at risk if he lived in Malawi.  As
         the judge found, contrary to the sponsor's evidence, there  was  no
         persuasive evidence that the appellant's sponsor was active in  any
         political or other military  platform  in  Zimbabwe  or  since  his
         arrival in the UK to demonstrate that he would be at risk in Malawi
         as a result of any such political activities or beliefs.

     54. Furthermore, there is no merit in the submission that the judge was
         wrong in reaching the finding at paragraph [24] that there  was  no
         evidence that the appellant's partner would be in danger in Malawi.
         The judge did not say that  there  was  "no  evidence"  as  to  the
         reasons why the sponsor and the appellant would  be  in  danger  if
         they relocated to Malawi but that there was "no  cogent  evidence".
         As submitted on behalf of  the  respondent,  there  was  no  cogent
         evidence beyond the sponsor's assertion that he would be at risk in
         Malawi. As the FtTJ observed, there had been no evidence  submitted
         to the tribunal to indicate that his grant of  refugee  status  was
         based on risk of return to Malawi or  that  he  had  evidenced  his
         claim to be active in politics or any other form of  association  (
         at [23]).

     55.  Whilst  Mr  Eteko  directed  the  tribunal  to  evidence  in   the
         appellant's bundle at pages 63  -  66,  this  comprised  of  a  map
         showing the two countries (page 63). Mr Eteko submitted that it was
         less than one hour flight between Zimbabwe  and  Malawi  and  as  a
         result of the proximity between the countries, that was  sufficient
         to show that he would be at risk in Malawi.

     56. In my judgement, a finding of risk on return in Zimbabwe  does  not
         demonstrate a risk in Malawi and the fact that  the  countries  are
         close proximity does not, without more demonstrate a  risk  to  the
         sponsor or to the appellant. Thus the judge was  correct  to  reach
         the finding that there had been no cogent evidence provided in  the
         form of any objective  evidence  to  support  any  such  risk.  The
         material referred to in the bundle at pages 64 - 66 was generalised
         material referring to Zimbabwe after the death of President  Mugabe
         (issues relating to petrol protests, inflation and  problems  still
         continuing). None of that evidence  made  reference  to  Malawi  or
         provided any possible support for a risk to  the  sponsor.  As  was
         submitted on behalf of the respondent if the  appellant  sought  to
         rely on his asylum application to make good his claim to be at risk
         Malawi, the judge could not be expected to know  the  specifics  of
         his asylum claim in the absence of evidence which is what the judge
         clearly stated at paragraphs [22 - 24]. I  am  therefore  satisfied
         that there is no error  on  the  basis  submitted  in  the  written
         grounds at paragraphs 9 - 10 or in the oral submissions as recorded
         above.

     57. Mr Eteko raised a further point in oral submissions.  He  submitted
         that the appellant's partner was not a Malawi National and that  it
         was not possible to know if Malawi would allow  him  entry.  Beyond
         that short submission, nothing further was stated. I  observe  that
         this was not a point raised in the grounds of challenge.  Whilst  I
         observe that Judge Adio had made a passing reference to  the  issue
         where he stated "the fact remains that x is not a national  Malawi"
         nothing further was stated or any elucidation of how  that  was  an
         error of law. However notwithstanding those difficulties,  I  shall
         go on to address that point raised.

     58. There was no dispute that the appellant's partner was not a citizen
         of Malawi. The respondent's guidance (that was in  the  appellant's
         bundle) at paragraph 23 states "the onus is  on  the  applicant  to
         show that it is not feasible for them or their family to  enter  or
         stay in any other country for this to amount to an  "insurmountable
         obstacle"". In the skeleton argument  (page  16  at  paragraph  52)
         reference is made to sections of the Malawi  Immigration  Act  2003
         (set out at paragraphs 53 - 57) where it is submitted that to enter
         Malawi the appellant's sponsor would need to satisfy  the  Malawian
         authorities that he was a temporary visitor and even  if  admitted,
         as the appellant had been absent for 12 years she could be required
         to report to an immigration of officer and therefore the  sponsor's
         residence would come to the attention of the authorities  and  that
         he would be treated as a prohibited migrant.

     59. The difficulty with that evidence is that  the  burden  is  on  the
         appellant to demonstrate that it was not feasible to enter or  stay
         in Malawi for this to amount to an "insurmountable  obstacle".  The
         evidence submitted was plainly selective in the extracts that  were
         provided and were insufficient  to  demonstrate  that  the  sponsor
         would not be able to enter or stay there  whether  as  a  temporary
         migrant, or as a spouse/partner of  a  Malawian  national.  Foreign
         law, including nationality law, is  a  matter  of  evidence  to  be
         provided by expert evidence directed specifically to the  point  in
         issue (see decision in Hussain and another  (status  of  passports:
         foreign law) [2020] UKUT 00 250 at paragraph 9). In that case,  the
         Upper  Tribunal  found  that  it  was  not  sufficient  to  produce
         Tanzanian statutes and assert the statute represented the whole  of
         the law on the subject. The same is true here where selective parts
         of the law was set out; no reference was made to the entry of those
         who were partners of a Malawi National and no expert  evidence  was
         before the tribunal on this  issue.  Therefore,  it  has  not  been
         demonstrated that the appellant had discharged the burden on her to
         demonstrate  that   her   partner's   nationality   would   be   an
         "insurmountable obstacle" on the evidence before the FtTJ.

     60. The Court of Appeal in Lal  indicated that one has to look  at  the
         factors relied on in an objective sense rather than on the basis of
         what the appellant and/or the appellant's spouse perceive to be the
         difficulties and that when  determining  the  question  of  whether
         return would entail "very serious hardship" based on  the  evidence
         which was before the FtTJ (see paragraph [43] of the judgment).

     61. When looking at the decision as a whole, in my judgement  the  FtTJ
         gave adequate and sustainable reasons that were in accordance  with
         the relevant case law and evidence for reaching the  decision  that
         the circumstances relied upon by the appellant and the sponsor  did
         not amount to "insurmountable obstacles" when  viewed  cumulatively
         to family life being established outside the United Kingdom.

     62. The second ground set  out  at  paragraphs  11-14  of  the  written
         grounds assert that the FtTJ erred in her analysis of Article 8 and
         that  the  findings  set  out  at  paragraphs  [31   -   35]   were
         "insufficient for the  purposes  of  analysis  of  the  appellant's
         Article 8 rights". In essence, in his  oral  submissions  Mr  Eteko
         submitted the judge failed to carry out  a  proper  proportionality
         balance and failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  reaching  her
         decision.

     63. In his oral submissions he referred to section 117B  (4)  and  that
         whilst it stated "little weight" should be given to a private  life
         or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner established when
         the person is in the UK  unlawfully,  it  did  not  mean  that  "no
         weight"  should  be  given  in  the  proportionality  balance.   He
         therefore submitted that at paragraphs 33  -  34,  the  judge  only
         considered the appellant's unlawful residence.

     64. He further submitted that in the balancing exercise the scales must
         be  properly  balanced  by  the  findings  made  and  by   adequate
         reasoning, but this had not been carried  out  here.  He  submitted
         that this was a case where there had been  no  criminality  on  the
         part of the appellant, she spoke English and  did  not  access  any
         benefits and that she would have to pay for her healthcare. As  the
         judge had found this to be a genuine and  subsisting  relationship,
         the scales should have fallen in favour of the appellant.

     65. Mr  Avery  on  behalf  the  respondent  made  the  point  that  the
         submissions amounted to no more than a disagreement with the FtTJ's
         analysis and did not demonstrate any error of  law  in  the  FtTJ's
         approach either in law or in fact.  He  submitted  that  the  judge
         applied the section 117 considerations  to  the  circumstances  and
         properly took into account  that  the  appellant  was  a  long-term
         overstayer since 2009 and that she and the sponsor had no realistic
         expectation to be allowed to remain as a couple and that this was a
         factor that was heavily weighted against the appellant.

     66. I have given careful consideration to the submissions  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant and have considered them in the context  of
         the evidence and the assessment made by the judge. Having done  so,
         I am satisfied that the judge did properly carry out an  Article  8
         assessment in accordance with the evidence and the  relevant  legal
         principles and gave adequate and sustainable reasons  for  reaching
         her decision.

     67. In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8,  the  heart
         of the assessment is whether the decision strikes  a  fair  balance
         between the due weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining an effective system  of  immigration  control  and  the
         impact of the decision on the individual's private or family  life.
         In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a court or
         Tribunal should give appropriate weight  to  Parliament's  and  the
         Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength  of  the  general
         public interest as expressed in the relevant  rules  and  statutes:
         see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and see   R  (MM  and  others)
         (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC
         10, the Supreme Court at [43].

     68. In my judgement the FtTJ correctly identified that when considering
         the public interest the appellant could not  meet  the  Immigration
         Rules either under Appendix FM, for the reasons given and where the
         judge found that there were no insurmountable obstacles for  family
         life being established outside the UK and Paragraph 276  ADE  based
         on her length of residence and in light of the findings that  there
         were no very significant obstacles to her integration to Malawi   (
         at [27]). A court must accord "considerable weight" to  the  policy
         of the Secretary of State at a "general level":  Agyarko  paragraph
         [47] and paragraphs [56] - [57]; and see also Ali paragraphs [44] -
         [46], [50] and [53]. This includes the policy weightings set out in
         Part 5A (sections 117A- 117D) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (inserted by the Immigration Act 2014).

     69. As provided by section 117A (1), Part 5A applies where a  Court  or
         Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under the
         Immigration Acts breaches Article  8  and  as  a  result  would  be
         unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Section 117A
         (2) requires the Court  or  Tribunal,  in  considering  whether  an
         interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
         family life is justified under article 8(2), to have regard in  all
         cases to the considerations listed in section  117B.  Section  117B
         states as follows: -

             "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
             cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-"

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-"

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-"

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-"

                  (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

     70. I am satisfied that the FtTJ directed herself  in  accordance  with
         the  law  and  the  decision  in  Agyarko,  that  even   when   the
         requirements are not met, an applicant may still be  granted  leave
         "outside the Rules" on the basis of if the consequences of  removal
         are "unjustifiably harsh".

     71. Given that the FtTJ had addressed the circumstances or  those  that
         would lead to "unjustifiably harsh  consequences"  which  had  been
         advanced  in  behalf  of  the  appellant  which  consisted  of  her
         relationship with her partner which the FtTJ accepted  was  genuine
         and subsisting, the issue of medical  treatment (  at  [25]))   his
         refugee status and that  it  had  not  been  established  that  her
         partner would be at risk of harm in Malawi,  it was therefore  open
         to the judge to reach the conclusion as he did at [35]  that  there
         were no such consequences identified  that  outweighed  the  public
         interest  in  effective  immigration  control.  When  reaching  her
         decision, it was open the FtTJ  to  take  account  of  the  earlier
         factual findings made that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
         or nor were  there  circumstances   which  could  amount  to  "very
         serious hardship" to family life being established outside  of  the
         UK.

     72. As regards the public interest considerations the FtTJ  found  that
         the public interest in effective immigration  control  was  engaged
         under S117B (1) at paragraph [35]). At [32]  the  judge  took  into
         account that the appellant spoke English and  at  [34]  whilst  the
         FtTJ had not been given full details of the  sponsors  income,  the
         judge accepted that there was evidence that the appellant had  been
         financially  supported  by  her  partner  even  if   he   had   not
         demonstrated compliance with the rules relating  to  the  financial
         requirements. However financial independence in the United  Kingdom
         alongside an ability to speak English would be neutral  factors  in
         the analysis under Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended).

     73. Whilst Mr Eteko submitted that the FtTJ attached no weight  to  the
         private life established nor to her relationship  established  with
         her partner which was contrary to S 117B(4), the  FtTJ  did  attach
         some weight to those factors ( see [33] and  [34]).  Little  weight
         does not equate to "no weight" and in  any  event  the  submissions
         are, in the terms relied upon by the  appellant,  disagreements  of
         weight. Barring irrationality, weight attached  to  any  particular
         factor is a  matter  for  the  judge.  Consequently  the  FtTJ  was
         entitled to place little weight  upon  the  appellant's  length  of
         residence and her private life which was established when her  stay
         United Kingdom had been initially precarious  (under  section  117B
         (5) and  unlawful  thereafter  (  under  S117B  (4)  and  that  her
         relationship was established at  a  time  when  the  appellant  was
         unlawfully in the United Kingdom. The FtTJ was  entitled  to  place
         weight on her earlier assessment  and  findings  that  family  life
         could continue in Malawi.

     74. Mr Eteko made reference to the Chikwamba principle, that  is,  that
         there is no public interest in requiring her to  leave  the  UK  in
         order to make a successful application for entry clearance when the
         sponsor could show he earned over 18,000. This  was  not  a  point
         raised in the grounds seeking permission to appeal nor in the grant
         of permission. Furthermore, on the material  before  the  FtTJ  the
         judge found at [32] that she  had  not  been  given  full  details,
         including documentary evidence of the  sponsor's  income.  That  is
         supported by the documents  at  p32-37  of  the  bundle.  Mr  Eteko
         referred to other documents provided at the hearing which were said
         to evidence a second job which would put the sponsor's income above
         18,000. I could find no evidence within the file and no  reference
         was made in the decision of the FtTJ to  this  evidence.  Mr  Avery
         confirmed that he could find no reference to that evidence  in  his
         papers.

     75. As set out above this is not a  point  raised  in  the  grounds  of
         permission. In  the  decision  of  Das  (paragraph  276B  -  s3C  -
         application validity) [2019] UKUT 00354 (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
         stated at [16]:

              16. "It has recently been necessary for the Court of Appeal to
                  underline the importance of adherence to proper  standards
                  of appellate advocacy in immigration appeals.  It  is  not
                  permissible,  whether  in  that  court  or  in  the  Upper
                  Tribunal, for advocates  to  consider  that  they  are  at
                  liberty to advance any  argument  which  occurs  to  them,
                  whether or not it appears in the  grounds  of  appeal  and
                  whether or not any notice of the argument has  been  given
                  to the respondent or the Upper Tribunal.  The  grounds  of
                  appeal frame the arguments which are to be  advanced.   As
                  Hickinbottom LJ said in Harverye [2018] EWCA Civ 2848, the
                  grounds are the well from which the  argument  must  flow:
                  [57].  And as Lewison LJ stated in ME (Sri  Lanka)  [2018]
                  EWCA Civ 1486, the arguments which can be raised on appeal
                  are limited by the grounds of appeal for which  permission
                  has been granted: [22].   These  observations  apply  with
                  equal force to  appellate  proceedings  before  the  Upper
                  Tribunal.  An application may be made to vary  the  notice
                  of appeal but, in the absence of such a notice,  advocates
                  should  expect  that  scope  of  their  argument  will  be
                  restricted  to  the  grounds  upon  which  permission  was
                  granted".

     76. Even if I did consider that  the  grounds  should  be  enlarged  to
         consider this,  neither  the  decision  in  Chikwamba  nor  Agyarko
         support the contention that there cannot be a  public  interest  in
         removing a person from  the  UK  who  would  succeed  in  an  entry
         clearance application.  In Agyarko, a case in which  the  Chikwamba
         principle was not at issue, it is only said that that there "might"
         be no public  interest  in  the  removal  of  such  a  person.  The
         circumstances in the decision of Chikwamba are very different  from
         the circumstances of the present appeal. The appellant in Chikwamba
         was  a  failed  asylum  seeker  from  Zimbabwe  whose  removal  was
         temporarily suspended because of the harsh conditions in  Zimbabwe.
         Whilst in the UK she married a national of Zimbabwe  who  had  been
         granted asylum and they had a daughter. Shortly after her  daughter
         was born, the suspension on removals to Zimbabwe was lifted.

     77. In the decision of Kaur, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1423, the appellant's
         argument raising the Chikwamba principle was  not  decided  by  the
         Court, but the nature of the principle was discussed.  Holroyde  LJ
         noted that the facts in Chikwamba were "stark". At paragraph 45  he
         stated:

             "I have quoted in paragraph 26 above the passage in which Lord
             Reed (at paragraph 51 of his judgment in Agyarko) referred  to
             Chikwamba. It is relevant to note that he there  spoke  of  an
             applicant who was "certain to be granted leave to enter" if an
             application were made from outside the UK  and  said  that  in
             such a case there might be no public interest in removing  the
             applicant. That, in my view, is a clear  indication  that  the
             Chikwamba principle will require a fact-specific assessment in
             each case, will only apply in a very clear case, and even then
             will not necessarily result in a grant of leave to remain."

     78. The Upper  Tribunal  considered  the  Chikwamba  principle  in  the
         decision R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the  Home  Department)  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba   -   temporary
         separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC). In  that
         decision the Upper Tribunal observed that Lord Brown was not laying
         down a legal test when he suggested in Chikwamba that  requiring  a
         claimant to make an application  for  entry  clearance  would  only
         "comparatively  rarely"  be  proportionate  in  a  case   involving
         children, and that in all cases it will be for  the  individual  to
         demonstrate, through evidence, and based on his or  her  individual
         circumstances, that temporary removal would be disproportionate.

     79. On the facts of this appeal,  no  such  evidence  or  any  argument
         regarding  temporary  removal  had  been  provided  to  the   FtTJ.
         Therefore, even if the grounds had raised this point  (which  I  am
         satisfied that  it  did  not),  it  would  not  have  succeeded  in
         demonstrating a material error of law on the part of the FtTJ.

     80. I understand that the appellant and her partner disagree  with  the
         decision reached by the FtTJ. However, I remind myself that  I  can
         only interfere with a decision of the First-tier Tribunal if it  is
         has been demonstrated that  the  FtTJ  fell  into  legal  error.  I
         further remind  myself  that  the  question  whether  the  decision
         contains a material error of law is not whether another Judge could
         have reached the opposite conclusion but whether this Judge reached
         a conclusion by appropriately directing himself and  assessing  the
         evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

     81. In summary and when addressing the second ground advanced on behalf
         of the appellant, I am satisfied that the FtTJ properly undertook a
         proportionality assessment outside of the rules and applied  it  on
         the circumstances of  the  individual  case  that  was  before  her
         carrying out a "fact sensitive assessment". The  findings  made  by
         Judge Clarke were  neither  irrational  nor  unreasonable.  It  was
         therefore open to the FtTJ to reach the conclusion at [35] that the
         refusal  of  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  constituted  a
         proportionate and fair striking of the balance between  the  public
         interest and the rights protected under Article 8.

     82. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that  the  decision  of
         the FtTJ did not make an error on a point of law and  the  decision
         stands. The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision.

     83. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore  the  decision  stands.
         The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated    18 March 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.




