
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20920/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2019                            |On 8 November 2019            |
|Extempore Decision                            |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mrs Sonya Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by Abbott solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they were referred to
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 12 March 1990.  She
    is married to a British citizen.  She entered the UK in June 2012 as
    the spouse of a British citizen with leave until 28 August 2014. Her
    leave was extended until 16 September 2016.  Her subsequent application
    to extend leave was refused because she failed to pay the immigration
    health surcharge as required by the Immigration Rules.

 3. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was heard by
    Judge Cas O'Garro ("the judge") at Hatton Cross on 15 April 2019.  In a
    decision promulgated on 26 April 2019 the appeal was allowed.

 4. The judge considered whether the appellant satisfied the Immigration
    Rules either because there would be "very significant obstacles" under
    paragraph 276ADE or there would be "insurmountable obstacles" under
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The judge was satisfied that there
    would not be such obstacles given that the appellant and her husband
    had visited Afghanistan in 2016, had close family members living in
    Kabul who could support and accommodate them, that her husband would be
    able to continue working in his current field as a taxi driver which is
    noted in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 as a
    common form of self-employment in Afghanistan, and that in AS it is
    confirmed that there are health facilities in Kabul which would be able
    to provide the further treatment the appellant may need in respect of
    her breast cancer treatment.

 5. After finding that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules the judge turned to consider Article 8 outside the
    Immigration Rules. The judge found that Article 8 is engaged by the
    relationship between the appellant and her husband.  The judge then
    considered various factors weighing in favour of and against the
    appellant and reached the conclusion that removal would be
    disproportionate.

 6. The Secretary of State appeals the decision on the basis that the judge
    failed to identify exceptional or sufficiently compelling circumstances
    to justify allowing the appeal outside the Immigration Rules given in
    particular that the appellant had not lost all ties or family
    connections to Afghanistan, would have family support in Kabul and her
    husband would be in a position to work and support her.

 7. The grounds also submit that the judge erred in prejudging the outcome
    of an application for entry clearance and finding that any delay before
    the appellant could re-enter the UK would be disproportionate.

 8. At the hearing Ms Bassi submitted that the judge gave inadequate
    reasons to allow the appeal under Article 8 given the finding that the
    appellant and her spouse would not face significant obstacles in
    Afghanistan. She argued that reading the decision as a whole it is
    apparent that the judge failed to recognise the significance of failing
    to meet the Immigration Rules and that there was deficient reasoning in
    this regard.  She drew attention to the judgment of the Supreme Court
    in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 highlighting the need to find exceptional
    circumstances in a case such as this.  She argued that the evidence
    simply did not support such a conclusion.

 9. Ms Daykin's argument, in short, was that there were sufficient factors
    weighing in favour of the appellant to justify the conclusion that the
    judge reached on the proportionality of removal under article 8.  In
    particular, she noted that when the appellant entered the UK she did so
    under the Immigration Rules prevailing prior to 2012 when the financial
    eligibility requirements were not applicable.  She maintained that the
    judge was entitled to take this into account.  She also pointed out
    that the appellant had not been required to pay the immigration
    surcharge on previous applications and this was a single failure.  She
    argued that the judge was entitled to give weight to this also.  A
    further factor relied upon by the judge was that the appellant was
    undergoing fertility and breast cancer treatment and, argued Ms Daykin,
    the judge was entitled to give weight to this as well.

10. I am satisfied that the decision does not contain an error of law.

11. It is clear that the judge accurately identified the relevant law and
    adopted the correct approach by firstly considering the relevant
    criteria under the Immigration Rules and then, having found that these
    were not satisfied, turning to consider article 8 outside the Rules.
    When considering article 8 outside the Rules, the judge directed
    herself to the correct legal questions and in particular noted the
    relevant issues identified by the Supreme Court in Agyarko. At
    paragraph 38 of the decision the judge stated:

         I bear in mind what the court said in Agyarko which is that
         Appendix FM is said to reflect how the balance will be struck under
         Article 8 between the right to respect for private and family life
         and the legitimate aims listed in Article 8(2) so that if an
         applicant fails to meet the requirements of the Rules it should
         only be in genuinely exceptional circumstances that refusing them
         leave to enter or remain would breach Article 8.  The court said
         that exceptional does not mean unusual or unique but means
         circumstances in which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences for the individual such that refusal of the
         application would not be proportionate.

12. This is an accurate summary of the law and I am in no doubt that the
    judge had in mind the correct legal issues when considering the appeal
    under Article 8 outside the Rules.

13. Reading the decision as a whole it is clear that the judge has had
    regard to all of the material information that was before her and has
    not omitted any material information from her assessment of the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal from the UK.  The judge has
    taken into consideration the immigration status of the appellant, the
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration control, the reason
    why the appellant did not succeed in her application under the Rules,
    the circumstances prevailing in Afghanistan, the difficulties the
    appellant would have returning to Afghanistan, that those difficulties
    would not arise to the level of very significant or insurmountable
    obstacles, that she is undergoing health and fertility treatment in the
    UK, that she entered the UK under the pre-2012 Rules where there was no
    financial eligibility requirement and that she would face difficulties
    re-entering the UK from Afghanistan given the financial circumstances
    of her husband which, based on the date when she entered the UK, were
    not a factor preventing entry in the first place.  These are all
    relevant considerations.  It was for the judge to balance them against
    each other before reaching a conclusion on whether removal of the
    appellant would be disproportionate.

14. Other judges may well have weighed the evidence differently and reached
    a different conclusion, but this does not mean that the judge made an
    error of law. The judge had regard to all the relevant considerations
    and reached a conclusion, based on those considerations, that was not
    irrational or perverse, and was open to her based on the evidence. The
    decision of the First-Tier Tribunal therefore stands, as it does not
    contain an error of law.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does
    not contain an error of law and stands.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                                    |
|                                    |Dated: 7 November 2019              |

