
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20086/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th May 2019                     |On 10th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Nikolin [I]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Waheed, instructed by Ropemakers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant's appeal against deportation was allowed on human  rights
    grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on 7 February 2019.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the judge erred  in
    finding that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's  partner  and
    children to live in the country to which he was to be deported  and  in
    finding that it would be unduly harsh for them  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the Appellant.  In summary, the factors identified by the judge
    did not give rise to unduly harsh consequences.  The judge had erred in
    law in finding that the high threshold had been met.

3.   Permission was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  McClure
    on 6 March 2019 on the following grounds:

         "It is arguable in the light of the guidance given in the  case  of
         KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 that  the  judge  has  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for finding that it would be unduly harsh for  the
         Appellant's children and partner to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
         whilst  the  Appellant  was  deported  to  Albania.  The  case  law
         identifies that there have to  be  factors  above  and  beyond  the
         normal relationship between  parent  and  child  which  render  the
         deportation unduly harsh. It is arguable that the judge has  failed
         to  identify  what  those  factors  are  [see  paragraph  35].   In
         considering the issues paragraph 398 and 399 are applicable and  it
         is arguable that the judge has failed to apply  the  provisions  in
         accordance with the case law."



Submissions

4.   Miss  Cunha  submitted  that  the  Respondent  challenged  the  judge's
    findings  on  whether  there  were  unduly  harsh  consequences   under
    paragraph 399, although the primary focus was on the judge's  error  of
    law in concluding that separation of  the  Appellant  from  his  family
    would be unduly harsh. Miss Cunha relied on NA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 662 and  submitted  that  deportation  ordinarily  results  in  the
    separation of families. It was not enough to say  that  the  separation
    would cause difficulties to family life continuing because that was the
    natural outcome and one required by the public interest.  The Appellant
    had to show that such separation would be unduly harsh.

5.   In this case the judge had  taken  into  account  matters  which  would
    cause discomfort or inconvenience. The factors relied on by the  judge,
    namely the Appellant's close relationship with his children  and  their
    strong bond did not give rise to unduly  harsh  consequences.  Further,
    the judge had failed to consider whether the Appellant's  family  could
    visit him if he was deported to Albania.  In summary, the unduly  harsh
    test was not properly considered and the judge had failed to take  into
    all relevant matters. The failure to properly apply the test of whether
    it was unduly harsh was a material error of law.

6.   Miss Cunha relied on paragraphs 20 to 23 of KO (Nigeria) and  submitted
    the unduly harsh test was a higher threshold than  reasonableness.  The
    public interest required the Appellant's  deportation  because  he  had
    been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of over twelve months.

7.   In considering the separation of the family it was not  appropriate  to
    consider whether it was unreasonable. Every separation would result  in
    harsh consequences and the Appellant had to show consequences over  and
    above the inconvenience of a child not being able to have  family  life
    with his father in the UK. In this  case  the  Appellant  had  supplied
    class A drugs. This was a serious offence and significant weight should
    be attached to the public interest.  Although  the  judge  acknowledged
    this at  paragraph  29,  when  balancing  it  against  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his children he  applied  a  test  of  reasonableness
    rather than unduly harsh.

8.   The judge had failed to apply the high threshold test and  the  matters
    relied on at paragraph 35 of the decision were  insufficient  to  reach
    that threshold. There  was  also  a  failure  to  consider  alternative
    arguments and together this amounted to a  material  error  of  law  in
    addition to the lack of reasons for the finding at paragraph 37.

9.   Mr Waheed submitted that the grounds of  appeal  failed  to  appreciate
    the judge's more nuanced decision. The  judge  took  into  account  the
    young age of the Appellant's children and their ability to adapt  to  a
    change in lifestyle. From paragraph 32  onwards  the  judge  took  into
    account the following factors:

    (i)  The Appellant's partner and children could not speak Albanian.

    (ii) They had no concept of culture or society in Albania.  This  would
         be a significant disadvantage.  Albania was a very poor country.

    (iii)    The children had a loving relationship with their grandparents
         and it was in their best interests that this continued.

    (iv) It would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant's partner to move
         to Albania because she was a British citizen and had lived  in  the
         UK all her life.  She did not speak Albanian and knew  very  little
         of the culture and the likelihood  of  her  being  able  to  secure
         employment was slim.

10.  The judge also had concerns over how a move to  Albania  would  impinge
    and affect the Appellant's partner's mental health.  He  accepted  that
    her mental health was stable at present but that there was a  real  and
    tangible risk that if either the  Appellant  was  removed  or  she  was
    compelled to join him in Albania this would result in  a  deterioration
    of her mental health.

11.  Mr Waheed submitted that there was ample evidence at pages 95 to 99  of
    the Appellant's bundle which supported the judge's conclusion that  the
    Appellant's  deportation  would  result  in  a  deterioration  of   his
    partner's mental health.  At page 99 there was a report from  Dr  Helen
    Rogers which stated:

         "I wonder if you can review [RG]. She is struggling  to  cope  with
         caring for her two children since her partner went to  prison.  Her
         mental health is suffering and from the consultation  I  could  see
         the eldest child  has  faced  some  very  challenging  problems  of
         behaviour."

12.   The  judge's  conclusion  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's family to remain in the UK if he was  deported  to  Albania
    was open to the judge on the evidence before him. The judge  took  into
    account all the factors set out above in addition to  the  genuine  and
    tangible bond between the Appellant and his children.

13.   Mr  Waheed  referred  to  RA   (s.117C:   "unduly   harsh";   offence:
    seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC) at paragraph 12 which  refers
    to MK (Sierra Leone) v The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC). He submitted that the conditions in the  country
    to which the Appellant is to be deported is a relevant factor  and  the
    important role the Appellant played in the lives of  his  children  was
    something the judge was entitled to take into account. In the  case  of
    MK, the severity of the impact of the Appellant's abrupt  exit  on  the
    children's lives would be unduly harsh.

14.  Mr Waheed submitted the matters relied on by the judge went beyond  the
    mere separation of the family. The effect the Appellant's  imprisonment
    had on his partner's mental health and the behaviour  of  his  children
    was something that the judge took into account in assessing whether  it
    was unduly harsh. The judge had not been speculative  as  suggested  in
    the grounds. There was evidence before him that the Appellant's partner
    was struggling  to  cope  with  the  children  and  the  children  were
    exhibiting difficult behaviour when the Appellant  was  imprisoned.  Mr
    Waheed submitted that, given the undisputed findings of fact, the judge
    was entitled to come to the decision he did.  He  was  not  obliged  to
    consider whether the Appellant's family  could  visit  him  in  Albania
    since this was not relied on by the Respondent in the appeal.  In  this
    case there was something more  than  mere  separation,  there  was  the
    Appellant's partner's mental health.

15.   The  judge  referred  to  thirteen  factors  which  would   make   the
    Appellant's deportation unduly harsh and they were all relevant to that
    assessment, although Mr Waheed accepted that  some  elements  would  be
    given more weight than others.  The absence of the Appellant's  support
    in caring and bringing up his children and his partner's mental  health
    justified the judge's finding that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's partner and children to remain in the UK if he was deported
    to Albania.  Paragraph 34 was sufficient to support  this  finding  and
    the judge had given a fully rounded decision  and  properly  considered
    proportionality at paragraph 38.

16.  Miss Cunha submitted that the Respondent considered the  mental  health
    of the Appellant's partner and having accepted that she may  have  some
    problems in caring for the  children,  the  Respondent  concluded  that
    those problems would not result  in  unduly  harsh  consequences.   The
    judge's finding at paragraph 34 did not fully explain why it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to be without  their  father.  The  judge
    failed to give reasons for how the Appellant's partner's mental  health
    would render the separation of the family unduly harsh. The  children's
    grandparents could assist the Appellant's partner and the judge  failed
    to consider the family's ability to be together in the future.



Conclusions and reasons

17.  I am satisfied, on reading the decision as a whole, that the judge  was
    aware of the relevant legal provisions and of the test which he had  to
    apply.  The judge stated at paragraph 27:

         "The real and true issue for me to decide was whether it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the children to live in  Albania  and  whether  it
         would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK  without
         the person who is to be deported."

18.  The judge acknowledged at paragraph 28 that  the  children  were  of  a
    young age and would be able to adapt to certain aspects of life as they
    grew older.  He also attached significant weight to the public interest
    given the seriousness and gravity of the offence.

19.  The judge then considered the best interests of the  children  and  his
    findings that it would be in the children's best interests to remain in
    the UK and continue their relationship with their grandparents was open
    to him on the evidence before him.   There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's findings that it was not in the children's  best  interests  to
    live in Albania or for them to remain in the UK  whilst  the  Appellant
    was deported. The issue was whether the Appellant's  deportation  would
    be unduly harsh.

20.  At paragraphs 32 to 35 the judge set  out  the  factors  which  he  had
    taken into account, namely the children do  not  speak  Albanian,  they
    have no concept or culture of society in  Albania,  and  although  they
    were of a young age they would be at a significant disadvantage  having
    to adapt to  life  in  a  very  poor  country.  The  opportunities  for
    advancement were less frequent than in the UK.  The children had loving
    relationships with their grandparents and the judge had grave  concerns
    for how the Appellant's deportation would affect the mental  health  of
    the Appellant's partner, the children's mother. His finding that  there
    was a real and tangible risk that her mental health  would  deteriorate
    if the Appellant was deported was open to the judge given the  evidence
    at page 99 of the Appellant's bundle.

21.  I am persuaded by Mr Waheed's submission that the judge  did  not  rely
    merely on the separation of the family but took into account the effect
    of the Appellant's deportation on the mental health of his partner  and
    also the genuine and  tangible  bond  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    children. The  factors  referred  to  at  paragraphs  34  and  35  were
    sufficient to support the judge's finding that it would be unduly harsh
    for the Appellant's partner and children to remain in  the  UK  without
    him.

22.  The judge identified factors which are over  and  above  separation  of
    the family. Applying MK (Sierra Leone), the severity of the  impact  of
    the Appellant's deportation on the children's lives is a  factor  which
    the judge could take into account. Given the  likely  deterioration  of
    his partner's mental health and the  evidence  that  the  eldest  child
    displayed challenging  forms  of  behaviour  when  separated  from  his
    father, that was sufficient to support the judge's finding  that  there
    was something more than mere separation of the family.

23.  The judge's findings at  30  to  34  also  support  the  conclusion  at
    paragraph 36 that it would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant's  family
    to live in Albania. This finding was open to the judge on the  evidence
    before him and he gave adequate reasons for coming to that conclusion.

24.  I find the judge's conclusion that the  Appellant's  deportation  would
    have unduly harsh consequences for the Appellant and his family  was  a
    conclusion which was open to the judge on the evidence before  him.  He
    applied the correct threshold test and the  factors  referred  to  were
    capable of satisfying that test. Another judge may well have come to  a
    different conclusion on that evidence, but that does not amount  to  an
    error of law.

25.  I find there was no error of  law  in  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant's  deportation  would  be  disproportionate.  Accordingly,  I
    dismiss the Respondent's appeal.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 7 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
