
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20380/2016
                                                HU/20383/2016, HU/20390/2016
                                                HU/20392/2016, HU/20398/2016
                                                HU/20406/2016, HU/20413/2016
                                                HU/20415/2016, HU/20418/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 7 August 2019                     |On 30 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

     (1)  BF  (6) AM
     (2)  MM  (7) AM
     (3)  IM  (8) AM
     (4)  AM  (9) SM
     (5)  AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S McTaggart, instructed by RP Crawford & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellants and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 2. The first appellant is  a  citizen  of  Somalia,  born  in  1974.   The
    remaining eight appellants are her children  aged  between  9  and  18.
    They appealed against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  refusing
    applications by the first appellant to join her daughter and the  eight
    appellants to join their sister in the United Kingdom (the sponsor) who
    has refugee status.  The ECO refused the applications on the basis that
    paragraph 352 of the Immigration  Rules  did  not  make  provision  for
    family reunion on the basis sought.  Furthermore, he was not  satisfied
    that the relationship between the appellants and  the  sponsor  was  as
    claimed.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox dismissed the appeals for  reasons  given
    in his decision dated  15  June  2018.   He  heard  evidence  from  the
    sponsor.  It was accepted that none of the appellants  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and the appeals therefore  turned
    on Article 8 grounds.

 4. In his survey of the evidence the judge observed  that  the  appellants
    live in Nairobi in a camp, having claimed international  protection  in
    Kenya.  He  considered  in  the  light  of  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellants that interference  with  their  right  to  family  life  was
    proportionate.

 5. The grounds of challenge argue a mis-direction by the judge as  to  the
    timing of evidence that he could take into  account  (ground  1).   The
    judge had failed to have regard to the relevant case  law  specifically
    AT & Another (Article 8 ECHR - Child Refugee  -  Family  Reunification)
    Eritrea [2016] UKUT 00227 (IAC) (ground 2).  In addition, the judge had
    given little or no weight to the fact that  the  sponsor  suffers  from
    depression and had misunderstood the evidence why she would not  return
    to Kenya to meet her family (ground 3).  Finally, reasons that were not
    understandable had been given  to  the  appellants  by  the  judge  for
    "refusal of their applications" (ground 4).

 6. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Martin considered
    there was no merit in the first two grounds.  Although  the  judge  did
    not specifically refer to AT & Another, he had  clearly  considered  it
    because his findings indicated  how  the  facts  were  distinguishable.
    Judge Martin also considered the third ground to be without  merit  but
    nevertheless concluded that the last ground was arguable and explained:

         "5.  The last ground is arguable.  In what is  otherwise  a  clear,
             reasoned decision the  Judge,  from  [36]  onwards  refers  to
             "removing" the Appellants, but they are not in  the  UK.   The
             Judge also refers to their application for a  residence  card.
             This confirmation and consequent lack of clarity  is  arguably
             an error of law.  Whether it is  material  is  for  the  Upper
             Tribunal to decide."

    And added at [6]:

         "6.  I add that I am unsure from the Decision and  Reasons  whether
             the Respondent accepted the  family  relationship,  as  it  is
             clearly challenged in the Refusals, but the Judge proceeded on
             the basis that it was not challenged."

 7. The First tier Tribunal sent  this  decision  to  the  parties  with  a
    covering letter dated 27 September 2018 in terms that  the  application
    for permission had been refused.  The appellants' representatives  then
    renewed the application on the same grounds to the Upper Tribunal on  3
    October 2018  but  filled  out  the  form  indicating  that  the  first
    application had been refused.  In error they failed to complete the box
    indicating that there had been a  limited  grant.   By  email  dated  8
    October the Upper Tribunal explained that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    issued the wrong notice and asked if they wanted to  proceed  with  the
    application  in  the  light  of  the  grant.    On   23   October   the
    representatives indicated that they wished to proceed  "notwithstanding
    the grounds on which permission has been granted".  It appears that  no
    steps were taken.  Meanwhile the Upper Tribunal proceeded to  list  the
    appeal  based  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin's  grant.   This
    triggered an email dated 29 July 2019 from the  representatives  asking
    for the renewed application to be  considered.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gill then made a decision dated 2 August 2019  refusing  permission  on
    all grounds.  She explained her reasons as follows including the ground
    on which permission had been granted in [5]:

         "5.  Paras 9 and 10  of  the  grounds  do  not  arguably  make  any
             material difference.  It is unarguably plain, when the judge's
             decision is read as a whole, that he was fully aware  that  he
             was deciding appeals against decisions of the Entry  Clearance
             Officer.  It is simply unarguable that he was confused in this
             regard."

 8. I have considered the effect of the refusal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gill and the lack of any indication by her that the decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin had been set aside.  I cannot see any basis  that
    would have enabled her to do so absent any suggestion  that  there  had
    been a clerical mistake, accidental slip or omission (see  Rule  42  of
    the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008).   I  therefore
    proceeded with the hearing of the appeal on the basis  of  the  limited
    grant.

 9. In anticipation of this being the case, Mr  McTaggart  and  Mr  Diwnycz
    were content to proceed on this basis.  The passages  that  have  given
    rise to the grant are preceded by paragraphs [39] and [40] in which the
    judge states:

         "39. I am satisfied on  the  evidence  before  me  today  that  the
             Appellants are not entitled to Entry Clearance and such  Entry
             Clearance  should  not  be  issued  to   the   Appellants   as
             confirmation of her right to reside in the United Kingdom.

         40.  I have considered the Appellants' claim under the Human Rights
             Act 1998, Article 8.  I find that the UK  Government,  in  its
             exercise of a fair  and  firm  immigration  policy  has  acted
             proportionately by refusing to issue Entry  Clearance  as  for
             the reasons recorded above, to  include  the  failure  of  the
             Appellants to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
             There has been family life that has been interfered  with  but
             in an entirely proportionate manner, on the evidence before me
             today. The Appellants do not identify  any  interference  with
             private life."

10. The judge then explained in the following paragraphs his  reasoning  in
    relation to matters which were not in play.  These relate to  right  to
    remain under Article 8 as well as paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  and  a
    Residence Card as follows:

         "41. On 11 June  2012  the  Government  announced  changes  to  the
             Immigration Rules to unify consideration under the  Rules  and
             Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
             Immigration Rules set out the requirements for  those  seeking
             Leave to Enter or Remain  on  the  basis  of  their  right  to
             respect for private or family life by  defining  the  criteria
             that a person is expected to fulfil in order to  qualify  this
             right to remain in the United Kingdom.  These criteria are set
             out in Appendix FM and Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  As  a  consequence,  because  the  Appellant  had  not
             applied under these provisions a full consideration  of  their
             Article  8  ECHR  rights  has  not  been  undertaken  by   the
             Respondent and by myself today.

         42.  The Immigration Rules now include  provisions  for  applicants
             wishing to remain in the United Kingdom based on their  family
             or private life.  These rules are located at Appendix  FM  and
             Paragraph 276 ADE respectively.  Should the appellant wish the
             UK Immigration Authority to consider an  application  on  this
             basis then  the  appellant  should  make  a  separate  charged
             application using the appropriate specified application forms,
             for the 5-year partner route, or for the 5-year parent  route,
             or the 10-year partner or parent route, or the 10-year private
             life route.  As the appellant has not made a valid application
             for Article 8 consideration, consideration has not been  given
             as to whether the appellant's removal from the UK would breach
             Article 8 of the  ECHR.   I  also  have  not  considered  such
             removal within an Article 8 ECHR context.  It is to  be  noted
             that the decision not to  issue  a  Residence  Card  does  not
             require the appellant to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
             appellant could otherwise demonstrate that they have  a  right
             to reside under the Regulations."

11. Mr McTaggart relied on a skeleton argument which he  supplemented  with
    oral submissions.  In essence he contended that the judge had failed to
    proceed in a  way  that  allowed  confidence  in  the  decision  making
    process.  His skeleton highlights how the matters referred  to  in  the
    closing paragraphs of the judge's decision  did  not  engage  with  the
    issue in the case which related to the Article 8 context  of  an  entry
    clearance decision.  He contended that it could not be  said  that  the
    determination clearly disclosed the reasons for the decision.

12. Mr Diwnycz conceded that there had been  material  error.   I  observed
    that the materiality of the error and whether the  decision  should  be
    set aside would be a matter for me  to  consider  particularly  in  the
    context of the unchallenged (in the light of the refusal of permission)
    factual findings by the judge between paragraphs [36] and [45].  By way
    of response Mr McTaggart submitted that if the findings  of  the  court
    were to be maintained it was for the court to decide if Article  8  had
    been breached.  Factors which he contended were relevant related to the
    sponsor's depression, although he accepted that she was an  adult  when
    before Judge Fox.  No new evidence had been lodged  and  neither  party
    had anything more to say in the event that the decision was  set  aside
    and required to be remade.

13. Mr McTaggart understandably struggled to make sense of paragraphs  [41]
    and [42] of the judge's decision.  For the sake  of  completeness,  the
    final paragraph [43] is in the following terms:

         "43. On the totality of the evidence before me today,  I  find  the
             Appellants have not discharged the burden of proof and reasons
             given by the Respondent justify the refusals.  Therefore,  the
             Respondent's decision is in accordance with the  law  and  the
             applicable Immigration Rules."

14. It is clear to me, having regard to the detail earlier in the  decision
    and the conclusions expressed at [39] and [40], that by that point  the
    judge had completed what was required  of  him.   This  was  to  decide
    whether the appellants had been able to establish that the  refusal  of
    entry clearance resulted in a disproportionate breach of  their  rights
    under Article 8 and those of the sponsor in the United Kingdom.  It  is
    clear to me that the judge took  all  the  evidence  into  account  and
    directed himself earlier in his decision as to the law he was  required
    to apply in relation to Article 8.  He correctly recorded the sponsor's
    circumstances and in relation to her  mental  health  was  entitled  to
    refer to the brevity of the letter  from  her  GP  in  respect  of  her
    depression.  It was open to the judge to observe  the  absence  of  any
    more detailed evidence.

15. Mr McTaggart drew my attention to a "routine" referral  to  the  Common
    Mental Health Problems Hub as an outpatient on 6 March 2018.  There was
    no more recent evidence after that indicating the extent and gravity of
    the GP's diagnosis.  In this regard the judge explained at [18]:

         "18. The sponsor claims to suffer from depression.  There is  a  1�
             line letter from a General Practitioner, confirming  that  she
             suffers from depression.  [There is] no indication as  to  the
             depth of such suffering, the treatment prescribed, the grounds
             upon which a  diagnosis  has  been  ascertained  the  expected
             recovery  period,  if  any,  details  of  any  medication   or
             treatment regime.  All of this, in the absence of evidence  to
             the contrary, suggest that if there  is  a  genuine  claim  to
             suffer from depression, it can only be of minimal proportions.
              It clearly cannot be interfering with her activities of daily
             living as she maintains an active  working  lifestyle  coupled
             with an active  and  productive  educational  lifestyle.   [A]
             diagnosis of depression is not mutually exclusive  of  a  work
             and educational regime.  However,  the  sponsor  has  a  clear
             ability  to  conduct  such  lifestyles  without  any  apparent
             difficulty is suggest [sic]  that  the  claimed  diagnosis  of
             depression is not in any way significant or material.  I  have
             noted the GP referral to counselling.  This has only  occurred
             very recently.  There is no  [evidence]  provided  as  to  the
             nature of the counselling  requested,  whether  an  assessment
             would be required before counselling may be offered, or who is
             to undertake such assessment and when."

16. In respect  of  the  appellants'  circumstances  in  Kenya,  the  judge
    explained his findings at [19] to [23]:

         "19. The first appellant  and  her  children  were  granted  asylum
             status having claimed international protection in Kenya.  They
             live in Nairobi.  I am told that this is a camp.  There is  no
             detail  before  me  as  to  the  living  conditions  that  the
             Appellants  enjoyed  at  the  date  of  the   application   or
             currently.  Photographs have been  provided  of  some  of  the
             Appellants and clearly show them to be in a  reasonable  state
             of health, based only upon their presentation to  the  camera.
             They appear happy, jovial,  well-dressed,  well-nourished  and
             the background to each  of  the  photographs  suggest  nothing
             untoward in terms of the lifestyle they  currently  appear  to
             enjoy.  Coupled with this the children and their  mother  seen
             to  enjoy  regular  contact  using  such   modern   means   of
             communication with their sponsor, in particular Viber.   I  am
             also aware that alternative means of electronic  communication
             such as WhatsApp, FaceTime, Facebook, video  call,  email  are
             available to the sponsor and the  Appellants.   The  sponsor's
             evidence is that they continue to enjoy contact  through  such
             modern  means  of  electronic  communication.   Some  of   the
             information supporting this claim has not been translated  and
             as a consequence  can  carry  little  weight.   The  documents
             before  me  today,  presented  to  support  this   contention,
             certainly did not indicate that the  Appellants  and  each  of
             them are suffering in the most exceptional  and  compassionate
             circumstances.  [The]  very  fact  that  [they]  are  able  to
             afford, maintain, make use of electronic devices to facilitate
             continuing contact with the sponsor,  indicates  a  reasonably
             comfortable lifestyle.

         20.  The documents that  have  been  provided  in  support  of  the
             contact between family members has not  all  been  translated.
             It demonstrates that contact is maintained  at  a  base  level
             alone.  It does not  demonstrate  any  evidence  of  a  family
             enduring the most compassionate of circumstances.  It reflects
             the obvious situation that the family are in  contact  and  do
             not highlight concerns on any front between them.

         21.  All of the Appellants are part of a family unit and  there  is
             no evidence before me  today  that  would  suggest  that  they
             should in any way be separated from one another.  There is  no
             evidence before me today that anyone of the  Appellants  would
             benefit from such a separation.  There is no  evidence  before
             me today to suggest how such a separation would unfold.

         22.  They have applied for and succeeded in securing  international
             protection from the state in Kenya.  They are safe from  harm.
             There is no evidence  that  the  Kenyan  authorities  proposed
             removing the Appellants or others like them to Somalia.

         23.  The sponsor has been  separated  from  her  family  since  she
             departed from her home country.  She gives evidence today that
             she would not be willing to go to [Kenya] to visit her family.
              She gives no evidence as to why such a journey would  be  out
             of question, difficult or impossible to undertake.   There  is
             no evidence before me today that the sponsor could not  travel
             elsewhere, rather than Kenya, to meet her family."

17. The judge continued at [25] to [26] as follows:

         "25. So far as I am aware, all of the Appellants  and  the  sponsor
             are  in  a  robust  state  of  good  health.    Their   living
             accommodation has not been identified to any degree, let alone
             something  that  could  match  a  description  of  exceptional
             circumstances or the most compelling  of  circumstances.   The
             sponsor sends money to the Appellants from the United Kingdom.
              It would be unfair to  suggest  that  these  funds  were  not
             significant.  They would be significant for the Appellants and
             they would be significant for the sponsor given her  level  of
             earnings.  They clearly have been put to good use and  in  the
             absence of any evidence to  the  contrary  clearly  provide  a
             handsome level of sustainable income for  the  Appellants  and
             each of them.  There me today [sic] that  the  sponsor  cannot
             continue to support her family from the UK. [She] says in  her
             statement that she wishes to continue to work and to study.

         26.  I am told today that the Appellants live in Nairobi, albeit in
             a camp.  As indicated above the  photographs  do  not  suggest
             that the Appellants have difficulties with their accommodation
             or their immediate surroundings.  If granted  entry  clearance
             would  be  considerable  public  expenditure  encountered   in
             sourcing appropriate accommodation,  providing  education  and
             welfare support.  These are considerations which  have  to  be
             taken into account.  There is no evidence before me  today  to
             suggest that there is a  change  in  their  circumstances,  to
             their  detriment  since  they  first  achieved   international
             protection in Kenya."

18. There is a degree of repetition and a recovering earlier ground in  the
    subsequent paragraphs before the judge reached his conclusions which  I
    have set out above at [39] and [40].  By that stage  of  the  decision,
    any reader would be in no doubt why the judge reached  his  conclusion.
    Although it is speculative, it is possible  that  paragraphs  [41]  and
    [42] which make no specific  reference  to  the  appellants  have  been
    included in error.  They do not form part  of  the  judge's  Article  8
    analysis and bear no relevance to the issues in the case.  If they  are
    struck out, the determination survives  as  a  self-contained  reasoned
    judicial decision.  Paragraphs [41] and [42] do not detract from  that.
    At worst they indicate carelessness or an oversight  by  the  judge  in
    proof-reading but in my judgment no more than  that.   They  have  been
    included clearly  in  error  and  the  matters  referred  to  in  those
    paragraphs were not matters required to be addressed by the judge.

19. I do not consider the error material, and accordingly, this  appeal  is
    dismissed



Signed                                  Date 20 August 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


