
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/20723/2016
                                                               HU/20724/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 11th April 2019                  |On: 18th April 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Pretoria
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   M H A H
                                   M A A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S. Khan, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors


                            DECISION and REASONS

 1. The Respondents are both nationals of Somalia,  currently  residing  in
    Ethiopia. They seek entry clearance as the dependent family members  of
    a refugee living in the United Kingdom, the Sponsor Ms [HA]. HAH is  Ms
    [A]'s half-sister, born on the 1st October 2006; AAA was  born  on  the
    25th May 2009 and it is said that she  is  the  daughter  of  Ms  [A]'s
    cousin.  She has cared for both children since they were  infants,  and
    treats them as her own daughters.  Both  children  were  refused  entry
    clearance on the 3rd August 2016, those decisions being maintained upon
    'Entry Clearance  Manager'  review  on  the  9th  December  2016.   The
    children exercised their right of appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. By a determination dated the 2nd September 2017 the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge MR Oliver) allowed the linked appeals  of  the  two  girls.  The
    Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  in  Pretoria  subsequently  applied  for
    permission to appeal,  such  permission  being  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on the 23rd February 2018.

 3. On the 1st November 2018 the matter came before me. On that occasion Ms
    [A]  appeared  without  representation;  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Senior Presenting Officer Mr A. McVeety.  In my  written
    decision dated the 2nd November 2018 I found that the decision of Judge
    MR Oliver must be set aside for a failure to have regard to the  public
    interest in the proportionality balancing exercise.  The  decision  had
    carefully set out the  very  compelling  circumstances  faced  by  this
    family, but in its final  reckoning  had  not  balanced  those  matters
    against, for instance, the matters  set  out  by  parliament  in  s117B
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  A number of findings  of
    fact made by the Judge were  however  preserved  (see  below)  and  the
    matter adjourned to be relisted before me.

 4. The primary reason for the adjournment was that Ms [A] did not have any
    representation; she was not in a position to make  submissions  on  the
    law, nor to produce bundles etc.  She informed me that she was  without
    funds and had found it difficult to  secure  legal  representation.  Ms
    Shazia Khan of Counsel, who appears  for  the  Respondents  today,  was
    present at court on another matter. She very helpfully assisted Ms  [A]
    by making some telephone calls until she  found  a  solicitor  who  was
    prepared to take the matter on: Legal Justice  Solicitors.   They  then
    faced obstacles and delay in securing legal aid.  The  resumed  hearing
    was adjourned on at least two occasions as a result. Before me Ms  Khan
    explained that the application for legal aid  was  outstanding  but  in
    view of the delay Ms [A] wished to proceed with the hearing.   Ms  Khan
    then  represented  the   family,   with   her   customary   skill   and
    professionalism, on a pro-bono basis.




    Factual Matrix

 5. The core facts are now uncontested. Although  the  ECO  had  originally
    doubted the claimed relationships, those doubts were  resolved  by  the
    production of DNA evidence (at least in respect of HAH), and  by  Judge
    Oliver's findings on the evidence of Ms [A]. I should add  that  having
    heard Ms [A]'s live evidence myself I was left in no doubt at all  that
    the relationships are as claimed; Mr Diwnycz was  similarly  satisfied.
     I therefore find that HAH is the maternal half-sister of Ms [A].   She
    came into Ms [A]'s care when she was very young, after her father  went
    missing and their mother was killed.   HAH is today 12 years old.   AAA
    is the daughter of a cousin of Ms [A]. Her parents  were  killed  in  a
    bombing raid shortly after her birth. Ms [A] looked after her from when
    she was about three months old.  AAA is approaching her 10th birthday.

 6. The account of how the various members of this family  came  to  be  in
    their present situations was narrated by Ms [A] when she first  arrived
    in this country and claimed asylum in 2015.  In broad summary  she  had
    taken the girls and fled fighting around their native Afgoye,  Somalia.
    In the spring of 2014 they ended up,  with  other  family  members,  in
    Yemen. Ms [A] met a man who helped them.  They stayed with him  and  Ms
    [A] married him: this was Mr [B].  He  provided  for  Ms  [A]  and  the
    children. After they had lived there for about one year the  war  broke
    out. Fighting started everywhere. One day Ms [A] went out to  buy  food
    for the family; Mr [B] had been unable to go  because  men  were  being
    targeted.  When she returned the  whole  family  had  disappeared.  She
    spent a day looking for them but  everyone  was  leaving.  People  were
    getting on boats to get out and they told her she should do  this  too.
    Ms [A] spent $150 on a ticket to Djibouti. The  sailing  took  2  days.
    When she arrived there she contacted her brother-in-law  who  lives  in
    South Africa. He arranged for her to stay with  someone  he  knew.  She
    stayed there two weeks before her brother-in-law arranged for her to be
    flown to the United Kingdom with the assistance of  an  agent.  It  was
    only after she had arrived  here  that  she  managed,  again  with  the
    assistance of this brother-in-law, to  re-establish  contact  with  her
    husband and the children.  They  had  managed  to  get  on  a  boat  to
    Ethiopia.

 7. As to the question of the girls' current circumstances, there are  also
    some  agreed  facts.  Judge  Oliver  accepted,  and  his  findings  are
    undisturbed, that AAA is totally blind. It seems that this has been the
    case since she was born.  He accepted that the children are,  and  have
    always been, entirely supported  by  Ms  [A],  who  continues  to  send
    remittances  every  month  to  pay  for  their  maintenance.  This  was
    evidenced before the First-tier Tribunal by Dahabshiil receipts but the
    accepted evidence was that these money transfers were  supplemented  by
    money being carried by Somali  people  visiting  Ethiopia  and  passing
    money on Ms [A]'s behalf. Ms [A] maintains  regular  contact  with  the
    children by telephone. There  can  be  difficulties  with  the  network
    coverage but she manages to speak to them once or twice per week.   The
    children are currently  living  in  Ethiopia,  under  the  care  of  an
    unrelated Somali woman named Fadumo.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms [A] gave oral evidence about the children's
    lives.  She was assisted by a Somali interpreter  and  I  am  satisfied
    that she and the interpreter understood each other and, as far as I can
    be, that all of her evidence was properly translated to the court.   Ms
    [A] began by explaining the background:

         "I have looked after [HAH] since the day that  she  was  born.  The
         only time that we have been  apart  is  since  I  have  been  here.
         [HAH]'s  father  has  been  missing  all  that  time.  I  have   no
         information about him.  We share a mother.

         I arrived in the United Kingdom on the 22nd May 2015. At that  time
         the girls were living with my then husband, Mr [AMB]. They were  in
         Addis at the time and then they moved  out  a  little  bit  to  the
         suburbs.  Before then we had all been in  Yemen  together.  We  had
         been in a refugee camp there.

         My marriage broke down in May 2017. The girls were  taken  to  live
         with a Somali lady called Fadumo.  This was in the same area in the
         suburbs of Addis; there was a bit of trouble there so they moved to
         a new place, which is where they are  now.  It's  near  the  border
         between Ethiopia and Somalia.  It's a small town"

 9. Ms Khan then asked Ms [A] if she was able to describe  the  house  that
    the children live in. There followed some discussion between Ms [A] and
    the interpreter, who was unsure about the terminology to  describe  the
    way that the house was constructed.   Ms [A] then  indicated  that  she
    had a picture of the house and asked if we would like to see it. When I
    indicated that we would, Ms [A] produced her mobile phone. I  think  it
    important to record that  at  this  stage  Ms  [A]'s  entire  demeanour
    changed. She had,  up  to  this  moment,  been  very  quiet,  flat  and
    emotionless. Just before she found the relevant item on her  phone  she
    said this:

         "it's a video. I am unable to watch it  because  it  upsets  me  so
         much. I saw it when it was first sent to me but I  haven't  watched
         it since - I can't bear to  see  the  way  that  the  children  are
         living. The woman they are with is not treating them properly. This
         was sent to me by the man whose phone they  use  to  speak  to  me.
         Fadumo asked him to record some audio of the girls to  send  to  me
         but he secretly took this film. She didn't know he was  filming  so
         she didn't realise I could see everything. He sent to me because he
         wanted me to know how the children are living".

    Ms [A] then broke down and cried uncontrollably. Her  mobile  telephone
    was passed to the bench where a short video was viewed  by  myself,  Ms
    Khan and Mr Diwnycz.

10. The video shows a small  makeshift  structure,  approximately  10  feet
    wide.  It  appeared  to  be  constructed  from  mud/  straw  with  some
    breezeblocks. It is topped by various bits of what appears to be ripped
    tarpaulins and old grains sacks that have been roped  together.   There
    is no flooring.  The girls are sitting on the bare  ground  outside  of
    the hut with a woman whom Ms [A] identifies as Fadumo. At the beginning
    of the film both girls are speaking to the camera. Fadumo appears to be
    gesturing at them to get them to co-operate: this is consistent with Ms
    [A]'s explanation that she was unaware that she is being filmed. At one
    point Fadumo appears to scold them and HAH starts to cry. Neither child
    looks well cared for. They both looked thin, and are  dressed  in  worn
    and dirty clothes.  AAA has her head shaved.  A bowl of what appears to
    be dirty water is lying on the ground in front of them.

11. Ms [A] reiterated that  she  finds  it  very  distressing  to  see  the
    conditions that the children are in. She became very concerned when she
    saw that film.   She continued:

         "When my husband was looking after the  children  this  Fadumo  was
         living nearby. When he left me he left the  children  with  Fadumo.
         Until I saw that film I had no idea how bad it  was.  There  is  no
         water there. No electricity. No  sanitation.  I  believe  that  she
         lives there with her husband and their own four children  as  well.
         There is no school for the children.   Fadumo is always telling  me
         she is fed up looking after them. I am frightened about the way she
         treats them. She has also told me that she wants to perform FGM  on
         the children.  She says that it is a stigma for  her  to  have  the
         girls in her home 'uncut'. In that area Somalis look down on  girls
         who are not cut. I have forbidden Fadumo to cut them but I am  very
         afraid about this. I send her $100 per month.  Despite  this  money
         she won't send them to school - she says there  is  no  school  for
         [AAA] because she is blind.  She won't send [HAH] because she needs
         her there because it is she who looks after AAA.   She is  probably
         using my money for her own children as well -  they  are  living  a
         really hard life there".

    Ms [A] remained distressed throughout the remainder of her evidence.

12. In respect of her own circumstances  Ms  [A]  explained  that  she  has
    remarried in the United Kingdom. Her husband is a  Portuguese  national
    of Somali origin. They have two children of their own now.   [A]  is  1
    year 10 months and [M] is 5 months old (the babies were not present  in
    court - they were being cared for by Ms [A]'s husband).  She  explained
    that her husband has been working  but  he  is  unable  to  at  present
    because he has injured his back. He was an 'Uber Eats' driver,  and  he
    also worked as a security guard.  Ms [A] is  not  working  because  she
    looks after the children. The family are therefore currently living  on
    benefits.  They live in a two-bedroom property with a  lounge.  Ms  [A]
    said that if the girls were to come here she would look after  them  in
    exactly the same way as she looks after her own children.  Neither  she
    or her husband have a criminal record.

13. Mr Diwnycz indicated that none of that evidence was challenged.  It was
    further accepted, having  regard  to  the  photos  on  file,  that  the
    children shown in the video are the Respondents.




    The Legal Framework

14. Ms Khan concedes that these are facts that fall outwith  the  framework
    of the immigration rules. The rule most pertinent to  these  applicants
    would be paragraph  352D  which  is  concerned  with  the  children  of
    refugees:

         '352D. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  leave  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order to  join  or  remain
         with the parent who currently  has  refugee  status  are  that  the
         applicant:

         (i)      is the child of a parent who currently has refugee  status
         granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and

         (ii)     is under the age of 18; and

         (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried  and  is
         not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit;
         and

         (iv)     was part of the family unit of the person  granted  asylum
         at the time that the person granted  asylum  left  the  country  of
         their habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and

         (v)      the applicant would not be  excluded  from  protection  by
         virtue of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or  Article  1F
         of the Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in their  own
         right; and

         (vi)     if seeking leave to enter, holds a  valid  United  Kingdom
         entry clearance for entry in this capacity.'

    Although it is accepted that the children meet all of the  requirements
    at (ii) to (v) they cannot meet that at (i)  since  they  are  not  the
    children of Ms [A].

15. The parties agreed that whilst in the past these  children  would  have
    fallen squarely within the 'Somali Family Reunion Policy' published  by
    the Secretary of State on a concessionary  basis,  that  policy  is  no
    longer in force today. All other paragraphs of the  rules  relating  to
    the entry of children - for instance the applicable parts  of  Appendix
    FM, paragraph 297 or the provisions  relating  to  adopted  children  -
    cannot avail them because Ms [A] is not settled. She is a refugee  with
    limited leave to remain until 2020.

16. The case therefore was put on Article 8 grounds only.  It  is  for  the
    Respondents to establish, on the balance of probabilities,  that  there
    is here a family life, and that by his refusal  the  ECO  has  shown  a
    'lack of respect' for it.   It is then for the ECO  to  establish  that
    his decision is nevertheless a proportionate response to  the  need  to
    maintain immigration control, having particular regard  to  the  public
    interest as expressed at s117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended).     Whilst  s.55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 has no direct  application  to  children  who  are
    outside of the United Kingdom  the  ECO  accepts,  in  accordance  with
    published policy, that applications by children should be  assessed  in
    the spirit of the legislation: T (s.55 BCIA  2009  -  entry  clearance)
    Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC).




    Discussion and Findings

17. Mr Diwnycz accepted that there is between the sponsor Ms [A] and  these
    two children a meaningful family life within the scope of Article 8. Ms
    [A] looked after both girls from early infancy and I  accept  that  the
    bond between them is essentially maternal.   Despite  their  separation
    that bond has persisted, by the means of regular telephone calls and Ms
    [A]'s continuing support for them.  This was a  family  unit  that  was
    established prior to Ms [A]'s flight and arrival in the United Kingdom.
     The case is therefore concerned with the reunification  of  a  refugee
    family and I am satisfied that the decision to refuse  entry  clearance
    surmounts the relatively modest threshold required to engage Article  8
    obligations:  it shows a 'lack of respect' for, or  interference  with,
    the family life that the children share with Ms [A].

18. The decision is one that was, as a matter of law, open to the ECO take.
     The question before me is whether it was a proportionate response.

19. The weight of the public interest in maintaining  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance in this case is  substantial.  The  children  are  unable  to
    qualify for leave under  any  provision  of  the  rules  because  their
    sponsor is not 'settled' and because they  are  not  her  children,  by
    either biology or the operation of  law.   There  is  a  strong  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control and the  failure  to
    meet the rules is a matter that must weigh against the children.

20. I have considered why the rules are framed in the way that they are. As
    Ms Khan points out, there is no provision under the Rules  which  would
    apply to these children, but it is entirely possible that  there  is  a
    reason for that.   It is easy to understand why the Secretary of  State
    would not wish to encourage applications by children  seeking  to  join
    adults  in  this  country  who  are  not  their   biological   parents.
    Trafficking, abuse and even the well-intentioned but misplaced altruism
    seen in some 'foreign adoption' cases are all real risks. I have  borne
    that in mind.   Having  had  regard  to  the  accepted  nature  of  the
    relationship between sponsor and the applicants, and the  very  genuine
    and heartfelt response of Ms [A] to their children's plight I am  quite
    satisfied that she sponsors these applications for no reason other than
    her desire to be reunited with the children and to  return  to  looking
    after them as a mother.

21. Neither child can speak English.  I recognise that where migrants  seek
    to settle in this country it is in the public interest that they  speak
    English, since this better aids their integration. I find however  that
    in the case of these applicants that weight against  them  is  slightly
    diminished by the fact that they are  children.   I  accept  Ms  Khan's
    submission that for that reason they can be expected to quickly  learn,
    and I note that children seeking entry clearance under  the  rules  are
    not routinely expected to be able to speak  English  in  the  way  that
    adults are.

22. The children, and the family that they seek to join, are not in any way
    financially independent.   This is a matter that  attracts  substantial
    weight in the balancing exercise.  Although  I  accept  that  Ms  [A]'s
    husband was until  recently  working  and  supporting  the  family,  at
    present they are all dependent upon state  funds.  Whether  or  not  he
    manages to return to work, the reality is that the children will  place
    a significant additional burden on the  taxpayer.  Both  will  need  to
    attend school, access the  health-service  and  in  the  case  of  AAA,
    additional support because of her disability. Ms [A],  her  two  babies
    and husband currently live in a two bedroomed property. I am  satisfied
    that this will be adequate accommodation even if the two girls come  to
    live  here.  It  will  be  full,  but  not   as   a   matter   of   law
    'overcrowded'[1].

23. These are all matters that weigh heavily against the  children  in  the
    balancing exercise.

24. Against that Ms Khan asked me to weigh in  the  balance  the  following
    matters.

25. First, this case concerns the pre-existing family of a refugee. Ms  [A]
    named these children as her dependents as long  ago  as  2015  and  has
    maintained her support for them ever since. Although the United Kingdom
    is under no formal legal obligation to  unify  families,  it  has  long
    recognised that in the spirit of the Refugee Convention efforts  should
    be made to ensure that families can  be  together,  particularly  where
    children are involved[2]. This is particularly  so  where  the  parties
    involved have proven their vulnerabilities. In Tanda-Muzinga v.  France
    Case  No.  2260/10  (10  July  2014)  the  ECtHR  recognised,  in   its
    consideration of a case involving  Article  8,  the  interplay  between
    obligations arising under the Refugee Convention and the ECHR:

         "The Court recalls that family  unity  is  an  essential  right  of
         refugees and that family reunification  is  a  fundamental  element
         allowing persons who have fled persecution to resume a normal life.
         It recalls also that it has also  recognized  that  obtaining  such
         international protection constitutes a proof of  the  vulnerability
         of the persons  concerned.  It  notes  in  this  respect  that  the
         necessity for refugees  to  benefit  from  a  family  reunification
         procedure that is more favourable  than  that  available  to  other
         foreigners is a matter of international and European consensus,  as
         indicated in the mandate and activities of UNHCR and the norms  set
         out in Directive 2003/86 of the EU.  In  this  context,  the  Court
         considers that it was essential for  the  national  authorities  to
         take  account  of  the  vulnerability  of  the  applicant  and  his
         particularly difficult personal experience, for them to  pay  great
         attention to the pertinent arguments he raised in the  matter,  for
         them  to  provide  reasons  for   not   implementing   his   family
         reunification, and for them to rule on the visa request promptly."

26. Second, that the best interests of the children are  overwhelmingly  to
    be granted entry clearance.   Practitioners will very often assume that
    the best interests of their child clients would best be served by being
    allowed  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   These   are
    assumptions that are often without any evidential  foundation,  instead
    underpinned by the frankly racist hypothesis that the United Kingdom is
    automatically better than anywhere else. Ms Khan's submissions were not
    based on any such assumptions.

27. It is accepted that these children look to Ms [A] as a mother and  that
    she in turn considers them to be her daughters. Whilst their separation
    over the past few years has  inevitably  weakened  that  bond  to  some
    extent, it was evident from Ms [A]'s emotional response to  the  video,
    and  by  the  children's  pleading  entreaties  to  camera,  that  this
    relationship subsists.  It is generally in a child's best interests  to
    be cared  for  by  her  'parent',  be  that  biological  or  otherwise.
    Conversely it is generally not in a child's best interests to be 'cared
    for' by someone who has no interest in their future: on the evidence it
    is hard to disagree with Ms [A]'s assessment that Fadumo  is  motivated
    by nothing more than the $100 she receives each month from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The children that I, Ms Khan and Mr  Diwnycz  saw  on  camera
    looked malnourished, dirty and unkempt.  They did not look happy.  They
    are not being sent to school. Whilst Fadumo is no doubt  right  to  say
    that there is no such provision  for  a  blind  child  on  the  Somali-
    Ethiopian border, the only reason that HAH is being kept from education
    is because she is being used as a carer for AAA (and possibly  Fadumo's
    other children).  It  is  strongly  contrary  to  the  children's  best
    interests to be living in such extreme  deprivation,  and  to  have  no
    prospect of gaining an education.

28. Another very worrying aspect of  the  evidence,  and  one  that  caused
    visible distress to Ms [A], is the prospect that Fadumo will  have  the
    girls cut.   I have no reason to doubt that Fadumo considers it a stain
    on her family's reputation to have uncircumcised girls living under her
    roof. That evidence must be read in  light  of  the  available  country
    background material which indicates that girls  who  are  not  cut  are
    viewed as 'unclean' and face stigma  as  a  result:  the  current  CPIN
    quotes statistics that 97% of Somali females over the  age  of  15  are
    subject to FGM[3].  Whilst the girls may have  been  immune  from  this
    social pressure whilst they were young, HAH in particular  is  reaching
    an age where it will be hard to resist. Ms [A] is understandably afraid
    that she will soon lose this argument, and there is nothing to  prevent
    Fadumo going ahead without her consent. It would be  strongly  contrary
    to the girls' best interests if they  were  to  be  subjected  to  this
    procedure.

29. A further matter raised by Ms Khan  in  submissions  is  the  uncertain
    future that the girls face in Ethiopia. As far as Ms [A] is aware  both
    they and their host family are without formal  legal  status  there.  I
    accept that it would be in their best interests to  have  their  status
    issues resolved, wherever they are.

30. I have weighed all of these matters in the balance. I take into account
    that there are factors which weigh heavily against  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance, the financial dependency of this family upon the state being
    foremost amongst them.  Although I accept Ms Khan may be  correct  when
    she surmises that the care these children require will by and large  be
    provided within the family unit, the  reality  is  that  children,  and
    particularly children with disabilities, cost  money.    Against  those
    matters are these. This is a law-abiding family who but  for  the  back
    injury suffered by Ms [A]'s husband would be  financially  independent.
    Ms [A] is a recognised refugee whose separation from these children  is
    causing her understandable distress.   The  compassionate  factors  are
    overwhelming. These are children who  have  already  had  an  intensely
    difficult life. Having lost their parents  they  were  forced  to  flee
    their country of nationality, only to be driven out of their  place  of
    sanctuary as war erupted there as well. Separated  from  their  primary
    carer they are now living in what appears to be conditions of the  most
    extreme poverty and deprivation. There is a significant risk  that  one
    or both of them could be subjected to FGM in the  immediate  future  if
    they remain living with their carer in Ethiopia.  The cumulative effect
    of these matters  is  such  that  I  am  compelled  to  find  the  very
    substantial public interest to be outweighed. I cannot accept  that  it
    would be proportionate or necessary to  continue  to  refuse  to  grant
    these children entry clearance in order to join the woman  who  is,  to
    all intents and purposes, their mother.




    Anonymity Order

31. This case concerns two minors. Having had regard  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Respondents are granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction applies
        to,  amongst  others,  both  the  Appellant  and  the  Respondents.
        Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
        court proceedings"



    Decisions

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and it is set aside to the extent identified  above.   In  remaking
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I nevertheless reach  the  same
    conclusion: the appeals must be allowed on human  rights  grounds.   In
    view of the matters set out above it would be highly desirable if entry
    clearance could be granted as soon as practicable.

33. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             15th April 2019



    Fee Award

    Both appellants before the First-tier Tribunal (the Respondents in this
    Tribunal) paid a fee of �140 for their oral  hearing.  They  won  their
    appeal in the First-tier Tribunal and before  this  Tribunal  on  facts
    that were available to the decision maker.  I therefore make a full fee
    award in respect of both appellants.


-----------------------
[1]https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/repairs/check_if_your_home_
is_overcrowded_by_law
[2] At the date of writing the Refugee Family Reunion Bill, which would
significantly widen the class of applicants who can join refugee family
members here, is before parliament.

[3] Country Policy and Information Note Somalia: Women fearing gender based
violence (Version 4.0) April 2018 at 5.1.2


