
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20075/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th July 2019                    |On 06th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                            Mohammed Atiqul islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Mohammed Atiqul Islam  against  a  decision  of
    Judge McIntosh who, on 1st May 2019,  decided  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's refusal of his human rights claim based on his
    private life in the United Kingdom.

 2. The background to the appeal is as follows.  Mr Islam is a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh who was born on 29th April 1981.  He arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 10th November 2007,  with  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student until 28th February  2009.   There  followed  a  succession  of
    grants of limited leave to remain, the last of which  expired  on  27th
    June 2015.

 3. I am very grateful to Mr Sharma who appeared on behalf of the Appellant
    for the chronology that follows.  On 10th October 2014, Mr  Islam  made
    an application for limited leave to remain as a student.  On 5th  April
    2015, he made a human rights claim based  on  his  established  private
    life in the United Kingdom.  That application, as a matter of law acted
    as a variation of the earlier application made on  10th  October  2014.
    It is not entirely clear whether it acted as a variation to  substitute
    the human rights claim for the earlier application for leave to  remain
    as a student, or whether it was intended to add the human rights  claim
    to the extant application for leave to remain as a student.  Be that as
    it may, the Respondent's refusal of  the  application,  on  23rd  April
    2015, addressed only the application for limited leave to remain  as  a
    student.  On 20th May 2015, Mr Islam  appealed  against  that  refusal.
    Again, it is not entirely clear whether that appeal was confined to  an
    appeal on the ground that the decision  was  "not  in  accordance  with
    immigration rules" (a ground that would at that time  still  have  been
    available to him) or whether it was also brought on the ground that the
    decision was incompatible with his right  to  respect  to  private  and
    family life under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention.   On  1st
    June 2015, the appellant's then representative  purported  to  withdraw
    the application that had been made on 5th April 2015.  I say that  they
    "purported" to do so because it is Mr Islam's case  (as  yet  unproven)
    that he had not given them the req

 4. For the sake of completeness, I should mention that on  6th  July  2015
    that the Appellant also made an application for a residence card  as  a
    family member of a citizen of the  European  Economic  Area  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  However, that application is  not
    relevant to the point that is taken in the present appeal.

 5. On the 23rd July 2015, the appeal against the decision  of  23rd  April
    2015 (launched on 20th May 2015) was withdrawn.

 6. I turn now to the decision of Judge McIntosh. He noted, at paragraph 28
    of his decision, that the Appellant had argued  that  he  ought  to  be
    treated  as  having  constructively  fulfilled  the   requirements   of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  That paragraph,  it  will  be
    recalled, may in certain circumstances lead to  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom if the applicant has lived lawfully in the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of ten years.   The  essence  of
    the case that was then being argued then, and which it  is  now  argued
    the judge failed to take  into  account  in  the  Article  8  balancing
    exercise, was the 'historic  injustice'  that  is  said  to  have  been
    suffered to Mr Islam due to (a)  the  Secretary  of  State  failing  to
    consider his human rights claim in the decision of 23rd April 2015, and
    (b) his then representative purporting to  withdraw  his  human  rights
    claim on 1st June without his knowledge and consent.

 7. The judge explained why the Appellant did fulfil  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, as a matter of strict law,  at
    paragraph 33 of his decision:-

         "As at 1st June 2015,  the  Appellant  had  not  been  present  and
         resident in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of  ten
         years.  The  Appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  10th
         November 2007 and therefore without a continuous period  of  lawful
         residence from that  date  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

 8. Mr Sharma who appeared before me (but not in the  First-tier  Tribunal)
    accepted that the above statement is true so far as it goes.   However,
    the error of law contended for in grounds 1, 2 and  4  of  the  instant
    appeal, is that the judge erred in failing to go on  to  consider  what
    the position would have  been  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to consider the human rights claim and/or
    his representative had not purported to withdraw that claim without his
    authority.  If neither of those things had  happened,  he  argued,  the
    appellant would have acquired continuous lawful residence  through  the
    operation of Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 (statutory leave to
    remain pending the determination of an  extant  application  or  appeal
    against refusal) and would thus have fulfilled the  requirements  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. It is argued that  this  is  a
    matter to which the judge ought to have  attached  considerable  weight
    when  assessing  the  Appellant's  rights  under  Article  8   of   the
    Convention.

 9. Whilst it is undoubtedly correct that Judge McIntosh did  not  consider
    these arguments, I have concluded that they are in any  event  unsound.
    This is for the following reasons.

10. It will be recalled that prior to the commencement of the amendments to
    section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, made by
    the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from the 5th April 2015, it was  a
    ground of appeal against  an  'immigration  decision'  that  discretion
    under the Immigration Rules ought to have been  exercised  differently.
    It was however never the case that the Secretary of State's  discretion
    to grant leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  was  something
    which the Tribunal could  exercise,  either  directly,  or  indirectly,
    through the operation of Article 8.  This was  for  the  simple  reason
    that the wording of the former ground of appeal expressly  stated  that
    the discretion that was subject to review by the Tribunal had to be one
    "conferred" by the Rules.  The reason that  the  discretion  could  not
    then (and  cannot  now)  be  exercised  by  the  Tribunal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, is that Article 8 does not confer a dispensing power
    (see Patel v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC
    72, per Lord Carnwath at paragraph 57).

11. Mr Sharma sought  to  persuade  me  that  there  was  discretion  under
    paragraph 276B to treat certain periods of residence as  'lawful'  when
    it would otherwise not be considered as such. However, it is clear from
    the Home Office Guidance on which he relied, that such discretion  does
    in fact lie outside the  Rules  (See  footnote  2  to  the  Appellant's
    Skeleton Argument that  was  submitted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal).
    Moreover, even if it  were  possible  to  construe  paragraph  276B  as
    containing such a discretion, it seems to me that Mr Sharma's  argument
    in truth amounts to the reintroduction of a  former  ground  of  appeal
    (that discretion conferred by the Rules ought to  have  been  exercised
    differently)  under  the  guise  of  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention. Finally, even if the above analysis is flawed,  it  remains
    the case  that  Mr  Sharma's  argument  is  ultimately  dependent  upon
    assuming a favourable exercise of  discretion  in  an  application  for
    leave to remain under paragraph 276B that has  never  been  made.   The
    exercise of that discretion in turn depends  upon  an  assumed  factual
    matrix that has yet to be proven. It is this to which I now turn.

12. It is right to say that in very limited circumstances the negligence of
    a representative can be relevant to the exercise of the judgment  under
    Article 8.  Those circumstances were considered in Mansur  (Immigration
    adviser's findings, Article 8) [2017]  UKUT  (IAC)  274,  the  relevant
    passage from which is helpfully set out at paragraph 7 of  the  Grounds
    of Appeal. In short, a blatant failure by  an  immigration  advisor  to
    follow P's instructions as found by the professional  regulator,  which
    led directly to P's application for leave being invalid when  it  would
    otherwise have been likely to have been granted, can amount to  such  a
    rare  case  of  negligent  advice  being  relevant  to  the  Article  8
    consideration.  However,  this  case  does  not  come  close  to   that
    situation.  Before any responsible regulator (or indeed  any  judge  of
    the Tribunal) could say that there had been such negligence,  it  would
    be necessary to give the representative the opportunity to  respond  to
    the allegation, which may of course be  disputed.  In  this  case,  the
    judge had only the Appellant's word  to  support  his  claim  that  his
    former representative had acted without instructions. That  is  not  to
    say that the Appellant  is  being  untruthful  in  making  that  claim.
    However, it would be quite inappropriate, and of  itself  an  error  of
    law, for the Tribunal to find an allegation of professional malpractice
    proved without giving the  accused  representative  an  opportunity  to
    respond to such a grave allegation.

13. I can deal with Grounds 3 and 5 rather more shortly.

14. Ground 3 is what Mr Sharma appropriately characterised as a  procedural
    ground.  It arises from what  the  judge  said  about  the  burden  and
    standard of proof at paragraph 10 of the decision: "The burden is  upon
    the Appellant to show that he is able to meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules".  That direction is challenged on the basis that the
    judge ought to have directed himself  that,  whilst  the  burden  under
    Article 8(1) rests with the Appellant, the burden  under  Article  8(2)
    shifts to the Respondent.

15. Use of the term "burden of proof" is often, as it  seems  to  me,  used
    quite loosely to mean  a  number  of  different  things.  Strictly,  it
    describes which party to the proceedings bears the  burden  of  proving
    the primary facts.  This applies regardless of the context in which  it
    is used, be it the application of the Immigration Rules, Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention, or  indeed  any  other  context  within  a
    statutory or regulatory framework. The question of who bears  the  onus
    of establishing that there is a public in a qualified right  under  the
    Human Rights Convention is not therefore a question of  proof  at  all.
    Rather, it is a matter of demonstrating the  existence  of  the  public
    interest upon established facts. Thus, as Lord Bingham observed in R  v
    SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 -

         "Where removal is proposed in pursuance  of  a  lawful  immigration
         policy, question  (4)  will  almost  always  fall  to  be  answered
         affirmatively. This is  because  the  right  of  sovereign  states,
         subject to treaty obligations, to regulate the entry and  expulsion
         of aliens is recognised in the Strasbourg jurisprudence (see  Ullah
         and  Do,  para  6)  and  implementation  of  a  firm  and   orderly
         immigration policy is an important  function  of  government  in  a
         modern democratic state. In the  absence  of  bad  faith,  ulterior
         motive or deliberate abuse of  power  it  is  hard  to  imagine  an
         adjudicator answering this question other than affirmatively.

         The question of whether there is a legitimate  public  interest  in
         excluding or removing somebody will  normally  always  be  answered
         affirmatively by reference  to  the  need  to  maintain  consistent
         immigration controls in furtherance of the  economic  wellbeing  of
         the country.  It is not in truth really a matter of proof  at  all,
         and so whilst as I have acknowledged the judge might have expressed
         the burden and standard of proof more precisely,  overall  it  does
         not seem to me to be a material consideration in  deciding  whether
         or not this was a safe decision." [Emphasis added]

    I therefore conclude that whilst  Judge  McIntosh's  self-direction  in
    relation to the burden and standard of proof could  perhaps  have  been
    more clearly expressed, it did not constitute an error of law.

16. The fifth ground attacks the judge's analysis of the  appellant's  case
    under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convection.  His  conclusion,  at
    paragraph 36, was short and to the point:-

         "I have given consideration whether Article 8 ECHR  is  engaged  in
         this case.  I find having regard to the five stage Razgar test [R v
         Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27]  the
         proposed removal of the Appellant would amount to  an  interference
         of the private life the Appellant has established  in  the  UK.   I
         find the  Article  is  engaged  and  the  decision  to  remove  the
         Appellant is in accordance  with  the  law.   On  the  question  of
         balance of proportionality, I find the  interference  is  necessary
         and proportionate to the  legitimate  aims  to  maintain  effective
         immigration control."

17. The criticism made in the fifth ground concerns  the  judge's  apparent
    suggestion, at  paragraph  35,  that  the  only  matter  on  which  the
    Appellant relied by way of a significant obstacle to his re-integration
    in Bangladesh was the likely difficulty  he  would  face  in  obtaining
    employment.  It was however also the Appellant's  case,  based  upon  a
    letter from his father, that his cousins were  threatening  to  assault
    him on return to Bangladesh due to a family land dispute, and that this
    threat posed a further obstacle to his integration. It  is  undoubtedly
    the case that the judge failed to consider this. However, it could  not
    in my judgement have affected the outcome of the appeal.  Taken at  its
    highest, the evidence was of nothing more than a threatened assault  on
    return to Bangladesh without there being any suggestion that the  local
    police would be unable or unwilling  to  provide  him  with  sufficient
    protection against that threat. This  could  not  in  my  judgement  be
    considered as an obstacle to integration at  all,  let  alone  a  "very
    significant" one. Moreover, the Appellant did not advance any  lack  of
    cultural, social or family ties to Bangladesh, which form the  mainstay
    of what are generally considered to  be  obstacles  to  integration.  I
    therefore conclude  that  the  judge's  omission  in  this  regard  was
    immaterial.

18. I have thus concluded that insofar as any of the matters raised in  the
    grounds of appeal could be appropriately characterised  as  'errors  of
    law', they were immaterial to the outcome of  the  appeal  and  do  not
    undermine the safety of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  If  it  is
    necessary to do so, I accordingly exercise my discretion by not setting
    aside that decision.

Notice of Decision

19. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 20th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 20th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

