
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20328/2016
                                                               HU/20331/2016
                                                               HU/20333/2016
                                                               HU/20335/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                           |On 9 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                          [J W C] (FIRST appellant)
                          [J C] (SECOND appellant)
                          MIN [W] (THIRD appellant)
                          [S C] (FOURTH appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr O Norr, Counsel instructed by Visa & Immigration
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rowlands promulgated on 5 December 2017.  The appeal concerns a  family
    unit, the mother being the third appellant and the three children being
    the first, second and fourth respectively. They are now aged 13, 8  and
    rising 7.

2.   The four appellants are all citizens of  South  Korea  and  the  mother
    came to this country with the benefit  of  a  student  visa  which  was
    extended on various occasions. However, the visa is  now  long  expired
    and the mother is a chronic over-stayer.

3.   The judge concluded that the children's best  interests  "lie  in  them
    being together as a family" [15] and that the family should be returned
    to South Korea.

4.   A renewed application for  permission  to  appeal  came  before  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor and was granted in the following terms:

         "The grounds argue,  with  merit,  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
         considering the rights of the children, two of whom are 'qualifying
         children' as individuals as well as in the context of the family as
         a whole.


         It is also arguable that this brief determination did not  properly
         engage with all of the evidence before the judge.


         MT and ET (child's best  interests  -  ex  tempore  pilot)  Nigeria
         [2018] UKUT 00088 was not promulgated at the time  of  the  hearing
         before the judge, but will be relevant if it is  decided  that  the
         decision needs to be re-made".


5.   Ms Willocks-Briscoe on behalf of the Secretary of State  very  properly
    accepted that the decision could not safely be upheld  because  it  was
    defective in the manner in which it  dealt  with  the  family  unit  as
    opposed to treating each child individually and  assessing  their  best
    interests. This is primary consideration albeit not determinative.  The
    children (two of whom  are  'qualifying  children')  are  at  different
    developmental changes and the level of their social integration is  not
    the same. The judge failed to give any consideration to the  respective
    interest of each child. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be
    set aside.

6.   The error of law goes  to  the  very  heart  of  the  decision.  It  is
    inevitable, as Mr Norr for the appellants rightly recognises, that this
    matter will need to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
    afresh.


7.   I make clear in the hearing of the mother that although  I  am  setting
    aside this decision and remitting it to the First-tier Tribunal, it  is
    perfectly possible that when applying the law correctly that First-tier
    Tribunal may come to exactly the same conclusion.


Notice of decision


   1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
      set aside.


   2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  to
      be reheard by a judge other than Judge Rowlands.


   3) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         5 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



