
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20661/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2020                            |On 13 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                               Temiloluwa [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen of Counsel, instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 27 August 1989.  She arrived
in the UK as a visitor on 29 December 2006 and on 8 February 2014 submitted
an application based on her private and family life in the UK.  This
application was refused with no right of appeal.  She made a further
application on 29 September 2017, which was refused with the right of
appeal.  The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burnett
for hearing on 30 April 2019.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 14
June 2019 the judge dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal was sought on the following bases:

Firstly, in finding that there was no family life between the Appellant and
her mother and siblings, all of whom were British, the judge erred in his
complete failure to have regard to or consider the history of this
particular family and the clear evidence of the role played by the
Appellant within the family.  Given it was and is the Appellant's case,
supported by evidence from her mother, from an independent social worker,
from numerous testimonials, the Church and her siblings that the
relationship that the Appellant has with her siblings is more as a second
parent than one of a sibling.  It follows that the judge's findings as to
whether the Appellant was in a parental relationship with her brothers with
reference to section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 was further flawed.

The judge erred in finding it would be reasonable for the Appellant's
siblings to leave the UK in that he failed to have regard to the evidence
before him and what would indeed be reasonable in the real world.

Thirdly, the judge's assessment of proportionality was flawed as a
consequence and he further failed to have regard to material evidence and
factors, in particular: (i) the impact upon the Appellant's family members,
her mother and minor siblings; (ii) in failing to take account of the fact
that the Appellant had arrived in the UK as a minor; (iii) in failing to
consider the significant contribution made by the Appellant to society in
the UK and (iv) in failing to take account of the significant difficulties
she would face as a young single woman if returned to Nigeria.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  in  a
decision dated    16 January 2019, on the basis that,  "arguably  the  judge
erred in assessing whether the  Appellant had family life  with  her  mother
and siblings given their uncommon    circumstances.   It  is  also  arguable
that a number of relevant factors  were  not  considered  as   part  of  the
proportionality assessment".

     Hearing

4.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Allen on behalf of the
Appellant     submitted that the judge had failed to consider much of the
evidence and issues    before him when concluding there was no family life
between the Appellant and her   mother and her two brothers and that
flowing from that error there were further   errors as to whether the
relationship was akin to a parental relationship, the     reasonableness
arguments relating to section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 and the
proportionality of removal of the Appellant.  Ms Allen submitted at [43]
the focus     there by the judge in relation to the Appellant's Article 8
claim outside the Rules was     outside the UK, the fact that the
Appellant's grandmother was in Nigeria, rather than   to consider the
Appellant's relationship with her mother and brothers within the UK    and
whether they constituted one family unit.

5.   Ms Allen submitted the judge failed to consider the history of the
family.  Although      the judge had considered some relevant case law
highlighting issues relating to     family dependency she submitted that he
completely failed to factor those cases into     his assessment of the case
but rather makes little reference to the evidence.  There is a     history
of domestic violence.  The Appellant's stepfather absconded from the family
     and there are, perhaps as a consequence, close bonds between the
Appellant, her    mother and her half-brothers.

6.   The Appellant's role within the family was an important one. This was
attested to not   just by the family members but also by Church members and
the fact that she is the   parental contact in relation to her half-
brothers' schooling.  Ms Allen submitted the     Appellant had effectively
stepped into the shoes of the absent parent consistently  and full-time.
At [48] the judge acknowledged the Appellant has assisted her  mother.
However, the evidence was more than this.  The Appellant was making
decisions on their behalf, not just in respect of day-to-day issues.  For
example, the  fact that the two brothers had been sent to school in Nigeria
for a brief period was a   joint decision taken by her and her mother.  She
had in those circumstances put her  brothers first and acted as their
parent.

7.   The Appellant was financially dependent on her mother and in the
supplementary     bundle was evidence of cultural traditions relating to
single women in Nigeria.  This  is not considered or referred to at all in
the judge's decision, nor is the report of the   independent social worker
as to the impact of separation on the remaining family    members.  There
was little consideration by the judge as to the history of the appeal,
how the Appellant came to the UK.  The Appellant's mother arrived in 2004
and the  Appellant visited her during the school holidays in 2004, 2005 and
in June 2006  where she remained for six months, returned to Nigeria and
then came back to the  UK before the end of December the same year.  The
Appellant was 16 when she first     arrived for a longer period of time and
is clearly part of the family unit.

8.   Ms Allen also sought to clarify the issue as to why no leave was given
at that  stage, given that the Appellant's stepfather had refugee status.
This appears to be     because the Appellant's mother married him after the
grant of refugee status and     was thus a post-flight spouse and returned
to Nigeria in June 2007 order to obtain      entry clearance, which was
subsequently granted.

9.   In relation to the judge's finding at [49] that it would be reasonable
for the  Appellant's half-siblings to leave the UK there is, Ms Allen
submitted, little      recognition that they are only in school in Nigeria
temporarily and that apart from     the short nine month period they have
lived all their lives in the UK: see [13] of the      grounds of appeal.
In relation to proportionality, therefore, the relevant factors were   not
considered and the decision is unsafe.  This is addressed at [14] of the
grounds  onwards.  There was little consideration of the actual evidence
and impact on family   members of separation in light of the Appellant's
arrival as a minor aged 16 as a     consequence of the decision taken by
her mother that she come to join family      members here.

10.  The Appellant has no experience of living in Nigeria as an adult and
little prior  experience, given she previously lived with parents and then
at a boarding school.      Ms Allen submitted the evidence is she would
have difficulties even getting onto the      employment ladder were she to
be returned.  The Appellant has undertaken   substantial voluntary work in
the UK but this is not addressed or factored in by the    judge.  She
submitted that taken altogether, this undermined the judge's conclusions.

11.  In her submissions, Ms Everett asserted that the judge had factored in
the evidence  before him and come to sustainable conclusions in relation to
the argument that there    was family life.  She submitted the judge was
entitled to find the Appellant had not  taken on a parental role.  He was
entitled to consider the fact that the two boys are   now at boarding
school in Nigeria and to reach the conclusions he did.  Ms Everett     drew
attention to the fact that the judge had correctly directed himself in
relation to   the judgment in AP (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 89 at [45] and
also at [46] to [50].  No  error had been shown in relation to the reasons
given in respect of this.

12.  Ms Everett acknowledged that all cases are fact-sensitive but there
was nothing   perverse about the reasons provided by the judge.  She
submitted the older one gets    the more one has to demonstrate to show
that there is an extant protected Article 8  family life and more evidence
of dependency is needed.  She submitted that,    regardless of the history
of the Appellant, there was nothing to demonstrate the    judge fell into
error in his consideration.  He found the Appellant did have the ability
to reintegrate into Nigeria and still had existing ties there.  She asked
that I uphold     the determination.

13.  In reply, Ms Allen submitted that there was no grappling with the
actual evidence   that was there. The Appellant's immigration history was
clearly important as   showing that family life continued and that she had
arrived as a minor and she      submitted this was not properly engaged
with by the judge: see [60] of the skeleton  argument and [57] of the
decision.

14.  I found a material error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Burnett and      agreed that the decision needed to be set aside and
remade de novo.  I now give my  reasons for so finding.

     Findings and reasons

15.  I consider that the First tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law
in his analysis of     whether or not there is family life between the
Appellant and her mother and half   siblings. At [47]-[50] the Judge held:

     "47. ...Although the family has been through some difficult times in
the past, I consider that  there is nothing beyond the normal emotional
ties between the appellant and her mother.

     48. Likewise, I consider that there is nothing beyond the normal
emotional ties between the      appellant and her brothers.... I
acknowledge and find that the appellant has assisted her  mother over the
years with the care of her brothers. As an older sibling, that is common in
     many families. I do not consider that her relationship with them
amounts to a "parental     relationship."

     49. ... On the basis of the facts as presented to me, I find that the
Appellant cannot meet the  requirements of section 117B(6). I also find
that the relationships she has with her mother and    brothers amounts to
private life within the Convention and not "family life."

     50. I find that the appellant does not have "family life" in the
Convention sense with her  relatives in the UK. There is a close bond which
has been demonstrated on the oral evidence   and documents presented to
me."

16.  I find that it is unclear from the Judge's findings why he considered
that the      Appellant does not have family life with her mother and half-
siblings, in light of the  evidence before him, which was not disputed by
the Respondent. This evidence was   that the Appellant has resided
continuously with her mother since her arrival in the     UK in December
2006 at age 16. Her twin half brothers were 18 months old at the   time.
Her mother's relationship with her stepfather broke down following domestic
     violence and he left the family home and they were rendered homeless
in 2013. The  Appellant's evidence, which was supported by that of her
mother, an independent     social worker, the boys' childminder and various
friends, was that she is seen as the    boys' second parent and that is her
role within the family. In light of this evidence I   find that more was
required by way of reasoning as to why the Judge found that the
Appellant did not have family life with her mother and siblings. The fact
that her      brothers were temporarily absent at boarding school in
Nigeria for 9 months cannot     properly materially impact on whether
family life was established, as such ties    cannot easily be broken by
such an absence.


17.  Further, whilst the Appellant's then representative sought to  rely  on
the judgment of   the Court of Appeal in AP (India) [2015] EWCA  Civ  89  at
[45]-[47] which the Judge  sets out at [45] of the decision and  reasons,  I
find that he  failed  to  apply  that    judgment.  It  is  clear  from  the
subsequent jurisprudence  on  the  point  that  what  is     required  is  a
"careful consideration of all  the  relevant  facts"  cf.  Lord  Dyson  M.R.
in Gurung [2013] 1 WLR 2546 at [45] and see also Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320. I
find that     the Judge failed so to do in this particular case.

18.  I find that the remaining grounds of appeal are also made out, in  that
the Judge's   finding that the Appellant did not qualify  for  consideration
under  section  117B(6)   of  the  NIAA   2002   and   his   assessment   of
proportionality are unsustainable, following      his  erroneous  assessment
of whether or not there is family  life  between  the  Appellant    and  her
mother and siblings.

19.  For the reasons set out above, the decision and reasons of the First
tier tribunal Judge    must be set aside and the appeal needs to be remade.
Given that the grounds of  appeal sought only to challenge the Judge's
findings in respect of Article 8 of ECHR,    outside the Immigration Rules,
his findings relating to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the  Immigration Rules
stand as they are unchallenged. I remit the appeal for re-making   on the
issue of Article 8 and proportionality only.





Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent of being remitted for a hearing de  novo
confined to consideration of Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 10 February 2020


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

