
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20967/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th December 2019                |On 13th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  PETER [F]
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Salam, Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. He arrived  in  the  UK  on
         17th July 2012 with a student visa valid until 1st  December  2012.
         In July 2013 he made an application for an EEA residence card.  The
         appellant and his spouse were interviewed  separately  in  December
         2013, and in February 2014 the application  for  an  EEA  residence
         card was refused.  That decision was subsequently withdrawn by  the
         respondent for further enquiries. Meanwhile, in December  2015  the
         appellant was charged for his part in a  conspiracy  to  facilitate
         the commission of a breach of UK immigration law.  On  17th  August
         2016 he was convicted at Wolverhampton Crown Court of conspiring to
         do  an  act  to  facilitate  the  commission  of  a  breach  of  UK
         immigration law and possession/control of identity  documents  with
         intent.  On 21st October 2016 he was sentenced to  3  years  and  6
         months imprisonment.


      2. Following that conviction, on 3rd November 2016 the  appellant  was
         served with a decision to deport pursuant to  the  Immigration  Act
         1971 and UK Borders Act 2007.  The appellant's representatives made
         representations on 18th June 2017, 27th  June  2017,  25th  October
         2017 and 22nd March 2018 setting out why he should not be deported.
         A deportation order was made against the appellant  and  his  human
         rights claim was refused for the reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
         dated 5th October 2018.  That decision gave rise to an appeal  that
         was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson ("the judge") on 20th
         February 2019. The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out  in
         a decision promulgated on 27th February 2019.


    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson


      3. The judge noted, at [5], that the appellant has been sentenced to a
         period of at least 12 months imprisonment.   The  judge  noted,  at
         [6], there are certain  exceptions  to  the  automatic  deportation
         provisions set out in s33 UK Borders Act 2007.  One such  exception
         is where the removal of the foreign criminal in  pursuance  of  the
         deportation order would breach the person's  Convention  rights  or
         the United Kingdom's obligations under the refugee Convention.


      4. In considering whether the deportation of the appellant would be in
         breach of Article 8 ECHR, the judge turned  to  paragraphs  398  to
         399D of the  immigration  rules.   The  judge  noted  the  relevant
         provisions are paragraphs 399(a) and (b) and paragraph 399A of  the
         immigration rules.  At paragraph [11], the judge stated:


             "In accordance with paragraph 399A(a) the  appellant  has  not
             shown that he has been lawfully resident for most of his  life
             in the UK. The appellant agreed that the history as set out in
             the refusal letter was correct and this shows that  the  first
             period of  lawful  leave  that  the  appellant  had  was  from
             01.06.12 to 01.12.12. This was agreed by  the  appellant,  who
             took  no  issue  with  the  history  as   recounted   in   the
             respondent's refusal letter. He cannot satisfy this exception.

      5. In any event, for the reasons set out at paragraphs [32]  to  [34],
         the judge also found  that  the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the
         requirements of paragraph 399A(b) and (c). That is,  the  appellant
         is not socially and culturally integrated in the UK and there would
         not be very significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria.


      6. The Article 8 claim based upon the  appellant's  relationship  with
         his partner and child  is  summarised  at  paragraph  [17]  of  the
         decision;


             "The appellant stressed his relationship with  the  child  and
             partner. The partner gave evidence that the child, and the new
             child to be born would go to Nigeria with  the  appellant  and
             she would remain in the UK to pursue  her  education,  if  the
             appeal failed. The  appellant's  submissions  were  that  this
             would place the children in a terrible position."

      7. It was  uncontroversial  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with his son who was born on  16th
         January 2017 and is a  British  citizen.  The  issue  was  twofold.
         First, whether it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live  in
         Nigeria, and second, whether it would be unduly harsh for the child
         to remain in the UK without the appellant.   The  judge  states  at
         [24] and [25]:


             "24. Ms Walker gave oral evidence that if  the  appeal  failed
             that the child, and expected child, would go to  Nigeria  with
             the appellant. This is a choice that the family can  make  and
             her evidence is that she wishes to pursue her  education,  has
             no family support and therefore the  children  would  have  to
             leave the UK, be deprived of their mother and would be  unable
             to access proper education  and  healthcare  in  Nigeria.  The
             appellant stated  that  he  worried  that  his  son  would  be
             kidnapped by  Bokul  Harum.  The  appellant  has  produced  no
             evidence that education is not available  in  Nigeria  and  no
             evidence of specific threats against him or  his  family.  The
             appellant himself has stated that he was a  maritime  engineer
             and mechanic in Nigeria and has access to education there. The
             appellant is in touch with his mother and  also  has  siblings
             outside Nigeria, but near to the border. This will  assist  in
             integration and give family  links  to  his  children  if  the
             family choose  that  the  children  go  to  Nigeria  with  the
             appellant. I have not been shown that it is unduly  harsh  for
             the child to relocate to Nigeria. He is  young  and  adaptable
             and can settle. His best interests are provided for  by  being
             with one or both of his parents. Paragraph  399(a)(a)  is  not
             satisfied."

             25.  Ms Walker looked after the child whilst the appellant was
             in prison on her own. She states that her  education  is  very
             important to her and that she will not be able to pursue it if
             the appellant is not there. She is no worse position than many
             other persons who have to juggle family life,  and  their  own
             plans for education and work. She has the option in the UK  of
             having state assistance  by  way  of  benefits  and  childcare
             places and the fact that she may find it more difficult or may
             have to postpone plans because of  childcare  responsibilities
             does not make it unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
             UK without the appellant. The mother will,  undoubtedly,  make
             sure her son is safe and well as will she for  the  future  of
             the child. The appellant's imprisonment caused the separation,
             and she  has  managed.  There  is  nothing  in  this  family's
             circumstances  that  make  the  effect  of   the   appellant's
             deportation unduly harsh upon the child, existing  and  future
             or upon Ms Walker."

      8. The judge had already stated in the closing sentence  of  paragraph
         [25] that there is nothing in this family's circumstances that make
         the effect of the appellant's  deportation  unduly  harsh  upon  Ms
         Walker.  It was uncontroversial that the appellant  has  a  genuine
         and subsisting relationship  with  Ms  Walker,  who  is  a  British
         citizen. The issue was threefold. First, whether that  relationship
         was formed at a time when the appellant was in the UK lawfully  and
         his immigration status was  not  precarious.   Second,  whether  it
         would be unduly harsh for Ms Walker to live in Nigeria  because  of
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM.  Third, whether it would  be  unduly
         harsh for Ms Walker to remain in the UK without the appellant.


      9. The judge found, at [27], the relationship  between  the  appellant
         and Ms Walker was formed at a time when the appellant was in the UK
         unlawfully.   The  appellant  could  not  therefore  benefit   from
         paragraph 399(b) of the immigration rules and the  public  interest
         in his deportation could only be outweighed by other factors  where
         there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
         described in paragraph 399 of the immigration rules.  Nevertheless,
         for the sake of completeness the judge stated, at [28] to [31]:


             "28. ...I find that Ms Walker can remain in the UK without the
             appellant. It  would  not  be  unduly  harsh.  She  has  lived
             successfully in the  UK  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the
             relationship.  Their  relationship  is  of  relatively   short
             duration. The appellant has deprived her  of  his  company  by
             virtue of his imprisonment and I have no evidence before me of
             any harsh consequences that have resulted for Ms Walker in her
             life on her own. She looked after her son on her own. She  has
             given oral evidence and states that she wishes to  pursue  her
             studies and that she will not  be  able  to  do  this  if  the
             appellant is not there to look after her children.

             29.  Ms Walker confirmed in oral  evidence  that  she  has  no
             particular health difficulties that would make the appellant's
             deportation unduly harsh upon her.

             ...

             31.  Ms Walker has stated that she would not  go  to  Nigeria.
             There is nothing that forces her to do so. But b. She may wish
             not to go, but this is  not  the  same  as  an  insurmountable
             obstacle. English is an official language of Nigeria and  this
             will assist her if she chooses to go. There are no  compelling
             circumstances over  and  above  the  insurmountable  obstacles
             required for paragraph 399(b)(ii). The exceptions contained in
             the rules do not apply to the appellant circumstances.

     10. Having addressed paragraphs 399(a) and (b) and  paragraph  399A  of
         the immigration rules, the judge  addressed  the  Article  8  claim
         outside the rules and whether the public interest in deportation is
         outweighed by other compelling circumstances over and  above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration rules.  The
         judge referred to s117C of the  2002  Act  and  at  paragraph  [40]
         concluded:


             "In considering the Article 8 claim outside of  the  Rules,  I
             find that the public interest in deporting the Appellant,  who
             is a foreign criminal and who committed a serious  offence  is
             not outweighed by the appellant's stated desire to  remain  in
             the UK and be with his partner and son and child to  be.   The
             public interest is not outweighed by  the  partner's  wish  to
             continue her studies and for the appellant to assist in  child
             care, nor is it outweighed by anything in  the  child's  bests
             interests and it is for all of those reasons that  the  appeal
             is refused.".





    The appeal before me


     11. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf on  3rd
         May 2019.  The judge noted that since the refusal of permission  to
         appeal by the FtT, a Presidential panel of the Upper  Tribunal  has
         considered the interpretation of s117C and the relationship between
         it and the provisions of paragraph 399 of the immigration rules  in
         MS (s117C(6): very  compelling  circumstances)  Philippines  [2019]
         UKUT 122 and RA (s117C: unduly harsh;  offence;  seriousness)  Iraq
         [2019] UKUT123.  In granting permission, the judge  indicated  that
         the  appellant's  advocate  will  need  to  have  given  these  two
         decisions careful consideration.


     12. Mr Salam refers to paragraph [28] of the decision.  He submits that
         having found that the appellant's relationship with his partner was
         formed at a time when the appellant was in the UK  unlawfully,  the
         judge completed what is a meaningless assessment as to  whether  it
         would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's  partner  to  live  in
         Nigeria because of compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
         described paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM, and as to whether it would
         be harsh for the appellant's partner to remain in  the  UK  without
         the appellant.   He submits the judge was of the view that  she  is
         not required to make findings in relation to paragraphs  399(b)(ii)
         and (iii), and in light of that, carried out nothing  more  than  a
         superficial analysis "for the sake of completeness".


     13. The appellant claims that although the judge recited  the  relevant
         provisions of  the  immigration  rules,  she  did  not  recite  the
         provisions of s117C of the 2002 Act and erred by focusing upon  the
         provisions  of  the  immigration  rules.   It  is  said   that   in
         considering whether the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  on
         his partner and child would be unduly harsh, the judge required the
         appellant to establish whether there are  compelling  circumstances
         over and above those described paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM,  when
         in fact that is a requirement under s117C(6) of the 2002  Act,  and
         only applies where the foreign criminal has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years. Mr Salam submits the
         'unduly  harsh'  test  was  not  properly  considered  because  the
         appellant was unrepresented, but Mr Salam was  unable  to  identify
         any relevant evidence that was before the FTT, that the  Judge  did
         not consider.


     14. Mr Salam accepts that the  recent  authorities  establish  that  in
         every case, there is a second stage and a Tribunal must carry out a
         wide-ranging  evaluative  exercise  in  the  case  of  all  foreign
         criminals, in order  to  ensure  that  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act
         produces, in each such case, a result that is compatible  with  the
         United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8.


     15. In reply, Mr Mills submits  the  judge  expressly  deals  with  the
         position of the child at paragraph [24] and  the  position  of  the
         appellant's partner at paragraph [28] of her decision.  The reasons
         given by  the  judge  for  her  finding  that  the  effect  of  the
         appellant's deportation upon his partner and  child  would  not  be
         unduly harsh, are perfectly adequate. The judge  did  not  need  to
         restate the reasons for those findings, and  the  appellant  simply
         disagrees with the findings that were made by the judge  that  were
         open to her.


    Discussion


     16. It is now well established that it  is  generally  unnecessary  and
         unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal  judgments  to  rehearse  every
         detail or issue raised in a case, provided the judge identifies and
         resolves key conflicts in the evidence and explains  in  clear  and
         brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can  understand  why
         they have won or lost.  The judge was not required to recite  s117C
         of the 2002 Act, provided it  is  clear  that  the  judge  properly
         applied the relevant legal framework in her decision.


     17. The judge found, at [23], the deportation of the appellant from the
         UK is conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
         because he has been convicted of an offence for which he  has  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but
         at least 12 months.  The Tribunal was required to consider  whether
         paragraphs 399 or 399A of the immigration rules apply.  If not, the
         public interest in deportation could only be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         beyond  those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and  399A   of   the
         immigration rules.


     18. At paragraphs [24] to [31], the judge found  the  appellant  cannot
         meet the requirements of paragraph 399 of  the  immigration  rules.
         Paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules  required  the  judge  to
         consider whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to live  in
         Nigeria and whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
         remain in the UK without the appellant. Having carefully considered
         the evidence including the evidence of the appellant's partner, the
         judge found, at [24], that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the
         child to relocate to Nigeria.  It is, as the judge said at [24],  a
         choice that the family can make as to whether the child remains  in
         the UK with his mother or relocates to  Nigeria  with  his  father.
         The Judge found that the child's best interests are provided for by
         being with one or both of his parents.


     19. At paragraphs [25] to [31], the judge addressed the requirements of
         paragraph  399(b)  of  the  immigration  rules.   The  judge  again
         considered the evidence of the appellant's partner  and  noted  the
         appellant's relationship with his partner was not formed at a  time
         when the appellant was in the UK lawfully as required by  paragraph
         399(b)(i)  of  the  immigration  rules.   As  the  requirement   in
         paragraph 399(b)(i) could not be met, the judge properly noted that
         she was not required to make  findings  in  relation  to  paragraph
         (b)(ii) and (iii), but nevertheless went on to consider whether  it
         would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's  partner  to  live  in
         Nigeria and whether it would be unduly harsh for her to  remain  in
         the UK without the appellant.  The Judge found that it would not be
         unduly harsh for the  appellant's  partner  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the appellant, for the reasons set out at  paragraphs  [28]
         and [29].  The judge also found that it would not be  unduly  harsh
         for the appellant's partner to live in Nigeria with  the  appellant
         for the reasons set out in paragraph [31].


     20. The authorities make it clear that "unduly harsh" does  not  equate
         with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely  difficult.
         It poses an elevated threshold and "harsh" in this context, denotes
         something severe, or bleak. It is the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
         comfortable, and the addition of  the  adverb  "unduly"  raises  an
         already elevated standard, still higher.


     21. I accept, as Mr Salam submits, that it is in the best interests  of
         any child to be cared for,  and  to  be  raised  by  both  parents.
         However, it is an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  commission  of
         serious crimes by a foreign national that there is  a  prospect  of
         deportation and separation between a child and  parent.   The  fact
         that the appellant's partner may wish to continue her education  or
         that she would have difficulties in managing and looking after  the
         child without the help she receives from the appellant, are matters
         that amount to inconvenience or mere difficulty and are the sort of
         difficulty faced by any parent when the other parent is removed. In
         my judgement, it is clear from a careful reading of the decision of
         the FtT judge that there was no doubt that the appellant's  partner
         and child would suffer some disruption to  their  lives  and  their
         lives would  be  more  difficult  if  the  appellant  is  deported.
         However, those  consequences  did  not  go  beyond  the  degree  of
         harshness which is necessarily involved for the partner or child of
         a foreign criminal who is deported.  The judge carefully considered
         the evidence given by the appellant and his partner.  I reject  the
         claim that the judge carried out a 'meaningless'  or  'superficial'
         assessment of the claim being made by the appellant.  The judge had
         regard  to  the  evidence  and  reached  findings  that  cannot  be
         described as irrational, or perverse.  The findings made were  open
         to the judge.


     22.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy   the
         requirements set out in paragraph 399A of the immigration rules for
         the reasons set out at paragraphs [32] to  [34]  of  her  decision.
         Having found that the appellant cannot benefit from paragraphs  399
         or 399A the immigration rules the judge noted, at [35], the  public
         interest in deportation can only be  outweighed  by  other  factors
         where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  No such  circumstances  were
         identified before the FtT, and Mr Salam was unable to identify  any
         such factors that had not been considered by  the  Tribunal  judge,
         before me.


     23. I accept, as Mr Mill submits that at paragraphs [36] to [41] of the
         decision, the judge considered the human rights claim  outside  the
         immigration rules. At [38], the judge is considering the additional
         public interest considerations in cases involving foreign criminals
         as set out in s117C of the  2002  Act.    Section  117C(3)  is  the
         relevant statutory provision. The appellant has not been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of four  years  or  more,  and  so  the
         public interest requires his deportation unless  exception  one  or
         exception two applies.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant  was
         involved in a serious  criminal  offence,  and  at  [38],  she  was
         referring to the two exceptions.   Exception two could  only  apply
         where the appellant is in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         with a qualifying partner or in a genuine and  subsisting  parental
         relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  the  effect  of  his
         deportation on the partner or child would  be  unduly  harsh.   The
         judge  had  already  found,  at  [24],  that  the  effect  of   the
         appellant's deportation would not be unduly harsh  for  the  child.
         As Mr Mills submits, at  [24],  the  judge  states  that  the  best
         interests are provided for, that is, the child's best interests are
         looked after sufficiently, by  being  with  one  or  other  of  the
         parents.  The judge considered it to be a choice for the family  in
         the end, as to where the child lives.  At [28], the judge found  it
         would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner to remain  in
         the UK without the appellant and at [31], found that there  are  no
         insurmountable obstacles to the family life between  the  appellant
         and his partner continuing in Nigeria if that is what  they  choose
         to do.


     24. I reject the claim by the  appellant  that  the  judge  erroneously
         focused upon the requirements of the immigration rules  and  failed
         to properly address s117C of the 2002 Act. The issue in this appeal
         was whether the appellant's deportation would be  unduly  harsh  on
         his partner and child.   Thus, if the appellant had  been  able  to
         establish that the effect of his  deportation  on  his  partner  or
         child would be  unduly  harsh,  he  would  meet  the  exception  to
         deportation set out in paragraph 399 of the Immigration  Rules,  as
         replicated in section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.


     25. The judge had had regard to the public interest considerations  set
         out in s117C of the 2002 Act.  I reject the claim  that  the  judge
         erroneously applied s117C(6) of  the  2002  Act  and  required  the
         appellant to demonstrate very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  It is  clear  from  a
         careful reading of paragraphs [37] to [40] of  her  decision,  that
         the judge was addressing s117(3) of the Act.  There is no doubt the
         deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest. For the
         same reasons that the appellant could not benefit  from  paragraphs
         399(a) and (b) of the immigration rules, it was in my judgment open
         to the judge to find that the  appellant  could  not  benefit  from
         Exception 2 set out in s117C(5) of the 2002 Act.


     26. The appellant and  his  partner  might  prefer  to  continue  their
         relationship with each other and their child, together in  the  UK,
         but that does not equate to a right to do so in law.  It was in  my
         judgement  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  there  are  no
         exceptional circumstances capable of establishing that  the  public
         interest in the deportation of the appellant is outweighed by other
         factors, such that it amounts to  a  disproportionate  interference
         with the appellants right to enjoyment of family life.  It  was  in
         my judgment open to the judge to dismiss the appeal for the reasons
         given by the judge.


     27. The decision of First-tier Tribunal judge Watson is not tainted  by
         an error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


    Notice of Decision


     28. The appeal is dismissed


     29. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson stands.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction.   No
    application for an anonymity direction was made before me, and no  such
    direction is made.

    Signed                                  Date     20th December 2019


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





    TO THE RESPONDENT


    FEE AWARD

    I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.




    Signed                                  Date     20th December 2019


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








