

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20408/2018 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 14 January 2021                             |On: 29 January 2021           |
|                                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                     AAC
                           (Anonymity Order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T Adams instructed by BID
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing, by way of skype  for  business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. Although a prior request  had  been
made by the appellant for a face-to-face hearing, there was no objection  at
the hearing to it proceeding  remotely  and  in  any  event  there  were  no
problems arising which undermined the fairness of the proceedings.

The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 16 August  1972.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 5 December 2002 on a visit visa and overstayed.  He
came to light on 19 September 2003 when he was arrested for handling  stolen
goods (credit cards) and, according to the respondent, he  was  served  with
illegal entry papers the following  day  and  was  released  with  reporting
restrictions. He came to light again following his arrest on 18  March  2005
for conspiracy to obtain  computers  and  computer  equipment  from  IBM  by
deception, for which he was convicted and sentenced on 16 September 2005  to
three years' imprisonment. A deportation order was issued against him on  10
July 2006 and he was deported on 25 August 2006.

Shortly after his deportation, in November or December 2006,  the  appellant
returned to the UK  in  breach  of  the  deportation  order  and,  in  2007,
obtained  a  mortgage  by  fraud.  Some  nine  years  later,  following   an
immigration enforcement visit on 14  December  2016,  he  was  arrested  and
charged with using false documents. On  17  December  2016  he  applied  for
leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  family  and  private  life  and  his
application was treated as representations requesting the revocation of  the
Deportation Order. On 18 December 2016 he was served with  a  notice  as  an
illegal entrant who had returned to  the  UK  in  breach  of  a  Deportation
Order. On 14 November 2017 and 19 March 2018 the appellant was convicted  on
four counts, one of dishonestly making false representations to make a  gain
for himself (in relation to the mortgage) and  three  counts  of  possessing
identity documents (driving licence) with intent.  He  was  sentenced  to  a
total of two years' imprisonment (eight months for each  of  counts  one  to
three and two years  for  count  four,  all  to  run  concurrently).  On  26
September 2018 the respondent refused the  appellant's  human  rights  claim
and refused to revoke the Deportation Order previously issued against him.

In that  decision,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  an
established family life with his British partner and daughter, M,  and  with
his partner's daughter from a previous relationship, J, but did  not  accept
that it would be unduly harsh for his partner and the children  to  relocate
with him to Nigeria or for them  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  him.  The
respondent  found  that  the  appellant  could  not,  therefore,  meet   the
requirements in paragraph 399(a) or (b). The respondent considered that  the
appellant could not meet the requirements in paragraph 399A on the basis  of
his private life as he had not been in the  UK  lawfully  for  most  of  his
life, he was not significantly socially and culturally integrated in the  UK
and there would be no very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in
Nigeria. The respondent  considered  that  there  were  no  very  compelling
circumstances outweighing the public interest in deportation  and  that  the
appellant's deportation would not breach his Article 8 human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal  was  heard  on  11
December 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brewer and  was  dismissed  in  a
decision  promulgated  on  17  December  2019.  The  judge  heard  from  the
appellant and his wife. He noted that the appellant had used a large  number
of aliases in the UK and that he was found with a number of fake  documents,
when arrested in 2016, some of which related to documents used to  obtain  a
mortgage in November 2007. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that  he
had simply kept  the  documents  and  had  not  used  them  after  2007  and
considered that he was seeking to minimise the seriousness of his  offences.
The judge also rejected the appellant's claim  that  he  had  committed  the
mortgage fraud in order to provide a home  for  his  family  and  considered
that he had lied in claiming as such before the  Crown  Court  judge.  Judge
Brewer found that the appellant and his partner's evidence was  inconsistent
and lacking in credibility and he had concerns about the  conclusions  in  a
social worker's  report  in  relation  to  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
deportation on the children. Whilst he accepted that the best  interests  of
the children lay in remaining with their parents, the judge  concluded  that
the consequences of deportation would not  be  unduly  harsh  and  that  the
appellant's deportation was  proportionate.  He  accordingly  dismissed  the
appeal on human rights grounds.

Following the grant of permission  to  appeal  the  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, the matter came before me to decide the error of  law  issue.  Due
to the circumstances relating to coronavirus, and  in  the  absence  of  any
objection by the parties, the matter was decided on  the  papers  without  a
hearing. In a decision promulgated on 5 October 2020,  I  found  that  Judge
Brewer had materially erred in law and I  set  aside  his  decision  on  the
following basis:

         "11. As for the first ground,  the  challenge  is  to  the  judge's
         assessment of credibility  and  the  assertion  is  made  that  the
         assessment was based upon speculation, particularly with regard  to
         the reasons given for rejecting the appellant's claim not  to  have
         used fake documentation after 2007. I accept that the fact that the
         appellant was charged with 'possession  with  intent'  was  not  in
         itself necessarily a reason for concluding that the  appellant  was
         not credible in his claim not to have used the documentation  after
         2007. However, there were various other reasons given by the  judge
         for making the adverse credibility findings that  he  did  and  for
         rejecting the appellant's account, starting with the fact  that  he
         had committed fraud and used  fraudulent  documentation,  which  in
         itself was a proper basis upon which to make adverse findings.  The
         judge also had the benefit of hearing from the  appellant  and  his
         partner and assessing their evidence as presented before him and at
         [13] he identified inconsistencies between their accounts of  their
         living arrangements which were relevant to the motivation  for  the
         mortgage  fraud.  The  challenge  to  the  judge's  assessment   of
         credibility at [5] and [6] are little more than disagreements  with
         the judge's findings and it seems to me that the  judge  was  fully
         entitled to have the concerns that he did and to make the  findings
         that he did.


         12. However, I find merit in the assertions in the second and third
         grounds. I accept that the  judge's  consideration  of  the  social
         worker's report was cursory and failed properly to engage with  the
         concerns raised therein. The grounds at [8] also have merit in  the
         assertion that the judge failed to consider and  make  findings  on
         relevant evidence and take account of relevant factors, and I  note
         the absence of any assessment by the  judge  of  the  risk  of  re-
         offending. I would also add that, whilst not included  as  part  of
         the grounds of challenge, the judge appears to have  conflated  the
         issues of "unduly harsh" and proportionality, taking account of the
         public interest and the appellant's  criminality  as  part  of  the
         unduly harsh assessment, contrary to the guidance in KO (Nigeria) &
         Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Respondent)
         [2018] UKSC 53, and failing to make a separate assessment  of  very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   the   exceptions   to
         deportation. Whilst it may well be that the outcome  would  be  the
         same, the absence of such a full and proper  assessment  undermines
         the sustainability of the judge's decision.


         13. For all these reasons I accept that the judge materially  erred
         in law and that his decision must be set aside, albeit to a limited
         extent. In light of my rejection of the first ground of appeal, the
         re-making of the decision will be limited to a determination of the
         'unduly  harsh'  issue  under  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  of  the
         immigration  rules   and   the   question   of   'very   compelling
         circumstances' over and above the exceptions to deportation. I find
         no merit in the assertion at [10] of Ms Adams' written  submissions
         that the appellant did not receive a fair hearing and, in  view  of
         the extent of the errors of law I have identified above, I  see  no
         reason why the decision cannot be re-made in the Upper Tribunal  on
         the basis of further submissions.


         14. In light of the current circumstances relating to Covid  19,  I
         am provisionally of the view that the re-making of this decision at
         a resumed hearing can and should be held remotely, by telephone  or
         Skype for Business on a date to be fixed."

In reply to directions made with that decision, the  appellant's  solicitors
requested a face-to-face hearing, whereas the  respondent  was  content  for
the hearing to be held remotely. In a further note and directions issued  on
6 November 2020, the appellant's request was refused on  the  basis  of  the
absence of any satisfactory explanation as to  why  a  face-to-face  hearing
was required.

Hearing and Submissions

The matter then came before me for the decision to be re-made, by way  of  a
remote hearing on skype for business. The appellant and his wife  gave  oral
evidence, remotely, from their home. Both adopted their  previous  and  more
recent witness statements as their evidence.

The appellant confirmed that the convictions  listed  in  the  Trial  Record
Sheet all related to the mortgage fraud in  2007  and  the  false  documents
used in that fraud. He denied the suggestion from Mr  Lindsay  that  he  had
complete disregard for the law and said that  he  was  ill-informed  at  the
time that he committed the offences and that he was under pressure from  his
family in Nigeria. He had learnt from his past mistakes and had worked  hard
to make amends and to become a better person. He tried to be a  good  person
and someone his children could look up to, and he was trying  to  give  back
to  society  through  his  charity  and  community  work.  Although  he  had
committed offences previously, he was alone at that  time,  whereas  now  he
had a family and he wanted to support his daughters.  The  appellant's  wife
said that she was not complicit in his offending and had not been  aware  of
his past until his arrest in 2016 when the documents were  found.  They  had
tried to legalise his stay since then. She had found it very difficult  when
he was in prison and had found herself alone and in debt and  had  lost  her
job. She had had a mental breakdown. She  had  not  asked  for  any  medical
treatment, preferring to deal with it by herself. She had managed to  reduce
her debt a lot since that time. It  would  be  very  difficult  for  her  to
manage if he was deported as she would  be  unable  to  work  full-time  and
could not survive on a part-time income.

Mr Lindsay submitted that the appellant's evidence and that of his wife  was
unreliable.  The  adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the   First-tier
Tribunal Judge had been preserved  and  therefore  the  evidence  now  given
should be treated with  caution.  The  independent  social  worker's  report
should be given little weight as it was based upon what  the  social  worker
had been told by the appellant and his wife and it was flawed in many  other
ways as well. The ISW's conclusions  were  based  upon  assumptions,  namely
that the children would suffer emotionally if the  appellant  was  deported,
whereas that was not supported by  any  evidence  and  the  report  did  not
define 'serious emotional harm'.  Whilst  it  would  be  difficult  for  the
children, that was not enough to reach the high threshold of 'unduly  harsh'
or 'very compelling circumstances'. Little weight  could  be  given  to  the
appellant's family life, in any event, pursuant  to  section  117B(4)(b)  of
the 2002 Act, since his relationship with his  wife  was  established  at  a
time when he was in the UK in breach of a deportation order. It was  not  an
unduly harsh option for the appellant's wife and children to remain  in  the
UK without him. Alternatively, family life could continue in  Nigeria,  with
the appellant and  his  wife  finding  employment  there  and  the  children
continuing  their  education  there.   There   were   no   very   compelling
circumstances  as  there  was  a  very  pressing  public  interest  in   the
appellant's deportation owing to his history of  serious  offending  over  a
lengthy period and  the  importance  of  deterring  foreign  nationals  from
returning to the UK in breach of  deportation  orders  and  then  committing
crimes. The appellant's private life, in terms of  voluntary  and  community
work, carried little weight, as per section  117B(4)(a)  of  the  2002  Act.
Although the  appellant  was  considered  to  present  a  low  risk  of  re-
offending, that did not mean that there was no risk.

Ms Adams submitted that the low risk assessment was an important factor,  as
was the fact that the appellant's most recent offending was as long  ago  as
2007 and that the sentencing judge  accepted  that  the  mortgage  had  been
obtained by the appellant to provide a home for  his  family.  There  was  a
vast amount of documentation showing that the appellant  was  trying  to  do
the best he could  to  make  amends  for  his  past  offending,  by  way  of
volunteering and looking after his children. Due weight should be  given  to
the ISW report which was not based only upon  what  had  been  said  by  the
appellant and his wife, but also from interviewing  the  two  children.  The
report showed the direct impact the appellant's deportation  would  have  on
the children. Ms Adam relied on the findings in HA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home  Department  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1176  in  regard  to  the
importance of the appellant's level of involvement in his  children's  lives
and the closeness of the family unit.

Discussion and Findings

The re-making of the decision in the appellant's  appeal  involves  a  fresh
assessment of the appellant's ability to meet the exception  to  deportation
in section 117C(5), specifically the question whether: "the  effect  of  C's
deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh" and  whether,  if
that exception does not apply, "there  are  very  compelling  circumstances,
over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2".

It is clear from the recent caselaw, and in particular as a result  of  Lord
Carnwarth's judgment in  KO  (Nigeria),  that  a  consideration  of  'unduly
harsh' in section 117C(5) is based upon the interests of  the  children  and
does not include a balancing exercise against the severity of  offending  of
the appellant, as was previously considered to be  the  case.  The  relevant
findings in KO (Nigeria) were considered at [42] to [44] of HA (Iraq):
   1. "At paras. 20-23 Lord Carnwath considers the language of section 117C,
      and  more  particularly  sub-section  (5),  as  regards  the  relative
      seriousness issue. At para. 21 he analyses the wording of Exception 1,
      describing it as "self-contained", and at para. 22 he  concludes  that
      the same is true of Exception 2. He continues, at para. 23:
      "On the other  hand,  the  expression  'unduly  harsh'  seems  clearly
      intended to introduce a higher hurdle than  that  of  'reasonableness'
      under section 117B (6), taking account of the public interest  in  the
      deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word 'unduly' implies an
      element of comparison. It assumes that  there  is  a  'due'  level  of
      'harshness', that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in
      the relevant context. 'Unduly' implies  something  going  beyond  that
      level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C (1),  that  is
      the public interest in the deportation of foreign  criminals.  One  is
      looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what would  necessarily
      be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent. What
      it does not require in my view (and subject to the discussion  of  the
      cases in the next section)  is  a  balancing  of  relative  levels  of
      severity of the parent's  offence,  other  than  is  inherent  in  the
      distinction drawn by the section itself  by  reference  to  length  of
      sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in IT
      (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
      932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras  55,  64)  can  it  be  equated  with  a
      requirement to show 'very compelling reasons'. That would be in effect
      to replicate the additional test applied  by  section  117C  (6)  with
      respect to sentences of four years or more."
      That is an important passage, and it is necessary to identify  exactly
      what Lord Carnwath is and is not saying.
   1. The starting point is that the question  to  which  the  reasoning  is
      directed is  whether  the  word  "unduly"  imports  a  requirement  to
      consider "the severity of the parent's offence": that, as I have said,
      was the actual issue in the appeal. Lord Carnwath's conclusion is that
      it does not: see the sentence beginning  "What  it  does  not  require
      ...". The reason why there is no such requirement is that the exercise
      required by Exception 2 is "self-contained". I  should  note  at  this
      point that it follows that it is irrelevant whether the  sentence  was
      at the top or the bottom of the range between one year  and  four:  as
      Lord Carnwath says, the only relevance of the length of  the  sentence
      is to establish whether the foreign criminal is a medium  offender  or
      not.
   1. In order to establish that the word "unduly" was not directed  to  the
      relative seriousness issue it was necessary for Lord Carnwath  to  say
      to what it was in fact directed. That is what he  does  in  the  first
      part of the paragraph. The effect of what he says is that "unduly"  is
      directed to the degree of harshness required: some level of harshness
      is to be regarded as "acceptable or justifiable" in the context of the
      public interest in the deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  and  what
      "unduly" does is to provide that Exception 2 will only apply where the
      harshness goes  beyond  that  level.  Lord  Carnwath's  focus  is  not
      primarily on how to define the "acceptable" level of harshness. It  is
      true that he refers to a degree of harshness "going beyond what  would
      necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of  a
      parent", but that cannot be read entirely literally: it is hard to see
      how one would define the level of harshness that  would  "necessarily"
      be suffered by "any" child (indeed one can imagine unusual cases where
      the deportation of a parent would not be "harsh" for the child at all,
      even where there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship).  The
      underlying concept is clearly  of  an  enhanced  degree  of  harshness
      sufficient to outweigh the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
      foreign criminals in the medium offender category."
Nevertheless, for the purposes of this appeal, it seems to  me  that  it  is
relevant to start by considering the appellant's  criminal  and  immigration
history, since it is his case that his close relationship  to  his  children
and the best interests of his children have led to him  becoming  a  changed
person and an integral part of his children's lives. Further, there  has  to
be a relevant distinction, in terms of the children's interests,  between  a
person who is wholly  invested  in  his  children  and  who  is  a  constant
presence in their lives as opposed to one who is  likely  to  re-offend  and
whose criminal and general profile is such that he is likely  to  be  absent
from the children's  lives.  To  that  extent,  therefore,  the  appellant's
criminal history and profile are not wholly irrelevant  considerations  when
assessing the best interests of the children and the 'unduly harsh' issue.

It is undoubtedly the case that the appellant has  a  significantly  adverse
offending history, both in terms of criminal and immigration  offending.  He
has  been  convicted  of  crimes  involving  fraud  and  deception  on   two
occasions, both resulting in substantial periods of imprisonment,  of  three
years in 2005 and two years in 2017/8. He also returned to the UK in  breach
of a deportation order only a few months after being deported, in 2006,  and
has remained in the UK without any lawful  basis  for  the  past  14  years,
using an alias in the early part of his return to the UK.

The appellant claims, however, that that was all in the past, prior  to  the
establishment of his family life, and that he has spent the last  few  years
seeking to make amends and to give back  to  society,  through  volunteering
and community work and encouraging his children  in  their  development  and
academic and other achievements. He claims  that,  whilst  his  most  recent
convictions were in 2017 and that he was in prison  from  November  2017  to
November 2018, those convictions related solely to crimes committed in  2007
and that he  had  not  re-offended  since  that  time.  Judge  Brewer,  when
dismissing the appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  did  not  accept  the
appellant's claim that the false identification documents found in his  home
at the time of his arrest in December 2016  had  not  been  used  since  the
mortgage fraud in 2007.  Neither did Judge  Brewer  accept  the  appellant's
claim that he had obtained the mortgage to provide a home  for  his  family,
despite that having been accepted by the Crown Court Judge in  the  criminal
proceedings. Those adverse  credibility  findings  were  challenged  in  the
appellant's appeal but were not set aside and they are therefore a  starting
point for my own assessment. However, I note that  there  still  remains  no
evidence to  show  that  any  further  offences  were  committed  after  the
mortgage fraud in 2007  and  that  the  convictions  in  2017/8  related  to
anything other than that fraud. The Crown Court Judge, when  sentencing  the
appellant on 19 March 2018, imposed a sentence of eight months for  each  of
the three counts relating to possession of false documents with  intent,  to
run concurrently, and it was the mortgage fraud itself which  gave  rise  to
the lengthier sentence of two years.

The appellant's claim not to have re-offended since the mortgage  fraud  and
to be  a  changed  person  is  certainly  consistent  with  the  prison  and
probation service reports, at pages 294, 297 - 307  referring  to  his  role
and achievements in prison, and at pages 308 and 309 referring  to  the  low
risk  of  re-offending  he  presented  and  his  level  of   engagement   in
supervision, the glowing reports in the Offender Data reports in  particular
at pages 322 to 325 of the appeal bundle, and the evidence  of  his  efforts
to  integrate  into  society  by  way  of  his  extensive  volunteering  and
community activities (page 327 to 342), as  well  as  the  evidence  of  his
efforts to support his children in their development.

As for the appellant's breach of his deportation  order,  despite  the  fact
that there is evidence within the appeal bundle (pages 86 to 98) which  goes
some way to support his account of his reasons  for  returning  to  the  UK,
aside from his relationship with his partner, involving  disputes  with  his
extended family members over his father's will and his fears of violence  in
Nigeria, his disregard for the UK immigration laws  is  a  very  significant
matter weighing against him. However, as discussed above, although a  matter
adversely affecting the appellant in a proportionality  balancing  exercise,
that is not a matter of material relevance  when  considering  the  initial,
'unduly harsh' question.

I therefore turn to the relevant question, namely  whether  the  appellant's
deportation would be unduly harsh on his wife and children. I do so  on  the
basis that the appellant has made positive efforts to change and has  turned
his back on offending in order to devote himself  to  his  family.  That  of
course is not in itself a basis to find that  deportation  would  be  unduly
harsh on his family but, as I have  mentioned  above,  is  not  an  entirely
irrelevant consideration.  Nevertheless, the threshold is  a  high  one.  In
assessing whether the effect of deportation is 'unduly harsh', the Court  of
Appeal, in HA (Iraq), endorsed the approach in KO (Nigeria), that  that  was
a stringent test:

    "[51]  ...the  criterion  of  undue  harshness  sets  a  bar  which  is
    "elevated"  and  carries  a  "much   stronger   emphasis"   than   mere
    undesirability"

although adding that:

    "[52]...while recognising the "elevated" nature of the statutory  test,
    it is important not to lose sight of the fact that the hurdle which  it
    sets is not as high as  that  set  by  the  test  of  "very  compelling
    circumstances" in section 117C (6)."


The first question is whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  entire
family to relocate to Nigeria, so that there would be no separation  of  the
children from their father. It is relevant  to  note  that  the  appellant's
wife is from Nigeria and lived there for the first  23  years  of  her  life
before coming to the UK. Whilst she has become a British citizen,  with  all
the rights that that entails, and has established a good career in  the  UK,
I do not consider that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to  return  to
Nigeria in order to maintain her family life with the appellant,  had  there
been no children involved. However, there are two British children  involved
and I have no doubt in concluding that it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
them to relocate to Nigeria, a country to which they have  never  been.  The
two girls, J aged 15 years and M aged 13, have lived in the UK  since  birth
and are at an age when their lives are rooted in the society  and  education
system of the UK, with J being at a crucial stage in her education,  in  her
first year of GCSEs.

The more relevant question is whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
children to be separated from  the  appellant,  bearing  in  mind  the  high
threshold to be met. The Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq),  at  [56],  expressed
caution in treating KO as "establishing a touchstone of whether  the  degree
of  harshness  goes  beyond  "that  which  is  ordinarily  expected  by  the
deportation of a parent"", and emphasised, at [82] and [83], the  fact  that
cases of this kind were never truly identical and  had  to  be  individually
assessed. At [56] the Court said:

   " How a child will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend  on
   an almost infinitely variable  range  of  circumstances  and  it  is  not
   possible to identify a baseline  of  "ordinariness".  Simply  by  way  of
   example, the degree of harshness of the impact may  be  affected  by  the
   child's age; by whether the parent lives with them (NB that a divorced or
   separated father may still have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
   with a child who lives with the mother); by the  degree  of  the  child's
   emotional dependence on the parent; by the financial consequences of  his
   deportation; by the availability of emotional and financial support  from
   a remaining parent and other family members;  by  the  practicability  of
   maintaining a relationship with the deported parent; and of course by all
   the individual characteristics of the child."

In this case, the evidence produced demonstrates  particularly  strong  ties
between the appellant and the two girls. Although J is not  the  appellant's
biological child, it is clear from the evidence that she  is  not  aware  of
this and that the appellant treats her as his own daughter, there  being  no
contact with her  biological  father.  The  evidence  is  that,  whilst  the
appellant did not live on a permanent basis with his now wife and  daughters
until 2013, he was very much involved in their lives in the preceding  years
and has always been present in their lives. The girls were  not  aware  that
he was in prison from November 2017 to November 2018, but  believed  him  to
be working away from home. Not only is  the  appellant  very  much  involved
with the girls' lives, but the evidence shows that he is at the  very  least
a joint carer, if not the primary carer, with his  wife's  previous  studies
and her job involving long hours and travel abroad (pages 103 to  107).  All
of that is supported by documentary evidence within the  appeal  bundle  and
includes evidence  of  his  direct  involvement  in  the  girls'  schooling,
education and out of school activities (pages 123 onwards)  and  his  wife's
evidence in her second statement about  his  involvement  in  home-schooling
the girls during the pandemic.

It is also apparent  from  the  evidence  in  the  appeal  bundle  that  the
appellant's wife struggled to maintain  her  work/life  balance  during  the
appellant's previous absence when in prison, that her work suffered  to  the
extent that she was eventually dismissed from her job (pages 99 to  102).  I
accept the evidence she gave before me, and in her statement  (paragraph  15
of her second statement), as to her struggles, emotional and  financial,  at
the time, all of which is supported by the reports from Peter Horrocks,  the
independent social worker (ISW), whereby he refers  to  the  impact  of  her
stress upon the girls.

Mr Lindsay asked me to accord little weight to the ISW  reports  given  that
they were based on the accounts given to Mr Horrocks by  the  appellant  and
his wife, who had been found by the  previous  Tribunal  to  be  lacking  in
credibility. However, Mr Horrocks interviewed the  two  girls  independently
of their parents and I therefore  see  no  reason  why  his  expert  opinion
should not be accorded weight. Mr Horrocks speaks of  the  two  girls  being
high achievers, both academically and in sporting  and  musical  activities,
who suffered from behavioural difficulties during the  appellant's  previous
absence and who would clearly be very much affected by separation from  him.
He speaks of their emotional vulnerability  (paragraph  4.6  of  his  second
report) and, at paragraph 4.13, of the risk to the  girls  of  "experiencing
long-term, if not permanent harm to their physical, their  emotional,  their
educational and their social  development"  and  his  concerns  about  their
mother being able to cope if their father was absent again (paragraphs  4.13
and 5.2). Whilst it is the case that  there  is  evidence  of  other  family
members in the UK, including the appellant's sisters, it is clear that  they
are not in a position to provide the level of support  needed  to  alleviate
the stress of the  appellant's  wife  in  coping  with  the  family  in  the
appellant's absence. In any event, it is the impact upon the  girls  of  the
absence of the appellant himself which was of concern to Mr Horrocks,  given
their close relationship and the role he plays in their lives

For all of these reasons,  taking  account  of  all  the  evidence  and  the
overall picture of the family, their relationships with each other  and  the
appellant's role in the family, it seems to me that the  high  threshold  is
met in regard to the 'unduly  harsh'  test.  Not  only  is  it  clearly  and
undoubtedly in the best interests of the two  children  that  the  appellant
remain in the UK with them and that they are able to continue  their  family
life together in this country, but I accept that the effect  of  deportation
upon the children would be unduly harsh. I  accept  that  the  exception  to
deportation in  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  immigration  rules  and  section
117C(5) of the 2002 Act is met, such  that  the  public  interest  does  not
require the appellant's deportation and  that  the  appellant's  deportation
would breach his Article 8 rights and those of his wife and children.

DECISION

The original Tribunal was found to  have  made  an  error  of  law  and  the
decision was set aside. I re-make the decision by allowing  the  appellant's
appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.



Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 18 January
2021
