
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/20666/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2018                          |On 10 December 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                  MEKAIL [K]
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harding of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Albania  born  in  1979.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 17 August 2016  to  refuse
    his application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The respondent noted a long immigration history. In summary, since  his
    first arrival in 1999 he has been removed on six occasions. He has used
    nine  false  identities  and  four  nationalities  as  well  as   false
    documents. He has seven convictions  for  nineteen  offences  including
    failure to  surrender  to  custody,  taking  a  motor  vehicle  without
    consent, driving without insurance, burglary and  possessing  a  listed
    false instrument. Some of  the  car  crimes  were  repeated.  His  last
    conviction was in 2007. An asylum claim made in 2010  was  refused  and
    dismissed on appeal in 2011.

 3. The respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
    suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of his relationship with  his  partner,  Ms  [B]  and  his
    children as his presence in the UK was not considered to  be  conducive
    to the public good given his criminal and immigration history.


 4. Also, it was not accepted that  he  has  sole  responsibility  for  his
    children or that they normally live with him and not their mother;  nor
    that he has a significant involvement in their  daily  life.   Further,
    there  would  not  be  insurmountable  obstacles   to   maintaining   a
    relationship with his children from overseas by way of modern means  of
    communication.

 5. Moreover, he did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  under  the
    private life provisions in paragraph 276ADE because of his  convictions
    and immigration history; he had not  shown  that  he  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to integration in Albania.

 6. Finally, there were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant  of
    leave to remain outside the Rules given his  criminal  and  immigration
    history.

 7. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 8. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 11 January  2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Bowler dismissed the appeal.

 9. Her findings are at paragraph [47] ff.  In summary, the appellant has a
    very  poor  immigration  history  having  repeatedly  and  deliberately
    breached the Immigration Rules.  He has never been granted any leave in
    the UK.  He has been removed from the  UK  six  times  in  some  twelve
    years.  He has used nine false identities  and  four  nationalities  as
    well as false documents.

10. He has received  seven  convictions  for  nineteen  offences  including
    failure to  surrender  to  custody,  taking  a  motor  vehicle  without
    consent, driving without  insurance,  violent  disorder,  burglary  and
    possessing a listed false instrument.  Some of the car  related  crimes
    were repeated.

11. Whilst he has not been convicted since 2007 the judge concluded that S-
    LTR 1.6 (presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
    public good because the conduct (including  convictions  which  do  not
    fall within the other suitability paragraphs), character,  associations
    or other reasons make it undesirable to allow him to remain in the  UK)
    applies.

12. The judge then went on to consider the family situation.

13. She found that the appellant's partner had come  from  Kosovo  and  was
    granted refugee status.  She is now a British citizen.   The  appellant
    is father to three children born in 2007, 2010 and 2014.   His  partner
    also has a daughter born in 2004 from a  different  relationship.   All
    the children are British citizens.

14. The judge concluded that there was family life which engaged Article  8
    between the appellant and his partner.  Also, that he has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with his children and step-daughter  such  that
    the relationship engaged Article 8.

15. Continuing her  analysis  the  judge  found  that  in  respect  of  the
    relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  partner   such   could
    reasonably be enjoyed in Albania; there was no language issue; she  has
    been to Albania without problems.

16.  The  judge  also  noted  that  they  had  entered  and  continued  the
    relationship when he did not have leave, a fact known to his partner.

17. The judge then advanced to consider what was agreed to be the  crux  of
    the case, namely,  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    children each of whom is a "qualifying  child"  (section  117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002).   The  issue  was  the
    reasonableness of expecting them to leave the UK.

18. She set out the relevant  guidance  from  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction - Family Migration - Appendix FM, Section 1.0  (B)  "Family
    Life as a Partner or Parent and Private Life, 10 Year Routes".

19. She then found as follows: the children's mother has been  the  primary
    carer throughout.  As for the best interests of the children  she  gave
    weight to the fact that the children are British citizens; she took  as
    the starting point that it is in the  best  interests  of  children  to
    remain with both parents. The children have always lived in the UK  and
    have not travelled to Albania; the eldest daughter (the  step-daughter)
    can speak Albanian although the other children  do  not;  none  of  the
    children have learning difficulties or special educational needs.

20. The judge went on to find that as both parents speak Albanian there was
    no reason why the children if they went to Albania could not learn  the
    language, particularly as the three youngest who are aged 10, 7 and  3,
    are at early stages in their education.

21. The appellant has family in Albania; there  is  little  evidence  of  a
    close relationship between the children and their parents with extended
    family in the UK.  In  any  event  contact  could  be  maintained  from
    abroad.

22. There are  no  health  difficulties;  they  would  be  able  to  access
    education and health services in Albania.

23. The judge next went on particularly to consider the  situation  of  the
    oldest child aged 13.  She found that the child is  not  at  a  crucial
    stage in education as she has not started  public  exams,  although  it
    would inevitably be disruptive to move her at  this  stage  to  another
    education system.  The other children being at earlier stages in  their
    education a move in schools would be significantly less disruptive.

24. Drawing these findings together the judge concluded that in respect  of
    the oldest child whilst given her age, her  lack  of  previous  contact
    with Albania and her British citizenship such would indicate  that  her
    best interests would be to remain in the UK, in the absence of evidence
    to show "deleterious" effects for her  in  going  to  Albania  and  her
    ability to speak Albanian, there are  factors  which  mean  it  is  not
    overwhelmingly in her best interests to remain in the UK.

25. As for the 7 and 10 year old and given their status and lack of ability
    to speak Albanian, their best interests lie in staying in the UK.

26. For the 3 year old, however, his British citizen status was not  enough
    to show his best interests are to stay in the UK, he is focussed on his
    parents and is young enough to learn  Albanian  and  quickly  integrate
    into the Albanian education system.

27. The judge then turned to consider the wider public interest.  She found
    that the appellant and his partner are reliant on  state  benefits;  he
    would be able to get work in Albania, there  was  no  reason  why  they
    would be destitute; family there could help them to adjust.  The judge,
    finally, noted the appellant's  woeful  immigration  history,  criminal
    convictions, history of misrepresentation  and  deceit  and  continuing
    lack of credibility or contrition, as well as  his  lack  of  financial
    independence.

28. She concluded that it would not be unreasonable  for  the  children  to
    leave the UK.

29. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused on  1  June
    2018 but was granted on 16 August 2018 on reapplication  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law Hearing

30. At the error of law hearing before me Mr  Harding  made  the  following
    points.  He emphasised that it was not the appellant's  case  that  the
    judge should have excluded from her consideration  that  the  appellant
    had repeatedly shown disregard for the UK immigration law and  criminal
    law.  However, the judge misunderstood the  IDI  when  she  stated  (at
    [77]) that where  an  applicant  has  a  criminal  history  or  a  poor
    immigration history the "general approach that a British child must not
    be expected to leave the EU does not automatically  apply".   Such  was
    incorrect.  The IDI states it may be appropriate  to  refuse  to  grant
    leave to a parent in such circumstances.  The error was material as  it
    underpins her approach to the reasonableness question.

31. Second, the judge's  reference  to  an  absence  of  evidence  to  show
    "deleterious" effects to the oldest child  going  to  Albania  was  the
    wrong approach.  The correct test was reasonableness.

32. Third, it was contradictory for the judge having found that  it  is  in
    the best interests of the three older children to remain in the  UK  to
    later find that it would be reasonable for them to leave the  UK  based
    on the father's conduct.  Such amounts to blaming the children for  the
    father's conduct.


33. Fourth, the judge gave inadequate weight  to  the  fact  that  all  the
    children are British citizens.

34. Finally, the finding that the step-daughter is not at a  crucial  stage
    in her education because she had not started her exams  was  irrational
    given her other findings.

35. Mr Harding asked me, were I to find error of law, to remit the case for
    further evidence to be led.

36. Mr Lindsay's response was that "reasonableness" is  a  fact  sensitive,
    free standing balancing exercise and such is what the judge  undertook.
    The criticisms of some of the language used in the decision amounted to
    no  more  than  disagreement.   It  had   been   appropriate   in   her
    consideration of the proportionality test.  She was  entitled  to  find
    for  the  reasons  she  gave  that  the  public  interest  trumped  the
    children's best interests.

37. I reserved my decision.

Consideration

38. I do not find merit in Mr Harding's submissions.

39. On the first point the judge correctly (at [76]) referred to the  terms
    of the IDI, specifically:


         "... the decision maker must not take a decision in relation to the
         parent or primary carer of a British citizen child where the effect
         of that decision would be to force that British child to leave  the
         EU ...


         ... It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where
         the conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to
         considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the
         child could otherwise stay with another parent or an alternative
         primary carer in the UK ...


         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


         Criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph 398
         of the Immigration Rules; a very poor immigration history, such as
         where the person has repeatedly and deliberately breached the
         Immigration Rules." [judge's underlining]


40. At [77] the judge went on to state that  the  "appellant  does  have  a
    criminal history and therefore on its terms the policy states  that  it
    may be appropriate to refuse to grant leave." Whilst the wording in the
    next sentence: "I refer to the underlined words  above  which  make  it
    clear that where an appellant has a criminal history  or  a  very  poor
    immigration history the general approach that a British child must  not
    be expected to leave the EU does not automatically  apply"  might  have
    been better expressed, it  is  clear  from  the  immediately  preceding
    sentence and  her  later  analysis  of  his  immigration  and  criminal
    history, that the judge was aware that  that  aspect  of  the  guidance
    concerned the parent, not the British child.

41. Nor do I find merit in the second ground, namely, that in referring  to
    an absence of evidence in respect of the  oldest  child  to  "...  show
    deleterious effects for her  going  to  Albania"  such  was  the  wrong
    approach.  It is clear that the judge had in  mind  the  reasonableness
    test throughout her analysis e.g. [80], [81], [82],  [104],  [110]  and
    that she was finding for the reasons she gave that the absence of  harm
    or damage to the child going to Albania meant it was reasonable for her
    to do so.

42. On the third point, namely, that  having  found  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the older children to remain in the UK it  was  irrational
    for the judge to later find that it would be reasonable to leave the UK
    and that such approach can only have been on the basis of the  father's
    criminality and immigration history and that such approach is  contrary
    to authority, I disagree.  In MA (Pakistan) and Others [2016] EWCA  Civ
    705 the Court separated two issues: the best interests of the  children
    and whether it is reasonable to expect them  to  leave  the  UK.   When
    considering the best interests of the  children,  the  conduct  of  the
    parents  is  irrelevant.   However,  when  considering  the  issue   of
    reasonableness, wider public interest factors may  be  weighed  in  the
    balance, including the conduct and immigration status  of  the  parent.
    There is nothing intrinsically illogical in the notion that, while  the
    children's best interests are for them to stay, it is not  unreasonable
    to expect them to go.

43. In this case the judge clearly dealt with the children's best interests
    in great detail as a  separate  matter  before  going  on  to  consider
    reasonableness.

44. Subsequently, in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 it  was  held
    that "reasonableness" does not require a balancing  exercise  in  which
    the best interests of  the  child  may  be  outweighed  by  the  public
    interest in deportation, made all the weightier by the bad behaviour of
    the parent. Section 117B(6) is a stand alone  provision  in  which  the
    focus is purely the effect upon the child, who,  as  indicated,  should
    not be blamed for the conduct of its parent.

45. However, reasonableness must be assessed  in  context.  Lord  Carnworth
    puts it this way at [18]:

         "[I]t seems to  me  inevitably  relevant  in  both  contexts  [para
         276ADE(1)(iv) and s117B(6) which both posit a situation  where  'it
         would not be reasonable' to expect a child  to  leave  the  UK]  to
         consider where the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are
         expected to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child
         to be with them. To that extent  the  record  of  the  parents  may
         become indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have  a
         right to remain here and having to leave. It is only  if,  even  on
         that hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to  leave
         that the provision may give the parents a right to remain."

46. Thus, the extent of the misconduct does  not  come  directly  onto  the
    balance,  but  it  is  equally  clear  that  the  father's  record   is
    "indirectly material," because he is expected  to  be  leaving;  it  is
    normally reasonable for children to be  with  their  parents;  and  the
    assessment is to be made "in the real world in which the children  find
    themselves" [18,19]. Whilst the judge did not have the benefit of KO, I
    can see no material error in her approach.


47. As for not giving adequate weight to the fact the children are  British
    citizens, on the contrary she clearly had such in mind (e.g.  at  [82],
    [94] and [101]) but found that nonetheless for the reasons she gave  it
    was reasonable for them to leave.  Such were conclusions open to her on
    the evidence as was the finding that the oldest  child  was  not  at  a
    critical stage in her education.

48. In summary, I consider that the grounds amount to a  disagreement  with
    the conclusion that the appellant's case for remaining in  the  UK  has
    not been made out.  The judge gave ample reasons  in  support  of  that
    conclusion in particular [3-13], [49-50], [71], [105], [108-110].   She
    properly dealt with best interests first.  She could not  exclude  from
    her consideration the facts of the appellant's  criminality  and  utter
    and repeated disregard for immigration law.  That the appellant in  the
    wording of the IDI has a "very poor immigration history such  as  where
    the person has repeatedly and  deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
    Rules" is indisputable. On the  judge's  findings  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history and criminality, (per the IDI) it was  "appropriate
    to refuse to grant leave where the conduct of the parent... gives  rise
    to considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the child
    could otherwise stay with another parent... in the UK..."

49. The children and their mother can, of course, choose not to leave.  The
    judge found the children could stay with their mother.   As  the  judge
    noted (at [78]) the  mother  has  been  the  primary  carer  throughout
    "including the numerous periods after the appellant  has  been  removed
    and while he has been detained whether  in  prison  or  in  immigration
    detention."  There  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  that   these
    separations had adversely affected the children.

50.  In Sanade and others (British children-Zambrano-Derici) [2012] UKUT 48
    a Presidential panel stated at #5 of the headnote:


         "Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano now makes it clear that where the child
         or remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a citizen of
         the European Union, as a matter of EU law it  is  not  possible  to
         require the family as a unit to relocate outside  of  the  European
         Union or for the Secretary of State to  submit  that  it  would  be
         reasonable for them to do so."


    This was a  concession  made  in  the  course  of  proceedings  by  the
    respondent who accepted that "it will  not  logically  be  possible  to
    argue" that it would be reasonable to expect a British child to move to
    a country outside the EU in order for the family unit to remain intact.

51. In VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255 the  respondent  resiled  from  the
    concession. Sales LJ went on  to  explain  that  Case  C-356/11  Derici
    rather than Zambrano was applicable in the instant case, in  which  the
    children could remain in the UK with their British mother if she  chose
    to stay here rather than follow her husband to Jamaica:


         "Rather than a legal impossibility of  remaining  in  the  UK,  the
         family would face a difficult practical choice whether to  separate
         (with the mother and children remaining in the UK,  in  which  case
         there would be no infringement of their EU citizenship  rights)  or
         to leave and go to Jamaica as a family unit..."


52. The decision of the judge in that regard, which  is  unchallenged,  was
    one that was open to her on the evidence.


    Notice of Decision


53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law
    and that decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

54. No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

