
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20140/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Skype)                |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 20 January 2021                           |On 4 February 2021            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              HANAN MOHADAD-ALI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Adebayo of A2 Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. In a decision promulgated on 13 October 2020 the Upper Tribunal set
        aside a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  allowed  the
        appellant's appeal on human rights grounds against the  refusal  of
        an application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
        basis of her private and family life.



Background


     2. The appellant is a female citizen of Canada born  on  22  September
        1979.
     3. There are a  number  of  preserved  findings  from  the  First-tier
        Tribunal (FTT) decision being the appellant's immigration  history,
        the  finding  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
        relationship with her partner, the  finding  the  appellant  cannot
        satisfy the requirements of the immigration rules for  the  reasons
        set out in the refusal, and the appellant's first  miscarriage  and
        emotional reaction and the effect of the  same  upon  her  and  her
        husband.
     4. In relation to the appellant's immigration history,  the  appellant
        entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 17 July 2019 but  on  22
        October 2019 made an application for further leave to remain  as  a
        spouse.
     5. The appellant underwent an Islamic marriage to Mr Haron Ayid Sallal
        a British national on 29  June  2019  after  which  they  commenced
        cohabiting and married in accordance with the laws  of  the  United
        Kingdom on 10 October 2019. The appellant claims to have been in  a
        relationship since November 2017 which began when she  visited  her
        uncle in the UK and met Mr Sallal.
     6. The reason the appellant cannot satisfy the  immigration  rules  is
        that  although  it  was  accepted  the  appellant  could  meet  the
        suitability  requirements,  she  cannot  satisfy  the   eligibility
        immigration status requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.2.1 to  2.2  as
        she entered the United Kingdom as a visitor, a  status  from  which
        switching is not permitted.
     7. In relation to EX.1 the decision maker wrote:


        "EX.1. Requirement


        We have considered whether you  are  exempt  from  meeting  certain
        legibility requirements under Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM because
        paragraph EX.1 applies.


        We have carefully considered whether paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM
        applies to your application, and therefore  whether  you  meet  the
        requirements of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(iii) of Appendix FM.


        You have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  your  British
        partner. The Secretary of State has  not  been  any  evidence  that
        there are insurmountable obstacles  in  accordance  with  paragraph
        EX.2. of Appendix FM which means the very significant  difficulties
        which would be faced by you and your  partner  in  continuing  your
        family life together outside the UK in Canada, and which would  not
        be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for you  or  your
        partner. You therefore failed to meet the requirements  of  EX.1(b)
        of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules so paragraph EX.1 does  not
        apply in your case.


        In light of the above the Secretary of State is not satisfied  that
        EX.1 applies to your case and so you do not meet  the  requirements
        of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(iii) of Appendix FM.


     8. In relation to paragraph 276 ADE, it was found the application  did
        not fall for refusal on grounds of suitability in Section S-LTR but
        did in relation to eligibly as she had only lived in the UK for  98
        days and had therefore not lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  at
        least 20  years;  meaning  the  appellant  failed  to  satisfy  the
        requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iii) of the Rules.
     9. There is no express  exceptional  circumstances  provision  in  the
        private life rules, such as that  found  in  EX.1  in  relation  to
        family life.
    10. It was also found that although the appellant was over 18 but under
        25 years of age it had not been shown that she had spend  at  least
        half her life living continuously in the UK or  that,  even  though
        aged 18 or above, there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
        integration into Canada, the country she will return to if she were
        to leave the UK.
    11. The decision-maker did not accept there will  be  very  significant
        obstacles to her integration into Canada, if she  was  required  to
        leave the UK, because she had spent her formative years  there  and
        it is accepted that she will have retained knowledge of  the  life,
        language and culture, and would not face significant  obstacles  to
        reintegrating into life in Canada once more.
    12. In  relation  to  the  miscarriage,  the  FTT  judge  recorded  the
        appellant's evidence that at the time she made her application  she
        did not know she was already pregnant.  She lost  the  baby  on  30
        December when she was 11 weeks pregnant. The appellant  stated  she
        was devastated as this was her first  child.  The  FTT  judge  also
        records the evidence of the appellant and her partner that they had
        gone through a difficult time as a result.

Discussion
    13. Paragraph E-LTRP.2.1. of the Rule states that an applicant must not
        be in the UK-
        (a) as a visitor; or
        (b) with valid leave granted for a period  of  6  months  or  less,
        unless that leave is as a fianc�(e) or proposed civil  partner,  or
        was  granted  pending  the  outcome  of  family  court  or  divorce
        proceedings
    14. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor and so falls foul of this
        provision.
    15. Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
        establishes the present regime under the rubric 'Article 8  of  the
        ECHR: Public Interest Considerations'. Section 117A of the 2002 Act
        addresses the application of the public  interest  regime;  section
        117B details the public interest considerations applicable  in  all
        cases; section 117C is concerned with additional considerations  in
        deportation matters and interpretation is  addressed  at  paragraph
        117D. This is not a deportation case.
    16. Section 117A(3) relates to the application of the public  interest.
        This Tribunal is required to carry  out  a  balancing  exercise  to
        decide whether the proposed interference is proportionate, with due
        weight given to the strength of public interest in removal'. See  R
        (Agyarko) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC
        11.
    17. It is accepted the 'little weight' provisions  of  section  117B(4)
        and  (5)  involve  a  spectrum  that  within   its   self-contained
        boundaries will result in the measurement of the quantum of  weight
        considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.
        See   Kaur   (children's   best    interests/    public    interest
        interface) [2017] UKUT 14 (IAC).
    18. In GM (Sri Lanka) v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 (4 October 2019)  the Court of Appeal made the
        following observations about the test to be applied:


        (a)  the immigration rules and section 117B had to be construed  to
             ensure consistency with art.8;
        (b)  national authorities had a margin of appreciation when setting
             the  weighting  to  be  applied  to  various  factors  in  the
             proportionality assessment;
        (c)  the test for an assessment outside the immigration  rules  was
             whether a fair balance was struck between competing public and
             private interests;
        (d)   that  proportionality  test  was  to  be   applied   to   the
             circumstances of the individual case;
        (e)  there was a requirement for proper evidence;
        (f)  there was in principle no limit to the factors which might  be
             relevant to an evaluation under article 8'.


    19. All relevant guidance has been carefully  considered  in  assessing
        the merits of this appeal.
    20. Applying  the  structured  approach  set  out  in  (R  (Razgar)  v.
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL  27;  it  is
        not disputed the core question  in  this  appeal  has  always  been
        whether any interference in the family and private life relied upon
        by the appellant is proportionate to the legitimate aim relied upon
        by the Secretary of State, which is that of  effective  immigration
        control.
    21. The burden of establishing the decision is proportionate lies  upon
        the Secretary of State.
    22. It is also necessary to consider the effect of the decision on  all
        members of the family. See Beoku-Betts v. Secretary of  State  for
        the Home Department [2008] UKHL 38 . In this appeal the core family
        members are the appellant's husband and his family in the UK.
    23. In relation to the appellant's private  life,  Section  117B(5)  is
        relevant  in  light   of  her  precarious  status.   Case  law  has
        established that for the purposes of section 117B(5),  anyone  who,
        not being a citizen of the  United  Kingdom,  is  present  in  this
        country and who has leave to  reside  here  other  than  to  do  so
        indefinitely, has a precarious immigration status' see- Rhuppiah v.
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58. This  is
        not disputed by Mr Adebayo.
    24. Mr Adebayo focused a large proportion of his submissions  upon  the
        compassionate element of this appeal arising from  the  appellant's
        miscarriages. The medical evidence  provided  in  the  most  recent
        bundle and the appellant's witness statement indicates that she has
        now conceived three  times,  but  that  all  the  pregnancies  have
        failed.
    25. The impact upon the appellant and her  husband  and  the  emotional
        distress caused form the first miscarriage is a  preserved  finding
        from  the  FTT  determination.  It  is  accepted  that  whilst  one
        miscarriage  is  heart  breaking  enough,  albeit   not   uncommon,
        recurrent miscarriages can lead to a situation akin to a  'horrible
        nightmare'. The impact upon the appellant  and  her  husband  as  a
        result of these unfortunate events is understood.
    26. The statistics tell us, however, that multiple miscarriage  happens
        in 15 - 20% of pregnancy and therefore the claim by Mr Adebayo that
        the fact the appellant has suffered three  miscarriages  makes  the
        case 'exceptional' is not  made  out.  It  is  also  the  case  the
        appellant has failed to produce sufficient evidence relating to the
        cause of the miscarriages, which could relate either to her or  her
        husband, that establishes there is anything exceptional in relation
        to this case such that she is required  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom.  It  is  not  made  out,  for  example,  that  if  medical
        facilities were required in Canada, they would not be available  to
        the  appellant.  Reference  was  made   in   the   submissions   to
        vulnerability to Covid-19 arising from a vitamin D deficiency,  but
        it is not made out the appellant would not have access to vitamin D
        supplements which can be  obtained  from  high  chemist  or  GP  in
        Canada.
    27. The appellant's claim, and that made by her husband, that he  would
        not be able to find employment in Canada is not made out as it  was
        admitted by the appellant in cross examination  no  enquiries  have
        been made to establish whether her husband will be able  to  obtain
        work in  Canada.  The  claim  he  will  not  is  pure  speculation,
        suggested to enhance a case.  Insufficient evidence was adduced  to
        show there will be any adverse impact upon the appellant's  husband
        in relation to his employment prospects, or family connections,  if
        he had to leave the United Kingdom to accompany  the  appellant  to
        Canada.  No  enquiries  have  been  made  regarding  prospects   of
        obtaining  a  spouse  Visa.   It   was   not   made   out   it   is
        disproportionate for the appellants husband  to  travel  to  Canada
        with her while she made an application to return to the UK if  they
        did not want to live there.
    28. The evidence is that the appellant has family in Canada  and  there
        was insufficient evidence to show  that  she  would  not  have  the
        support and assistance of her family on return.  It  has  not  been
        shown there are any insurmountable obstacles to reintegration  into
        Canada individually or as a couple.
    29. The appellant also admitted, in rely to a question put  to  her  in
        cross examination, that  no  enquiries  have  been  made  with  the
        British High Commission to ascertain how long it would take for  an
        application for entry clearance, to enable her return to the United
        Kingdom lawfully as a spouse, to be granted.  There is no  evidence
        of inordinate delay by the British High Commission  in  Canada  who
        are those able to undertake all the enquiries required in a case of
        a person seeking leave to enter  the  UK  in  this  capacity.   The
        appellants claim that any delay will be  disproportionate  is  mere
        speculation and not made out on the evidence.
    30. The appellant's claim that an application would take much longer as
        a result of the current application having been made and refused is
        not supported by any evidence  and  is  mere  speculation.  As  Mrs
        Petterson observed, the appellant has remained  in  United  Kingdom
        with section 3C  leave  pending  the  conclusion  of  these  appeal
        proceedings and has therefore not yet overstayed. If the  appellant
        returned voluntarily to Canada, she will not be removed at cost  to
        the public purse either which is a point in her favour.
    31. Although the appellant claims she  was  told  that  as  a  non-Visa
        national she will be able to switch  categories  this  is  not  the
        correct legal position in light of the specific  provision  of  the
        rules preventing  the  same.  The  possession  of  a  valid  spouse
        settlement visa is a mandatory requirement for a person wishing  to
        remain in the UK with their spouse for longer than 6 months.
    32. I do not find the appellant adduced sufficient evidence to  warrant
        a finding  that  it  is  unreasonable  or  irrational  in  all  the
        circumstances to expect her to return to Canada,  or  that  it  has
        been made out that the family life she and her husband enjoy in the
        United Kingdom cannot  continue  in  Canada.  Although  Mr  Adebayo
        suggested the husband faced insurmountable  obstacles  in  securing
        employment this  is  not  made  out  on  the  facts  of  this  case
        especially in light of his failure to make  any  proper  enquiries.
        Nor is there any evidence of a disproportionate adverse  effect  on
        any other family member.
    33. Mr  Adebayo  sought  to  rely  upon  the  decision  in  R  (on  the
        application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
        separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) in  which
        it was held that (i) Appendix FM does not include consideration  of
        the question whether it would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  an
        individual to return to his home country to make an entry clearance
        application to re-join family members in  the  U.K.  There  may  be
        cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life
        being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where  temporary  separation  to
        enable an individual to make an application for entry clearance may
        be disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the individual to
        place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary
        separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.
        It will not be enough to rely solely upon the  case-law  concerning
        Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. (ii) Lord  Brown  was  not  laying
        down a legal test when he suggested in Chikwamba that  requiring  a
        claimant to make an application  for  entry  clearance  would  only
        "comparatively  rarely"  be  proportionate  in  a  case   involving
        children (per Burnett J, as he then was, in R (Kotecha  and  Das  v
        SSHD [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin)).
    34. The problem for the appellant in this case is that she  has  failed
        to provide sufficient evidence to show  that  temporary  separation
        will interfere disproportionately with any of the protected rights.
        The desire to remain in the UK is not enough.
    35. In TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 it was found at [25]:

       25. The settled jurisprudence of the ECtHR is that it is  likely  to
           be only in an exceptional case that article 8 will necessitate a
           grant of  leave  to  remain  where  a  non-settled  migrant  has
           commenced family life in the UK  at  a  time  when  his  or  her
           immigration status is precarious (see, for  example Jeunesse  v
           Netherlands (2016) 60 EHRR 17 at [100] and [114]). That general
           principle applies  to  any  consideration  of  the  Rules  which
           involves  engaging  with  a  requirement  or  requirements  that
           possess an article 8 element  (often  wrongly  described  as  an
           article  8  consideration  within  the   Rules)   and   to   the
           consideration  of   article   8   outside   the   Rules.   Where
           precariousness exists it affects the weight to  be  attached  to
           family life in the balancing exercise. That is because article 8
           does not guarantee a right to choose one's country of residence.
           Both the unlawful overstayer and the temporary migrant  have  no
           right to remain in the UK  simply  because  they  enter  into  a
           relationship with a British citizen  during  their  unlawful  or
           temporary stay. The principle was accepted in Agyarko at [49] to
           [54] leading to a statement of general principle at [57]:
           "In general, in cases concerned with precarious family  life,  a
           very strong or compelling claim  is  required  to  outweigh  the
           public interest in immigration control."

        26.  In relation to assessing the public interest, it is  necessary
           to consider section 117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002, as noted above, which reads:


           ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


           117A Application of this Part


           (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


           (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
           life under Article 8, and


           (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
           Rights Act 1998.


           (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


           (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
           and


           (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
           to the considerations listed in section 117C.


           (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
           question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified under Article
           8(2).


           117B Article 8:public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases:


           (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
           public interest.


           (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


           (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


           (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


           (4)  Little weight should be given to- (a) a private life, or


           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
           established by a person at a time when the person is in the
           United Kingdom unlawfully.


           (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established
           by a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
           precarious.


           (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and


           (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.


    36. It was held in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 that a court or tribunal  had
        to decide  whether  the  refusal  to  grant  leave  to  remain  was
        proportionate in the  particular  case  before  it,  balancing  the
        strength of the public interest in the removal  of  the  person  in
        question against the impact on private and family  life.  In  doing
        so, it should give appropriate weight to the Secretary  of  State's
        policy, expressed in the rules and instructions,  that  the  public
        interest in immigration control can be outweighed, when considering
        an application for leave to remain brought by a person in the UK in
        breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
        obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. "The critical
        issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to the  strength
        of the public interest in the removal of the  person  in  the  case
        before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong  to  outweigh
        it. In general, in cases concerned with precarious family  life,  a
        very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the  public
        interest in immigration control".
    37.  The  Supreme  Court  referred  to  the  judgment  in  Jeunesse   v
        Netherlands and said that  the  fact  that  family  life  had  been
        established by an applicant in the full knowledge that his stay  in
        the UK was  unlawful  or  precarious  affected  the  weight  to  be
        attached  in  the  balancing  exercise.  Circumstances   could   be
        envisaged however "in which people  might  be  under  a  reasonable
        misapprehension as to their ability to maintain a  family  life  in
        the UK, and in which a less stringent approach might  therefore  be
        appropriate"  (para  53).  Nevertheless,  in  general,   in   cases
        concerned with precarious family life, a very strong or  compelling
        claim is required to outweigh the public  interest  in  immigration
        control.
    38. In this case both the appellant and her husband were aware  of  her
        immigration status  and  that  she  had  neither  applied  for  nor
        obtained a Visa giving her permission to enter the  United  Kingdom
        to be with her husband. It is not made out that the appellant could
        be said to have been under a 'reasonable misapprehension' as to her
        ability to maintain her family life in the United  Kingdom.  It  is
        not made out that a less stringent approach of the  type  envisaged
        by the Supreme Court is applicable in this case. The simple fact of
        the matter is that the appellant came to the United Kingdom  to  be
        with the person who is now her husband  and  now  claims  that  she
        wishes to remain without having any  application  considered  under
        the Immigration Rules.
    39. As a result of the appellants husband's employment and support in
        the UK it is not suggested she will be burden on taxpayers or
        unable to integrate into society in the UK as she speaks English,
        but an appellant can obtain no positive right from either section
        117B(2) or (3) whatever the degree of his/her fluency in English,
        or the strength of his financial resources'. See AM (s117B) Malawi
        [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC).
    40. It is not made out any medical issues arise  sufficient  to  engage
        article 3 ECHR, or article 8 on the basis removal will amount to an
        interference with the appellants private life based upon access  to
        medical services sufficient to make the decision disproportionate.
    41. Whilst Mr Adebayo refers to the Covid-19 situation, the  respondent
        has published removal policies  relating  to  those  unlawfully  in
        United Kingdom which includes specific  consideration  of  ensuring
        safe removals in such circumstances.
    42. The error of law finding illustrates the appellant's claim that she
        will be unable to fly due to the lockdown was not  shown  to  be  a
        determinative point in  light  of  the  resumption  of  flights  by
        airlines to Canada. Even though at the date of this decision  there
        is  another  lockdown  in  the  UK  and  international  travel   is
        difficult, it is not made out this is a situation that is likely to
        prevail indefinitely and even if it remains  until  the  summer  or
        beyond that does not make the decision arguably disproportionate.
    43. It is also the case that despite the general  restrictions  on  the
        population, in relation to immigration removals, as of  22  January
        2021, there is no  evidence  of  a  general  policy  of  suspending
        removals. 285 people were removed between 1 April and 30 June  2020
        and charter flights have continued to operate, with more  scheduled
        during this month and beyond.
    44. The appellant's case is purely that she and  her  husband  wish  to
        choose where they want to live as a  couple  and  that  is  in  the
        United Kingdom.  It  is  a  preserve  finding  that  there  are  no
        insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant   and   her   husband
        continuing their family life together in Canada. I  find  that  the
        respondent has established that the interference in  any  protected
        rights that will result as a result  of  the  requirement  for  the
        appellant to return to Canada, where she can continue to live  with
        her husband or to make an application to return to United  Kingdom,
        is with the States margin, lawfully,  and  has  been  shown  to  be
        proportionate. It  has  not  been  established  there  is  anything
        exceptional to which sufficient weight can be  given,  individually
        or  cumulatively,  to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest   in
        effective immigration control.
    45. On that basis the appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

    46. I dismiss the appeal.





   Anonymity.


    47. The First-tier Tribunal made not an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
        of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 21 January 2021.












