
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number HU/20060/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2021                         |On 15 February 2021           |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   A Q D I
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms X Vengoechea, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
                    Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  He came to the UK in  2002,  at
    the age of almost 22.   The essentials of his immigration and  criminal
    history are set out in the decision of FtT Judge Farrelly,  promulgated
    on 8 October 2019, allowing his appeal.

 3. There have been some complexities of procedure since then, which it  is
    not necessary to detail.  Any extensions of time  required  for  filing
    submissions, or for other purposes, are granted.

 4. For present purposes, the further relevant materials, which  should  be
    read with this determination, are:

      i) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT, filed on 14 October 2019: -
         One, misdirection of law (failure to identify and  apply  criterion
         of very compelling circumstances); Two, misdirection and inadequacy
         of reasons on integration in the UK; and  Three,  misdirection  and
         inadequacy of reasons on integration in Somalia.

     ii) Grant of permission by FtT Judge Neville, dated 25 February 2020.

    iii) Appellant's rule 24 response, dated 24 March  2020,  submitting  no
         error of law on any of the 3 grounds.

     iv) Submissions for the SSHD  dated  23  April  2020,  asking  for  the
         decision of the FtT to be set aside.

      v) Submissions for the appellant, filed on 28 April  2020,  responding
         to the above.

 5. Parties agreed that there should be an oral  hearing.   The  technology
    enabled that to take place effectively by remote means.   There  was  a
    technical hitch such that it was not  possible  to  make  a  recording.
    Parties agreed that could be dispensed with.

 6. Representatives made helpful and  focused  submissions,  based  on  the
    materials above.  The SSHD asked for the decision of the FtT to be  set
    aside, while the appellant argued that it should stand.

 7. I indicated that I would reserve my  decision  on  error  of  law,  and
    sought submissions on what should follow, if the decision  were  to  be
    set aside.  Ms Vengeochea, having taken instructions, asked the  UT  to
    proceed immediately to remake the decision, based on all  the  evidence
    which had been placed before the FtT.   There  was  no  application  on
    either side to add to those materials.  Mrs Pettersen was  content  for
    any fresh decision to be approached in that way.

 8. Further submissions  on  remaking  the  decision  were  brief,  as  all
    relevant matters had been canvassed in the "error of  law"  discussion.
    I reserved my decision on both aspects.

 9. The immigration rules provide as follows:

         Deportation and Article 8


         A398. These rules apply where:


             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
             deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


             (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
             against him to be revoked.


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and


             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or


             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because, in the
             view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in
             assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or
             399A applies and, if it does not, the public interest in
             deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
             the UK, and


                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and


                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                      or


             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and


                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                  (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -


             (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most
             of his life; and


             (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his
             integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
             deported.


10. The statutory scheme in part 5A of Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 includes section 117C:

         Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
         criminals


         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.


             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


11. It is undisputed that the appellant is a foreign  criminal  subject  to
    deportation under those provisions, which can be resisted  only  if  he
    meets  one  (or   both)   exceptions,   or   shows   "very   compelling
    circumstances, over and above" those exceptions.

12. The appellant does  not  advance  any  case  under  the  "family  life"
    exception.

13. The appellant accepts that the FtT's decision cannot be read as holding
    that the "private life" exception was made out, and that  the  question
    is whether the FtT found there to be very compelling circumstances over
    and above that exception.

14. The SSHD says  that  such  a  conclusion  is  simply  absent  from  the
    decision, and that  it  made  no  findings  on  the  facts  capable  of
    supporting the outcome.

15. Ms  Vengoechea  realistically  acknowledged  that  the  layout  of  the
    decision might be thought not to follow the scheme of statute  and  the
    rules.  She argued that the position was more  complex  than  the  SSHD
    maintained, and that the judge had identified factors  which  justified
    his conclusion.  She referred to the appellant's problems with alcohol;
    mental health issues; the precarious existence awaiting him in Somalia;
    lack of clan support; lack of financial support; his  offending,  being
    at the lower end; lack of improvement in general conditions in Somalia;
    poor mental health provision,  indeed,  absence  of  even  basic  care;
    difficulties of relocation in Somalia; all such that the FtT  had  been
    entitled to find very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  the
    exceptions. Even if the FtT's approach was "non-linear",  that  was  in
    effect what it had done, and no error of law was disclosed.

    Error of law.

16. I accept the submission that it does not matter whether the legal tests
    have been recited, if the  substance  of  the  decision  justifies  the
    outcome.

17. Ms Vengeochea did her best to promote such a  reading,  but  it  cannot
    reasonably be detected.

18. The judge says at [30] that he seeks "to apply the check list principle
    suggested in the case law".  It is not clear what he means by that, but
    he then proceeds to a wide-ranging exercise.  At [36] he says  that  he
    has "sought to balance  all  the  various  factors",  and  at  [39]  he
    concludes that deportation would be "disproportionate  ...  bearing  in
    mind [the appellant's] integration here and the obstacles he would face
    on return".

19. Earlier in his decision, the judge found that  the  appellant  has  not
    been here for most of his life, that his degree of integration  in  the
    UK is weak, and that obstacles to integration do not  reach  the  level
    required by the private life exception.  He  has  referred  to  nothing
    which does not fall within that exception.

20. The SSHD's grounds and submissions are not merely a  disagreement  with
    the FtT's evaluation of the evidence.  They  disclose  that  judge  has
    fallen into the error off deciding the appeal by engaging  in  a  free-
    ranging proportionality exercise, as if that had no limits set  by  the
    rules and by statute.  His conclusions cannot  be  read  as  respecting
    those parameters.

21. The decision falls to be set aside.

    Remaking the decision: (i) the private life exception.

22. The appellant has lived in the UK for over 18 years.  He is aged 41 and
    has not lived here "for most of his life".

23. The appellant's residence from 2003 to 2010 was not lawful, so he falls
    further short of the residence requirement.

24. The appellant claimed to have learned  English,  and  the  respondent's
    decision accepted that ability; but it emerged  in  the  FtT  that  his
    command of the language, even after all these years, is poor.

25. The appellant's persistent and escalating criminal record goes  against
    his degree of integration in the UK.

26. The appellant said he was once in a (fairly brief) relationship with  a
    UK citizen.  Although, at highest, that did not come  near  the  family
    life exception, it might  have  contributed  to  private  life  and  to
    integration.  However, his latest evidence is that the relationship had
    ended.

27. The appellant vaguely claims to have  worked,  at  times,  but  he  has
    provided no evidence of any significant employment history, or  of  any
    other positive contribution he has made while living here.

28. The appellant has not accepted and assumed the  culture,  core  values,
    customs, and social behaviour of  the  UK.   His  social  and  cultural
    integration is minimal.

29. The appellant says that on return he will have no clan support, but  he
    failed in previous proceedings to establish that he is from a  minority
    clan, so there is no  reason  to  think  that  feature  will  make  his
    reintegration any more difficult.

30. Ms Vengoechea referred to  evidence  and  case  law  on  difficulty  in
    relocating away from Mogadishu, due to the activities of Al-Shabab; but
    the appellant is from Mogadishu.

31. The appellant refers to a history of alcohol abuse, but with no current
    problems, and has been abstinent for some time.  There  is  nothing  to
    support this as a significant difficulty in reintegration.

32. The appellant provides a report by Dr  Jeremy  M  Stirling,  consultant
    psychiatrist, prepared following a  60-minute  examination  on  3  June
    2019.  Dr Stirling opines that the  appellant  likely  suffers  from  a
    mental disorder, possibly but not definitely  PTSD,  and  alternatively
    from "generalised anxiety disorder with PTSD symptoms"; which  is  very
    likely to get worse in Somalia because he "would  be  returning  to  an
    environment he perceives as life-threatening".

33. The appellant had no treatment or medication prior to  the  psychiatric
    report.  Although the report recommends assessment and therapy, he  has
    not sought treatment since.

34. The  report  does  not  doubt  the  appellant's  account  of  his  past
    experiences in Somalia.  It is not  its  function  to  do  so.   It  is
    undermined, to some extent, by the  appellant's  failure  to  establish
    that account.

35. Mental health facilities in Somalia are scant.  However,  the  evidence
    does not show that the appellant is likely to suffer  through  lack  of
    access to such facilities, as he does not take advantage of  them  even
    where they are available.

36. The psychiatric report and other evidence do not support a finding that
    the mental health aspect of the  case  discloses  a  "very  significant
    obstacle" to reintegration.

37. The appellant would have the benefit of a package  of  assistance  from
    the respondent to help him  to  settle  back  into  Somalia.   Even  if
    relatively modest, and not long term, that is of some significance.

38. The third element of the private  life  exception  is  not  essentially
    concerned with general difficulties of life in the  receiving  country,
    as explained by Moore-Bick LJ in Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  813  at
    [14]:

         In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration"  into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one.  It  is  not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life.

39. The appellant resists the prospect of  reintegrating  in  Somalia,  and
    that might entail some difficulty; but he would be  an  insider  rather
    than an outsider.

40. To succeed on the private life exception, the appellant needs  to  meet
    all of requirements (a), (b) and (c).  He falls well short on each one.



    Remaking the decision: (ii) "very compelling  circumstances,  over  and
    above" the private life exception.

41. In this exercise, all matters continue to weigh  in  the  balance;  but
    there must be something additional.

42. The general difficulties  of  life  in  Somalia  were  relied  upon  as
    obstacles to integration.  They do not qualify the  appellant  for  any
    other form of protection and are not at a  level  to  constitute  "very
    compelling circumstances".

43. I notice only one other aspect said to support the appellant which does
    not fall within the private life  exception:  his  offending,  although
    serious, was at the lower end of the deportation scale.  I accept  that
    as a corollary of section of 117C(2) the public interest in deportation
    is not at its highest.  However, I do not consider that can  constitute
    a circumstance over and above the exception.  The facts which bring the
    appellant into the scheme of deportation cannot also give him a way out
    of it.

44. Alternatively, even  if  the  relatively  low  level  of  offending  is
    relevant, it does not constitute "very compelling circumstances".







    Conclusion.

45. The deportation of the appellant, being a foreign criminal, is  in  the
    public interest.  He accepts that the family life  exception  does  not
    apply.  He has not shown that he meets the private life exception.   He
    has not  shown  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  that
    exception.

46. The decision of the FtT having been set aside, the decision substituted
    is that the appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

47. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  It  is  not  clear  that  one  is
    required, but the matter was not addressed in  the  UT.   Anonymity  is
    maintained herein.


        Hugh Macleman

     2 February 2021
     UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




