
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20132/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2020                  |On 22 April 2020                     |
|Judgment given orally at hearing     |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                               Husnain Mushtaq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Akinbolu of Counsel, HRS Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 22  April  1990.
    He was in the UK between 2007 and 2015 with leave to remain,  initially
    at least, as the child dependent of his father.  He made an application
    for further leave to remain on 24  May  2012  which  was  refused,  his
    father by that time having left the UK to return  to  Pakistan.     The
    application was made on the basis of the appellant's ties  to  the  UK,
    having arrived in 2007 when he was aged 17,  having  studied  here  and
    having a brother in the UK.  His appeal against  the  refusal  of  that
    application was dismissed in 2014.

 2. The appellant then made another application, for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life.  On 24 July 2014  that  application
    was also refused, on  4  December  2014.   He  then  made  yet  another
    application for leave to remain on 5 March 2015, which was  refused  on
    12 May 2015.

 3. On 26 June 2015, following the execution of a  search  warrant  at  the
    appellant's home address, he was arrested and detained  and  thereafter
    left the UK on 4 July 2015.  The appellant was an  overstayer  from  16
    July 2014 which is when his appeal rights were exhausted.

 4. The appellant,  having  left  the  UK  voluntarily,  and  this  is  not
    disputed, at his own expense, then made an application on 8  June  2018
    for entry clearance as a spouse. That  application  was  refused  in  a
    decision dated 4 September 2018 and that refusal is the subject of this
    appeal.  The  application  was  refused  with  reference  to  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  That paragraph applies
    in circumstances where an individual  has  previously  contrived  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules, in this  case
    by overstaying and there are said by the respondent to  be  aggravating
    circumstances such has to justify the application of paragraph 320(11).
     Where that paragraph of  the  Rules  applies,  an  application  should
    "normally" be refused. Thus, a refusal based on  paragraph  320(11)  is
    discretionary rather than mandatory.

 5. The appellant's appeal against  the  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kinch on 5  August  2019.   Judge  Kinch  dismissed  the
    appeal because she decided that the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") was
    correct in applying paragraph 320(11).  Considering Article 8, she also
    concluded that the decision did not amount to a disproportionate breach
    of the appellant's right to family and private life.

 6. The grounds of appeal in relation to Judge Kinch's decision  argue  the
    following. It is asserted that she erred in distinguishing the decision
    in PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440
    IAC.  It is contended that there are, in fact, no  "truly  aggravating"
    features identified in this case, the phrase 'truly aggravating'  being
    taken from [14] of PS India.  It is argued that there was  no  evidence
    that the applications made by the appellant for leave  were  frivolous.
    Before removal directions were set the appellant left the UK, and  thus
    there  is  no  suggestion  that  he  failed  to  comply  with   removal
    directions.  The respondent, it is contended, would  need  to  identify
    factors which are aggravating,  sufficient  to  come  within  paragraph
    320(11).

 7. Ms Akinbolu relied on the grounds in her oral submissions.  She took me
    to the decision  in  PS  India,  in  particular  at  [11]-  [14].   She
    emphasised that if the purpose is to encourage people to leave the  UK,
    they  should  not  be  penalised  unduly  where  there  are  no   truly
    aggravating circumstances.  That, it was submitted, is the import of PS
    India.

 8. Ms Akinbolu highlighted various undisputed factual matters such as, for
    example, that the appellant entered the UK as  a  child  and  when  his
    leave expired he sought further leave to  remain  on  three  occasions.
    Those applications were  unsuccessful  because  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules in different respects.

 9. I was referred to what was said in the  appellant's  witness  statement
    about the circumstances in which he made  those  applications  and  the
    legal advice that  he  was  given.   In  those  circumstances,  it  was
    submitted, Judge Kinch was wrong to distinguish PS India.

10. In her submissions, Ms Cunha readily accepted that Judge Kinch erred in
    law in misapplying Section 117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), that is  to  say  the  little  weight
    provisions concerning a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner
    at a time when the person is in the UK unlawfully.

11. She questioned, however, whether that error of law  was  material.   Ms
    Cunha submitted that there was no misapplication of the decision in  PS
    India in the sense advanced on behalf of the  appellant.   She  pointed
    out the history in terms of the unsuccessful applications for leave  to
    remain and the fact that the appellant only left after he was arrested.
     Ultimately however, it was accepted on behalf of the  respondent  that
    there were errors in the judge's reasoning in terms of identifying  the
    aggravating features necessary for paragraph 320(11) to apply. But as I
    understood Ms Cunha's submissions,  it  was  not  accepted  that  those
    errors of law necessarily required the decision to be set  aside.  Even
    if they did, there were sufficient factors such as to mean that the ECO
    was correct to apply paragraph 320(11).

    Assessment

12. I indicated to the parties that I was satisfied that  Judge  Kinch  did
    err in law in her consideration of paragraph 320(11)  and  additionally
    in relation to Article 8 in terms of Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.

13. There is, it seems to me, an inadequacy of  reasoning  in  the  judge's
    decision in terms of the identification  of  aggravating  circumstances
    within the meaning of the respondent's guidance, to which I shall  turn
    in a moment.  It is not  necessary  for  me  to  decide  the  point  in
    relation to whether she was right in saying  that  PS  India  could  be
    distinguished because it may be that Judge  Kinch  was  saying  nothing
    other than that the facts of the appellant's case were  different  from
    those in PS India.

14. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that
    paragraph 320(11) applied, Judge Kinch failed to appreciate the  import
    of PS India.  The reported guidance in that case is as follows:

         'In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11)  of  HC  395,  as
         amended, to refuse an application for entry  clearance  in  a  case
         where the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry clearance  in
         paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C)  the  decision
         maker  must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing  the  aggravating
         circumstances said to justify refusal and must have regard  to  the
         public interest in  encouraging  those  unlawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom to  leave  and  seek  to  regularise  their  status  by  an
         application for entry clearance.'

15. Contrary to PS (India), although one can see that Judge Kinch did  seek
    to identify the aggravating circumstances, she fell into error in  that
    respect as explained above.

16. So far as Article 8 is  concerned,  Judge  Kinch  decided  that  little
    weight was to be attached to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    wife,  whom  he  married  in  December  2017  in   Pakistan,   applying
    s.117B(4)(b) of the 2002 Act. That provides that little  weight  should
    be given to a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom  unlawfully.  Although  Judge  Kinch  acknowledged   that   the
    appellant was not in the UK unlawfully when he married the sponsor, she
    said that that was only because he had previously left  the  UK  having
    been arrested and detained as an overstayer.

17. However, the evidence before  the  respondent  was  that  they  met  in
    November 2017 in Pakistan. The appellant was not  in  the  UK  at  that
    time.  Whether  Judge  Kinch  was  under  the   impression   that   the
    relationship was formed in the UK before  the  appellant  left  is  not
    clear. On any view, however, s.117B(4)(b) has  no  application  to  the
    circumstances of their relationship. In finding otherwise, Judge  Kinch
    erred in law.

18. The errors of law are such as to require the decision to be  set  aside
    and for the decision to be re-made.

19. In re-making the decision I take into account what was said in PS India
    about  the  great  care  necessary   in   assessing   the   aggravating
    circumstances. It is also necessary to see if there is  any  assistance
    to be derived from the respondent's own guidance.

20. The current guidance appears to be that published on 14  November  2013
    entitled 'Frustrating the intentions of the Immigration  Rules:  RFL07,
    paragraph  320(11)'.   It  contains  a  section  entitled   'What   are
    aggravating circumstances?'. There then follows a list, which  is  said
    not to be  exhaustive.  The  fact  that  the  list  is  not  exhaustive
    necessarily means that there may be other factors not contained  within
    the list that can be taken into account.

21. According to that guidance, the aggravating circumstances  can  include
    actions such as, and I summarise:

           . absconding

           . failure to comply with removal directions after illegal entry

           . previous recourse to NHS treatment when not entitled

           . receipt of benefits when not entitled

           . using an assumed identity or multiple identities

           . previous use of a different identity  or  multiple  identities
             for deceptive reasons

           .  vexatious  attempts  to  prevent  removal,  for  example,  by
             feigning illness

           . attempts to frustrate arrest or detention

           .  a  sham  marriage,  marriage  of  convenience  or  polygamous
             marriage in the UK

           . harbouring an immigration offender

           . facilitating people smuggling

           . switching nationality

           . vexatious or frivolous applications.

22. It is clear that the context of the examples above indicate that  where
    aggravating circumstances  are  required,  as  they  are  in  paragraph
    320(11),  those  aggravating  circumstances  have   to   be   something
    significant, or to use the phrase from PS India,  "truly  aggravating".
    The word "truly" does not qualify the word aggravating,  but  it  means
    that the circumstances must be, in truth, aggravating circumstances.

23. In this case, whilst the appellant made three applications for leave to
    remain after his leave expired, it is  not  said  in  the  respondent's
    decision and was not advanced on behalf of the  respondent  before  me,
    that those applications  were  vexatious  or  frivolous,  although  the
    decision does refer to them. Apart from  the  respondent's  stance,  it
    seems to me that there is no evidence to support a conclusion that  any
    of  those  applications  were  frivolous   or   vexatious.    Frivolous
    applications are not necessarily,  or  not  even,  the  same  thing  as
    applications that do not succeed.  No details of the applications  were
    put before me on behalf of the respondent to demonstrate  that  any  of
    them was frivolous.   It  appears  to  be  the  case  simply  that  the
    applications were unsuccessful because they either  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of  the  Rules  or,  in  the  case  of  an  outside  Rules
    application, were just rejected on the merits.

24. The fact that the appellant left only after being arrested seems to  me
    to add very little to the mere fact of his having been  an  overstayer.
    Being an overstayer, plainly, is not  enough  for  the  application  of
    paragraph 320(11) because the individual  has  to  be  overstayer  with
    attendant aggravating circumstances.

25. Looking at all the circumstances, I am not satisfied that it  has  been
    established by the respondent that there are aggravating  circumstances
    in this case sufficient for paragraph 320(11) to apply.

26. Accordingly, the appeal must be allowed.

Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and I re-make the decision
    by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules  with  reference  to
    Appendix FM.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek                                  Date:  03rd
    April 2020


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee was paid, and assuming I have power to do so, I make  the  relevant
order in favour of the appellant in terms of a fee award.

