
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20666/2018
                                                               HU/20663/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                |                                |
|On 9 July 2019                        |On 18 July 2019                 |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                             MARYAM ZAHOOR AHMED
                                NASIRA ZAHOOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms G Patel instructed by Amjad Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms E Groves Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox, promulgated on 4 April  2019
   which  allowed  the   Appellant's   appeal   and   held   that   it   was
   disproportionate and unlawful under Article 8 of the European  Convention
   on Human Rights to refuse their human rights claim

Background

3. The Appellants A1 and A2 are a daughter and mother born  on  19.8.93  and
   5.4.1970 respectively although the year of birth  given  for  A1  in  the
   refusal letter is 1993. They are nationals of Pakistan.

4. In the Appellants entered the UK as the dependence of a foreign  diplomat
   in November 2013 when A1 was therefore 20 years old.  They were  included
   in successive  applications  on  the  basis  of  exemption  from  control
   ultimately valid until 11 May 2018.  On 6 October,  2017  may  apply  for
   leave to remain on the basis of family and private life.

5. On 22 September 2018 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons.  In respect  of
   A2 the Appellant was not a eligible to  apply  under  Appendix  FM  as  a
   partner or parent her partner was not British or settled in  the  UK  and
   because she lives as part of a family unit with A1.  This  was  therefore
   considered as a private life claim.  The Respondent did not consider that
   there were 'very significant obstacles' to A1s reintegration in  Pakistan
   and she had lived there for the majority of her life, she had family that
   could support their and she could speak the language.  In respect  of  A1
   there were no very significant obstacles to her reintegration in Pakistan
   as she had lived there throughout her childhood, for her formative  years
   and a proportion of her adult life and has visited Pakistan in 2015.  The
   refusal letter also considered whether A1s circumstances amounting to  to
   exceptional circumstances recognising that  she  suffered  from  cerebral
   palsy, was wheelchair bound and unable to communicate well verbally.  The
   letter noted that support for sufferers from cerebral palsy was available
   in Pakistan at the AGA  Khan  University  hospital  which  are  found  at
   multiple locations around Pakistan and the Movement for  Independence  of
   Disabled a charity based in  Lahore  provides  support  in  the  form  of
   psychological support for people with cerebral palsy to help them gain  a
   degree of independence.  It was noted  that  the  Appellant  was  not  in
   receipt of any form of regular medication and  the  specialist  equipment
   she used could be brought to Pakistan.  It was noted that  the  Appellant
   was cared for solely by her mother and this could continue on  return  to
   Pakistan where her father would be available for additional support.

The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  parties  agreed
   that the  only  issues  were  Articles  3  and  8  and  paragraph  276ADE
   (paragraph 15)

7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against
   the Respondent's decision. The Judge found that

    . A2's appeal was dependent on that of her daughter.


    . The expert evidence is that medical  services  are  not  available  in
      Pakistan (AB 61)


    . There are no adequate 'care arrangements' for adults only children and
      this was confirmed by at Aga Khan hospital.


8. Grounds of appeal were lodged which raised a number of issues  and  on  9
   May 2019 Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission only  in  respect  of
   those matters raised at paragraphs 6-16 which I summarise as follows:

   a) The Judge made contradictory findings in respect of A1s father and his
      ability to assist in her care.


   b) The Judge has failed to make adequate findings in respect of Article 8
      and  the  public  interest  factors  in  s  117B  of  the  Nationality
      Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  relevant  to  the  proportionality
      exercise.


   c) There was nothing exceptional about the  Appellants  circumstances  to
      warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules.


9. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Ms  Groves  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that:

   a) She relied on the grounds.

   b) The Appellants had lived in China and therefore there were  inadequate
      reasons why care would not be available in Pakistan.

   c) The Judge fails to identify what care the Appellant receives in the UK
      that she could not get in Pakistan.

   d) Given that the Judge did not accept that the father was no  longer  in
      the picture the findings in respect of 276  were  inadequate  as  they
      failed to take into account the network of available support.

10. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Patel submitted that :

   a) The Appellant is an adult and the letter  was  clear  no  support  was
      available for adults.

   b) The Judge had documentary evidence of her medical needs and heard oral
      evidence as to the social support she receives in the UK in  the  form
      of attendance at a day care centre that  would  not  be  available  in
      Pakistan.

   c) On the evidence before the Judge what private life could she  have  in
      Pakistan beyond her immediate family: in the UK she is meeting  people
      and socialising.

   d) The Appellants condition has deteriorated since she went to China.

   e) While acknowledging  that  a  different  Judge  may  have  come  to  a
      different conclusion she argued that the reasons given were adequate.

11. In reply Ms Groves on behalf of the Respondent submitted:

   a) The Appellant will face very significant obstacles wherever she lives.

   b) In relation to her medical care the Appellant mother is her main carer
      as she has no ongoing medical needs.

   c) There was no evidence that  trained  caregivers  were  unavailable  in
      Pakistan.

The Law

12.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law.

14. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by  the
   Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

      "The duty to give  reasons  requires  that  reasons  must  be  proper,
      intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court in
      Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964] 2 QB 467.  The only dispute in
      the present case relates to the last of those elements,  that  is  the
      adequacy of the reasons given by the FtT for its decision allowing the
      appellant's appeal.  It is important to appreciate  that  adequacy  in
      this context is precisely that, no more and no  less.   It  is  not  a
      counsel of perfection.  Still less should it provide an opportunity to
      undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see if  they  are
      wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits.  The purpose of the
      duty to give reasons is, in part, to enable the losing party  to  know
      why she has lost.  It is also to enable an appellate court or tribunal
      to see what the reasons for the decision  are  so  that  they  can  be
      examined in case some error of approach has been committed."


15. I have also considered the guidance given in UT Sri  Lanka  [2019]  EWCA
   Civ 1095 which reminds us f what was said in AH (Sudan)  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department at [30]:

      "Appellate courts should not rush to find  such  misdirections  simply
      because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts or
      expressed themselves differently."

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard those submissions I we  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. At the core of this case if the Judges finding (paragraph  39)  that  in
   fact the Appellants met the requirement of Paragraph  276ADE  vi  of  the
   Rules. In those circumstances  given  that  the  Rules  are  intended  to
   promote consistency, predictability and transparency  in  decision-making
   where issues under Article 8 arose, and to clarify the  policy  framework
   and to reflect the Government's and Parliament's view of how, as a matter
   of public policy, the balance should  be  struck  between  the  right  to
   respect for private and family life meeting the Rules  addresses  Article
   8. Thus in TZ and PG [2018] EWCA Civ  1109  at  paragraph  34  the  court
   stated

      "... where a person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference
      to an article 8 informed requirement, then this will be positively
      determinative of that person's article 8 appeal, provided their case
      engages article 8(1), for the very reason that it would then be
      disproportionate for that person to be removed."


18. Thus I am satisfied that in finding that the  Appellants  met  paragraph
   276ADE vi there was no additional requirement to make  separate  findings
   under s 117B of the NIA 2002 as the  grounds  suggest  as  Article  8  is
   deemed to be met.

19. The only issue therefore is whether the Judge gave adequate reasons  for
   the finding that the Appellants met the  requirements  of  276ADE  vi  in
   relation  to  the  very  significant  obstacles  faced  in  reintegrating
   reminding myself that the test is one of adequacy and no more, or as  the
   Court of Appeal stated is her reasoning 'tolerably clear':  the  test  is
   not whether the decision could have been  better  expressed  or  could  a
   Judge on the same evidence come to a different conclusion.

20. I accept that it would have been more helpful if the Judge  had  started
   by setting out the nature of the test under paragraph 276  ADE  vi,  what
   amounts to 'very significant obstacles', as this  was  the  core  of  the
   case, rather than listing a number of more generic cases (paragraph 9). A
   reference to  guidance given in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813  for  example
   would have been helpful in explicitly clarifying that integration is  not
   confined to the simple provision of health care as Ms Groves appeared  to
   suggest whether by the Appellants parents or a hospital but  also  should
   be an assessment of her capacity to  participate  in  life  in  her  home
   country, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there even
   if this was on the limited basis dictated by her health, to  be  able  to
   operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up  within  a
   reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give substance to the
   individual's private and family life . The refusal letter it seems to  me
   to a limited degree  recognises  this  in  suggesting  that  support  was
   available in Aga Khan  Hospital  but  importantly  in  referring  to  the
   charity that  assists  in  helping  the  disabled  to  gain  a  level  of
   independence which recognises the social and  rehabilitative  element  of
   treatment.

21. This was the context in which the Judge considered the medical  evidence
   produced by the Appellants, to rebut what was claimed to be available  in
   the refusal letter, to address both any medical needs  she  had  but  any
   social rehabilitation available that might assist the Appellant in having
   a life  outside  of  the  confines  of  her  immediate  family  and  thus
   integrating, albeit to a limited degree, in Pakistan. It was open to  the
   Judge to prefer this evidence in its entirety to the 'generic' (paragraph
   35) evidence of the Respondent.

22.  The Judge at paragraph 34 indicates  that  'medical  services  are  not
   available in Pakistan': while this may not  reflect  fairly  all  of  the
   contents of the letter of Dr Nizami of the  Institute  of  Psychiatry  in
   Rawalpindi the Judge was clear that what the Doctor said in  that  letter
   was accepted in its entirety and the Judge was not required to repeat  it
   verbatim. What was said in the letter that was relevant to the issues  to
   be determined was:

   a) A1 'enjoys to  socialize  and  interact  with  other  in  her  limited
      capacity and with the support of social workers  and  the  specialized
      healthcare service in UK.'


   b) The Appellant had  been  referred  (by  the  refusal  letter)  to  the
      rehabilitation services in Aga  Khan  Hospital  in  Karachi  which  is
      1500km from the Appellants home in Islamabad. The 'multiple locations'
      referred to in the refusal letter are in fact only sample and specimen
      collection centres  not  facilities  that  provide  rehabilitation  or
      medical care for cerebral palsy patients.


   c) The Movement for Disabled is described as an  'obscure  advocacy  with
      unidentified capacity to cater for any needs of patients with cerebral
      palsy. It also states that lately its website has stopped working  and
      it is not traceable


   d)  A1  requires  specialized  fluid  thickeners  and  bath  and   shower
      emollients which are not readily available in Pakistan.


   e) Its conclusion is that 'with no available facilities  for  social  and
      rehabilitation services' required for the Appellants wellbeing a  move
      would be detrimental to her 'physical, mental and social welfare.'


23. The Judge also  accepted  at  paragraph  34  the  evidence  of  Dr  Aziz
   Sonawalla a Consultant Neurologist and Senior Lecturer at  the  Aga  Khan
   Hospital. The Judge was entitled to give this letter  weight  given  that
   this was the hospital the refusal letter suggested could provide services
   that were relevant to the issues to be determined. The Doctor  identifies
   the  provision  of  4  separate  services  in  the  UK  including  social
   rehabilitation and education facilities which in particular would clearly
   be relevant to her ability to integrate and notes  'to  the  best  of  my
   knowledge these  kinds  of  facilities  are  not  available  anywhere  in
   Pakistan.' The Doctor notes that some facilities may be available in  the
   private sector but these are for children and not on any long term basis.
   He also states that he is unaware of any 'long term  employment  programs
   for such physically challenged persons' noting that he checked this  with
   colleagues who worked in Aga Khans rehabilitation  department.  He  makes
   clear 'The Aga Khan University Hospital  is  a  tertiary  medical  centre
   based in Karachi in the private sector.  However it  too  does  not  have
   facilities to cater for long-term rehabilitation for chronic conditions.'

24. The  Judge  also  had  in  the  bundle  and  appears  to  have  accepted
   (paragraph 39) the evidence from the Appellants GP Dr Needham at AB 65-67
   and no challenge to this evidence  is  recorded  in  the  ROP.  This  too
   addresses the positive impact of attendance at the Seashell  Trust  which
   explored ways to help her 'effectively express herself  and  become  more
   socially active' and provided access to work skills using  new  IT  based
   tools for social interaction and notes the positive impact  they  had  on
   her. The Dr notes, consistent with what was said by Dr Sonawalla,  'these
   opportunities in treatment and the access to education are not  available
   in Pakistan.'

25. It was open to the Judge to note there that  the  Respondent  relied  on
   'generic evidence' (paragraph 35) and to prefer  the  far  more  specific
   evidence provided by the Appellant.

26. Taking all  of  this  medical  evidence  into  account  and  given  that
   integration involves more than the provision of medical care either in  a
   hospital or at home but envisages an assessment of the Appellants ability
   to enjoy a private life and interaction with society beyond the  confines
   of her home and indeed communicate with those around her  the  Judge  was
   entitled to conclude that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
   the Appellants reintegration in Pakistan.

27. I would finally note that it would also be open to  the  Judge  to  find
   that A2 and her husband were not estranged as claimed  but  this  was  of
   limited relevance as the medical evidence did not suggest that social and
   rehabilitative treatment was available for adult  sufferers  of  cerebral
   palsy either in public or private hospitals.

28. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable and adequate  in  explaining
   why it was  accepted  that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to
   reintegration in Pakistan.

CONCLUSION

29. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

30. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
12.7.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

