
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20913/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 May 2021                     |On 2 June 2021                     |
|(remote hearing)                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       OLUWAFEMI EBENEZER JNR OLAPADE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Byrne, Counsel instructed by Visa Inn Immigration
                    Specialists

This has been a remote hearing to which both  parties  have  consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing  was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be  determined
in a remote hearing. I did not  experience  any  difficulties,  and  neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I will refer to the parties as they were designated in the First-tier
      Tribunal.

Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 18 June 1976. He entered
      the UK in 2013 as a visitor, with leave until 18 January 2015. He did
      not leave when his visa expired.

   3. On 2 March 2016 he applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis
      of his family life with a British partner and his son ("JO"), who is a
      British national born on 5 May 2015. He was granted leave until 22
      January 2019.

   4. On 24 April 2017 the appellant was convicted of a serious driving
      offence.

   5. On 21 January 2019 the appellant applied for further leave to remain
      on the basis of his family life with his partner and JO.

   6. On 24 July 2019 he was convicted of affray and, on 3 September 2019,
      sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.

   7. On 13 September 2019 the appellant was served with a decision to make
      a deportation order against him under section 32(5) of the UK Borders
      Act 2007. The appellant, in representations made on 1 October 2019,
      argued that his deportation would violate article 8 ECHR. On 11
      December 2019 the respondent served a deportation order on the
      appellant along with an appealable decision refusing his human rights
      claim. The respondent's decision also stated that it was not accepted
      that the appellant had a derivative right to reside in the UK under EU
      law as the primary carer of JO.

   8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Swaney ("the judge"). The
      judge's decision, which was promulgated on 30 one July 2020, is now
      being appealed by both parties.


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


   9. The judge found that the appellant, since his release from immigration
      detention on 10 March 2020, has been living with JO, his former
      partner (who is JO's mother) and his former partner's daughter from a
      previous relationship ("AC"). AC was 14 at the time of the hearing.

  10. The judge described the relationship between the appellant and his
      former partner as being "an on again and off again relationship".

  11. The judge found that the appellant is actively involved in caring for
      both JO and AC. With respect to the relationship between the appellant
      and AC, the judge found that the appellant is an important figure in
      AC's life and that AC regards him as being as important in her life as
      her biological father (who lives in Zimbabwe).

  12. The appellant relied on an independent social worker report by Ms
      Austin, that was prepared whilst the appellant was in prison (with the
      appellant participating by telephone). The judge identified
      inconsistencies in Ms Austin's report, and found that she overstated
      the likely impact of the appellant's deportation on the ability of the
      appellant's former partner to provide for her children. The judge
      stated that she could place "some weight" on the report.

  13. The judge addressed two distinct legal questions: firstly, whether the
      appellant has a derivative right to reside in the UK under regulation
      16(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016
      Regulations"); and secondly, whether his removal would violate article
      8 ECHR.

  14. With respect to the 2016 Regulations, the appellant argued that he has
      a derivative right to reside in the UK pursuant to regulation 16(5)
      because he and his former partner are the joint primary carers of JO
      and JO would be unable to reside in the UK if they both left for an
      indefinite period.

  15. The judge rejected this interpretation of regulation 16(5). Relying,
      inter alia, on Ruiz Zambrano v Office national de l'emploi (Case C-
      34/09), Chavez-Vilchez v Raad van bestuur van de Sociale
      verzekeringsbank (Case C-133/15) and Patel v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2019] UKSC 59, the judge found that the relevant
      question under regulation 16(5) was not whether JO would need to leave
      the UK if, hypothetically, both his parents were to do so, but rather
      whether he would in practice be compelled to leave the UK as a
      consequence of the appellant being removed. The judge found that JO
      has a stronger bond with his mother then with the appellant and that
      in the event of the appellant leaving the UK JO would remain with his
      mother in the UK. He therefore would not be compelled to leave the UK.

  16. With respect to article 8 ECHR, the judge directed herself to apply
      the framework in section 117C of the Nationality Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

  17. Applying section 117C(5), the judge found that both JO and AC are
      qualifying children and that the appellant had a genuine and
      subsisting relationship with them.

  18. In paragraph 59 the judge directed herself that the test under section
      117C(5), where a person subject to deportation has a genuine and
      subsisting relationship with a qualifying child, is whether the effect
      of deportation on that child is "unduly harsh". In paragraphs 61 and
      62 the judge again referred to the test of undue harshness, citing the
      relevant Supreme Court authority KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53. In paragraph 71 the
      judge concluded that the effect on AC would be unduly harsh.

  19. However, in paragraph 60 the judge stated that she needed to consider
      whether it was unreasonable to expect JO and AC to remain in the UK
      without the appellant, and in paragraph 66 a test of reasonableness
      was again referred to.

  20. The judge found that the effect of the appellant's deportation would
      not be unduly harsh for JO but would be for AC. The main reason the
      judge gave for finding that the unduly harsh threshold would be met in
      respect of AC was that she would suffer emotional harm from the
      cumulative effect of being separated from her biological father (who
      lives in Zimbabwe) and the appellant.

Grounds of Appeal

  21. The respondent sought, and was granted, permission to appeal. The
      appellant was subsequently also granted permission to appeal.

  22. The respondent's grounds of appeal argue that the judge's finding that
      the effect of the appellant's deportation on AC would be unduly harsh
      was inadequately reasoned and did not come close to demonstrating the
      severe or bleak outcomes envisaged in established case law. Reliance
      was placed on LE (St Vincent And the Grenadines) v The Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 505 and Secretary of
      State for the Home Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213, as
      well as MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), where it was said at paragraph 46:

           "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'
           does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or
           merely difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated
           threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or
           bleak. It is the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.
           Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an
           already elevated standard still higher."

  23.  It is also argued by the respondent that the judge failed to take
      into consideration the ability of AC's mother to successfully look
      after her children on her own as she has done for the majority of
      their lives.

  24. The appellant's grounds argue that:

        a. The judge, when evaluating undue harshness with respect to JO,
           failed to consider the difficulties JO's mother would have in
           affording to visit the appellant in Nigeria, given that she
           would still need to travel to Zimbabwe to visit AC's father; and
           failed to consider the impact on JO's education.


        b. The judge misapplied regulation 16 of the 2016 Regulations by
           failing to recognise that their meaning is clear: a person is
           entitled to a derivative right of residence where he is one of
           two parents sharing responsibility for a child and the effect of
           both those parents leaving the UK would be that the child would
           be unable to reside in the UK. The grounds contend that the CJEU
           case law relied upon by the judge is irrelevant as it represents
           the minimum level of protection required by article 20 TFEU and
           there is nothing preventing the 2016 Regulations from providing
           a more permissive and generous framework.

Regulation 16(5) of the 2016 Regulations

  25. Prior to the hearing, Mr Clarke applied for permission to cite an
      unreported Upper Tribunal decision which was promulgated on 2 February
      2021: SSHD v Velaj HU/12362/2017. Velaj is a decision by an Upper
      Tribunal panel which addressed the same arguments made by the
      appellant in respect of regulation 16(5). It sets out cogent reasons
      (with which I agree) as to why regulation 16(5) should be given a
      purposive interpretation consistent with CJEU jurisprudence. However,
      I do not need to consider Mr Clarke's application, or the appellant's
      ground of appeal in respect of regulation 16(5), because Mr Byrne
      stated that in the light of the panel's analysis in Velaj he was no
      longer pursuing this ground.

The effect of the appellant's deportation on AC

  26. The issue for the judge to determine was whether the effect of the
      appellant's deportation on AC would be unduly harsh under section
      117C(5) of the 2002 Act.

  27. Mr Clarke submitted that it is not possible to be satisfied that the
      judge applied the test of undue harshness under section 117C(5)
      because although reference is made in the decision to undue harshness,
      at paragraphs 60 and 66 the judge referred to reasonableness, which
      indicates that she may have had  in mind section 117B(6) of the 2002
      Act, which is applicable only where a person is not liable to
      deportation, rather than section117C(5), which applies in cases such
      as this involving foreign criminals. Mr Clarke also argued that the
      judge's failure to refer to MK (Sierra Leone) - or to harshness
      denoting something severe or bleak - reinforces that the judge did not
      apply the correct threshold.

  28. Mr Clarke also submitted that the reasons given by the judge were
      insufficient and did not support the conclusion that the effect on AC
      of the appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh. He argued that
      the judge failed to take into account that the appellant had resided
      with AC for only a brief period of time and did not make any findings
      on how AC's education (or life) would be negatively impacted. He
      argued that the judge needed to take into account, when considering
      the effect on AC, her finding that the appellant's former partner
      would be able to manage without him, as she had done for most of the
      children's life. He also highlighted the criticisms in the decision of
      the independent social worker, whose report, he argued, could not
      properly be relied upon because of fundamental mistakes about when the
      appellant and his former partner lived together.

  29. Mr Byrne acknowledged that the judge mistakenly referred to
      reasonableness but argued that this was no more than a slip. He noted
      that undue harshness was mentioned in paragraphs 59, 61, 62 and 71. He
      submitted that paragraph 71 demonstrates that the test of undue
      harshness was applied as it is explicitly stated in that paragraph
      that the judge was satisfied that the effect on AC of the appellant's
      deportation "would be unduly harsh". Mr Byrne argued that the judge
      did not need to refer to MK (Sierra Leone) or use the words "severe"
      or "bleak" as it was sufficient that she referred to KO (Nigeria).

  30. He also argued that the reasoning in the decision was adequate as the
      judge identified the basis for her findings, and explained the
      particular circumstances of AC that gave rise to undue harshness,
      which was the cumulative effect of separation from the appellant after
      already having been separated from her biological father.

  31. I am satisfied that the judge did not fall into any of the errors
      raised by the respondent, for the following reasons:

        a. First, although the judge referred in paragraphs 60  and  66  to
           reasonableness, it is plain, when considering paragraphs 59 - 71
           as a whole, that the judge was aware that  the  applicable  test
           was undue harshness and that she applied  this  test.  Paragraph
           71, in particular, leaves no doubt that the judge considered, in
           respect of AC, whether the effect on her would be unduly  harsh.
           I do not accept, therefore, that the  judge  applied  the  wrong
           test.


        b. Second, I do not accept that the judge failed to appreciate that
           undue harshness is a high threshold or erred by not referring to
           MK (or the references therein to harsh being severe  or  bleak).
           Having cited KO, which is a 2018 Supreme Court authority,  there
           was no need for the judge to quote from a  2015  Upper  Tribunal
           decision. The judge at paragraph 61 stated that it was  held  in
           KO that "the unduly harsh test is whether the  consequences  for
           the child will be inordinately or excessively harsh taking  into
           account all of the circumstances". This clearly  indicates  that
           the judge was aware that there is a high threshold.

        c. Third, the judge  gave  adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  she
           concluded that the undue harshness threshold was met in the case
           of AC. The judge considered the length of time AC has known  the
           appellant, the nature of their relationship, the stage  of  AC's
           life,  and  -  most  significantly  -  the  effect  on  her   of
           effectively losing a second father figure. The judge  stated  at
           paragraph 71 that it was the likely impact of  losing  a  second
           father figure that (just) persuaded her that the effect would be
           unduly harsh. The judge also distinguished between AC and JO. In
           respect of JO, she focused on the  ability  of  the  appellant's
           former partner to cope without the appellant and meet his needs.
           This was entirely appropriate given his young age. In  contrast,
           in respect of AC, the judge focused  on  the  emotional  impact.
           This indicates that the judge undertook a case specific approach
           looking at the reality of the situation for AC. In so doing, the
           judge was approaching the case consistently with recent Court of
           Appeal authorities. As explained in paragraph 22 of TD (Albania)
           v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2021]  EWCA  Civ
           619:


                 "The decision in HA (Iraq) does no more than  explain  that
                 what is required is a case-specific approach in  which  the
                 decision-maker  addresses  the  reality  of   the   child's
                 situation  and  fairly  balances  the   justification   for
                 deportation and its consequences."



The effect of the appellant's deportation on JO

  32. As I have upheld the judge's decision in respect of AC it is not
      necessary to determine whether she erred in respect of JO. That said,
      I am satisfied that the judge did not err. She gave clear reasons to
      explain why she found that the appellant's former partner would be
      able to successfully meet JO's needs and facilitate the maintenance of
      his relationship with the appellant. She was entitled, for these
      reasons, to conclude that the effect on JO of the appellant's
      deportation would not meet the unduly harsh threshold.


Conclusion


  33. The judge, when assessing the effect on AC and JO of the appellant's
      deportation, applied the correct legal test, took into account all of
      the material evidence and made findings, specific to each of them,
      that were supported by reasons. Caution must be exercised before
      interfering with evaluative decisions of first instance judges (see,
      for example, Lowe v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2021] EWCA Civ 62) and, although I am in no doubt that many judge's
      would have reached a different conclusion about whether the unduly
      harsh threshold was met in respect of AC, I am not satisfied that
      there is a basis to disturb the evaluative decision of the judge in
      this case.


Decision

  34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
      an error of law and stands.

|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |                                  |
|                                  |Dated: 21 May 2021                |

