
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20126/2019 (V)
                                                           HU/20409/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2020                 |On 29 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    mrs Farhat Zaffar (first Respondent)
                     Mr Zafar Iqbal (second Respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M. Vidal, Counsel, instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's application.  I  shall  refer  to  the
    Respondents as the Appellants as they were known before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  They are  husband  and  wife.
    Mrs Zaffar's date  of  birth  is  1  September  1953.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal referred to her as the first Appellant.  Mr Zafar Iqbal's (the
    second Appellant) date of birth is 24 September 1953.

 3. The second Appellant came to the UK on 30 June 2005 having been granted
    a work permit was joined by the first Appellant in 2006.  They have not
    had lawful leave since  13  November  2007.   They  have  made  various
    unsuccessful applications.  On 4 July 2016 they made an application  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.   This  was  refused.   Their  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris in a  decision  that  was
    promulgated on 12 October 2018.

 4. The Appellants made a further application for leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds on 27 June 2019.  That application  was  refused.   They
    appealed against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  their
    appeal were allowed by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  D  Lemer.
    Permission was granted to the Secretary of State by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Fisher on 15 June 2020.  Thus,  the  matter  came  before  me  on
    22 September to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal  erred  when
    allowing the appeal.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

 5.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  both  Appellants  through  an  Urdu
    interpreter. Their son (Osama Zafar), daughter (Mrs Ramiza  Zafar)  and
    daughter-in-law (Mrs Noor-Us-Saher Kayni) gave evidence.

 6. The Appellants' adult children are married to British  citizens.   They
    reside in the UK.  The Appellants have five grandchildren, AZ (born  15
    June 2015), AZF (born 21 April 2017), SRI (born 30 November  2013),  SI
    (born 7 November 2017) and SII (born 23 October 2018). The children are
    British citizens.

 7. The second Appellant's evidence was that he  and  the  first  Appellant
    live with their son.  They moved into the family home in 2018.   Before
    they lived in their own property. They continue  to  own  the  property
    from which is rented out.  They do not have property  in  Pakistan.  He
    worked as a structural engineer in Pakistan and he has a structure  and
    design company here in the UK which his son  looks  after.   He  had  a
    stroke on 6 January 2020.  As a result of which he is not able to  live
    independently.  The left side of his body is weak and he does not  have
    much use of his left hand.  He is  unable  to  drive  or  take  a  bath
    unassisted.  He is unable to go shopping or to cook.  He is  unable  to
    make  key  decisions.  He  finds  it  difficult   to   process   simple
    information.  His children take  him  to  hospital  appointments.   His
    daughter-in-law does most of the cooking.  His wife serves food to  him
    and  helps  him  administer  medication.  His  relationship  with   his
    grandchildren is close.  He described the biggest obstacle to returning
    in Pakistan would be to not having the love and support of his children
    and grandchildren.  He does not have the courage to return.  A carer in
    Pakistan would not be able to provide the emotional  support  that  his
    family in the UK provide.  He has not thought about going into  a  care
    home.  He  feels  depressed,  hopeless  and  suffers  with  high  blood
    pressure.

 8. He accepted that he  had  continued  to  work  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully until August 2015. He  had  no  choice  because  his  family
    needed his support.

 9. The first Appellant gave  evidence.   She  suffers  from  deteriorating
    memory, depression, insomnia, cholesterol, thyroid and stomach  ulcers.
    Her husband would not be able to look after them should they return  to
    Pakistan.  He does not have the full  function  of  his  hands  and  he
    sometimes falls over.  He can bath himself, but she must remain outside
    the bathroom.  She is unable to cook because  of  her  failing  memory.
    She attends appointments at the memory centre.  Her son and daughter-in-
    law help with her husband's private chores.  They  are  dependent  upon
    them  for  cooking,  laundry,  shopping,  taking  medication  and   for
    assisting them in attending appointments.  There is little that she can
    now do to help her husband and most of the support is provided  by  her
    children. She has a special bond with her grandchildren and a different
    but loving relationship with each child.  In their  culture  they  live
    with their sons in old age.  They do not go to an  old  people's  home.
    They have family in Pakistan but they have  not  seen  each  other  for
    twelve years.  They are not close and they would not be able to replace
    what they have in the United Kingdom.  Her sister lives in the UK  with
    her husband.  She  has  a  brother  in  Pakistan  but  he  has  limited
    resources and a family to care for.  She has become  dependent  on  her
    son and daughter-in-law.

10. The Appellants' son gave evidence. He works in the UK as  a  structural
    engineer.  He earns �60,000 per annum.  His wife works as a  tutor  and
    earns just over �20,000 per annum.  His children are  attached  to  his
    parents.  He has a very close  relationship  with  them.   His  parents
    treat his wife as their own daughter.  She takes care  of  their  diet,
    washing, health, medication, and other  requirements.   Separating  his
    parents from his children and their other  grandchildren  would  affect
    not  just  his  parents  but  the  children.   His  mother  has  severe
    depression and she is under investigation for dementia.  She  has  been
    allocated a community mental health nurse.  She is  completely  reliant
    on him, his wife, and his sister. She cannot be  trusted  to  cook  and
    turn off the cooker.  She has become disorientated. She is incapable of
    looking after herself or anyone else.  Since his father had a stroke he
    has been depressed because he is  now  physically  dependent  on  other
    people and because of the stress of his immigration case.  His  parents
    are in no state to live on their own.

11. The Appellants' daughter also gave evidence. It was broadly  consistent
    with her brother's. The Appellants' daughter-in-law gave evidence  that
    the second Appellant is "disturbed and unstable".  He is  dependent  on
    her and her husband for toilet visits  and  feeding.   He  cannot  walk
    around the house without feeling dizzy and out of breath.  His  anxiety
    and depression are obvious to visitors because he starts crying like  a
    child in front of everyone.

12. The judge recorded the closing submissions made by the  Respondent  who
    relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter acknowledging that the  second
    Appellant's stroke had taken place since the refusal but that there had
    been no post-operative complications.  It was accepted that he may have
    weakness in his left-hand side but that there  was  no  evidence  of  a
    significant weakness.  There was, according to the Presenting  Officer,
    no evidence that normal everyday tasks could not be undertaken  without
    the  assistance.  There  is  no  evidence  confirming  that  the  first
    Appellant has specific problems with her memory.  Emotional  ties  were
    addressed in the  previous  determination  by  Judge  Harris.   Medical
    treatment would be available in Pakistan  and  there  is  no  issue  in
    relation to affordability.

13.  The  Appellants'  submissions  included  the   acceptance   that   the
    documentary evidence relating to the second Appellant's condition post-
    stroke did not assist in terms of assessing his  level  of  incapacity,
    however, Counsel contended that  he  had  a  left  side  weakness.  She
    conceded that on a day-to-day basis he  could  do  limited  things  for
    himself. She submitted that he needed care from his wife and  daughter-
    in-law, and he needed assistance to walk and sit down.

14. The judge's attention was drawn to the 2018 determination. The  parties
    agreed that that should be the judge's starting point.  The Appellants'
    representative drew the judge's attention to a report of  15  May  2019
    from consultant psychiatrist Andrew Margo which postdates the  decision
    of Judge Harris.  Ms Vidal conceded  that  there  were  care  homes  in
    Pakistan but that she had not come across any assessments as  to  their
    quality and in any event the emotional care for  the  Appellants  could
    not be addressed in such a setting.

15. Before going on to make findings the judge considered the  decision  of
    Judge Harris in 2018 and he recorded the material findings of the judge
    as being as follows:-

      i) the length of time spent away from Pakistan by the Appellants  does
         not add great weight to the claim of there being  very  significant
         obstacles to integration;

     ii) it is not accepted that the Appellants have no continued connection
         with Pakistan.  They have clear cultural, linguistic  and  historic
         ties to the country;

    iii) it is accepted that the Appellants' son and his wife are  the  main
         breadwinners in the family.  It is not accepted, however, that such
         financial support could not be continued if the Appellants were  to
         be returned to Pakistan;

     iv) the Appellants' house in the  United  Kingdom  is  an  asset  which
         through rental  or  sale  could  pay  for  accommodation  costs  in
         Pakistan;

      v) there was no medical evidence indicating that the second  Appellant
         could not function on return to Pakistan.  The  medical  and  other
         evidence  did  not  show  that  his  physical  or   mental   health
         conditions, whether individually or cumulatively, would prevent him
         from re-establishing a life in Pakistan;

     vi) there was equally no medical evidence that  the  first  Appellant's
         medical  conditions  would  prevent  or  significantly  hinder  her
         reintegration into Pakistan;

    vii) having considered Dr Margo's report of 29 April  2016  it  was  not
         accepted that the first Appellant  would  be  suicidal  on  return;



   viii) it was accepted that the absence of family in Pakistan would  be  a
         major factor in the recurrence of  a  more  significant  depressive
         illness, but there was no reference, in Dr Margo's  report  to  the
         impairment that that would have on the first Appellant's ability to
         function on return to Pakistan;

     ix) no evidence had been provided as to  the  availability  of  medical
         care and treatment in Pakistan;

      x) family life, engaging Article 8 ECHR existed between the Appellants
         and their children;

     xi) the Appellants and their grandchildren were emotionally attached to
         one another but were not in a parental relationship.  The  children
         have  parents  to  care  for  and  supervise  them.   This  was  in
         accordance with their best interests;

    xii)  the  inevitable  diminishment  in  the  relationship  between  the
         Appellants and grandchildren would not so damage the best interests
         of the  children  so  as  to  amount  to  compelling  circumstances
         justifying  the  Appellants  remaining  in  the   United   Kingdom.



16.  The  judge  said  that  the  Appellants'  case   had   been   advanced
    predominantly on  the  basis  of  the  degeneration  of  their  medical
    conditions since the hearing before  Judge  Harris  and  that  reliance
    continues to be placed upon the strength of their emotional connections
    with their family.

17. The judge said that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is directed at the position
    on return to Pakistan, rather than loss of connections based in the UK.
     He accepted that to the extent that the loss of United  Kingdom  based
    relationships  inhibit  the  Appellants'  ability  to  reintegrate   in
    Pakistan is material to the assessment under the Immigration Rules.

18. The judge considered the medical evidence.  He said that as far as  the
    first Appellant is concerned and the evidence of  memory  loss,  namely
    that she has become forgetful,  leaving  on  the  cooker  and  becoming
    disorientated, the judge said that  the  "mere  absence  of  a  medical
    diagnosis for those symptoms does not  undermine  the  claim  that  the
    first Appellant has, in fact, suffered from those problems".   He  said
    on the balance of probabilities that the  first  Appellant  has  memory
    problems which has manifested itself in the  manner  described  by  the
    witnesses.  He found the witnesses  were  consistent  as  regards  this
    aspect of their evidence.  In addition he took into account Dr  Margo's
    evidence which referred to  the  first  Appellant  scoring  within  the
    dementia range in a memory test undertaken by Dr Henry Kinsler.  He did
    find, however, that she was able physically to  cook  albeit  that  the
    cooking is undertaken in the presence of her daughter-in-law who is  at
    home during the week.  The judge found that that did not  detract  from
    the contention, which he accepted, that the  first  Appellant's  memory
    problems  could  give  rise  to  a  dangerous  situation  if  she  were
    unattended and forgot that she had left the cooker on.

19. The judge referred to Dr Margo's being "quite shocked" at the change in
    the first Appellant's condition since he last saw her, arising from the
    traumatisation from immigration proceedings, as well as her  developing
    memory problems.  Dr Margo concluded that she continued to suffer  from
    a major depressive illness which is perpetrated by the terror of  being
    forced back to Pakistan.  Dr  Margo  referred  to  concerns  about  the
    potential for a suicide attempt.

20. Judge Lemer said at 32 as follows

         "Whilst Dr Margo has provided an updated report, referring  to  the
         deterioration in the first Appellant's condition, those conclusions
         continue to fall foul of the reservations expressed by  FTT  Harris
         in the 2018 determination, namely that:

         (i)  the prognosis is not framed in the context of  what  level  of
             impairment and more severe depressive illness  would  have  on
             the first Appellant's ability to function in  terms  of  daily
             life in Pakistan;

         (ii)     the report does not address what level of care  she  would
             require to function on a daily basis in Pakistan;

         (iii)    the report does not suggest that  medical  facilities  and
             treatment would not be available to  the  first  Appellant  on
             return".

21. The judge went on to consider the second Appellant, noting  that  there
    was very limited medical evidence as  to  the  continued  physical  and
    mental impact on him arising from a stroke in January 2020.  The  judge
    accepted that he has weakness on his left-hand side which has left  him
    requiring a stick to walk and means that he shakes when he holds a  cup
    of tea.  He also found that the evidence of the various  witnesses  was
    consistent that the second Appellant is now able to  take  a  bath  but
    needs to be monitored to ensure nothing happens to him when  he  is  in
    the bath.  The judge said  he  had  not,  however,  had  his  attention
    directed to any medical evidence as regards the second Appellant having
    developed any mental health problems or cognitive problems  on  account
    of his stroke.  The judge concluded that it would be reasonably open to
    the Appellants and their families to have arranged a consultation  with
    at least a GP to assess those aspects of the second Appellant's  health
    in advance of the hearing.  The judge  said  in  the  absence  of  such
    evidence whilst he was prepared to accept  that  the  second  Appellant
    suffers from depressed mood because of the ongoing physical  impact  of
    his stroke. However, he said that he is unable to conclude that he  has
    any diagnosed mental health problem nor that he has developed cognitive
    issues as is suggested in his witness statement.

22. The judge took note that in the 2018 determination there was  reference
    to there being no close family members in  Pakistan.  However,  it  was
    also accepted that the first  Appellant's  brother  continued  to  live
    there,  as  did  the  second  Appellant's  brothers.   The  Appellants'
    evidence was  that  those  relatives  would  not  be  able  to  provide
    practical support and/or accommodation.   The  judge  noted  that  that
    evidence was unchallenged and he accepted that  those  relatives  could
    not and would not support the Appellants in terms of the  provision  of
    support and accommodation on return.

23. The judge took into account that in 2018 Judge Harris  found  that  the
    Appellants could be supported by their family in the UK on  return  who
    could finance their lives or they could finance their lives through the
    rental or sale of their UK property.  The judge said it  was  clear  to
    him that money was not an issue and recorded that he was not  asked  to
    depart from those findings of the judge in 2018.   Thus,  he  concluded
    that the Appellants would be able to financially support themselves  on
    return.

24. The judge at [36] identified what he called the essential point,  being
    the Appellants' deteriorating medical conditions and their inability to
    live independently in Pakistan without  the  support  of  their  United
    Kingdom based family. The judge then said that the  problem  with  that
    approach is  that  it  fails  to  consider  the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellants' difficulties could be ameliorated by  the  provision  of  a
    carer to assist them on return.  He recorded that when that possibility
    was put to the second Appellant his response was "that it was not  only
    about care but about emotional ties".  The judge found as follows "that
    response is instructive, and consistent with Miss Vidal's  observation,
    in closing submissions,  it  is  the  emotional  care  that  cannot  be
    replicated".

25. The judge at [37] said that ultimately the burden of  proof  lies  with
    the Appellants and that it was not disputed that homecare is  available
    in Pakistan and that there are private care homes, however he said that
    he accepted that provision in Pakistan will not address the Appellants'
    emotional needs. He found that the failure to address  their  emotional
    needs would not have such an impact on their ability to integrate so as
    they could satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Rules.   The  judge
    found that there was no reason to depart  from  the  finding  of  Judge
    Harris in respect of that issue

26.  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  proportionality  outside  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  With reference to the 2018 decision he found as did
    Judge Harris that there would be an interference with  Article  8  ECHR
    family rights of the Appellants on  return  to  Pakistan.    The  judge
    reminded himself that the Appellants cannot meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  He turned to proportionality.

27. At [47] he said "in assessing the public interest under Article 8(2), I
    apply the provisions of Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA  2002)  as  amended  by  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014".

28. He went on at paragraph 48 to say

         "In the present  case  the  factors  set  out  in  s.117B  must  be
         considered in the context of my conclusion, set out above, that the
         Appellants  cannot  satisfy  the   relevant   provisions   of   the
         Immigration Rules.  I further note, with regard  to  s.117B(2)  and
         (3) that the Appellants have not demonstrated that they  can  speak
         English  to  any  significant  degree,  and  that  they  are   not,
         themselves, financially dependent".

    The judge went on to identify the test to be applied as that in  R  (on
    the application of Agyarko and Ikuga) and Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11, namely  that  the  Appellants  need  to
    demonstrate something very compelling.  The judge at paragraph 50  said
    as follows

         "Other than the Appellants' deteriorating medical  conditions,  and
         the fact the Appellants now live with their  son  and  daughter-in-
         law, the Appellants have not relied upon any further matters  which
         have substantively changed since the 2018 determination".

    The judge said that reliance was placed  upon  the  close  relationship
    that the Appellants have with their  children  and  grandchildren,  and
    that he was bound to consider the strength of those  relationships  and
    the extent to which the seventeen to eighteen months that  have  passed
    since the 2018 decision those  ties  have  been  strengthened  further,
    particularly in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellants  have
    cohabitated with their son, daughter-in-law and  children.   The  judge
    went on at paragraph 52 to apply ZH Tanzania and SSHD [2011]  UKSC  11.
    He observed that the Appellants are not in a parental relationship with
    their grandchildren however he accepted as did Judge  Harris  that  the
    relationships between the Appellants, their  children,  daughter-in-law
    and grandchildren will inevitably  be  diminished  by  the  Appellants'
    relocation.  He said as follows at paragraph 53

         "...  whilst  Judge  Harris  concluded  that  that  disruption  and
         diminishing  of  family  life  did  not  amount   to   sufficiently
         compelling circumstances to allow the Appellants to remain  in  the
         United Kingdom, I have to  take  into  account  the  passing  of  a
         further seventeen/eighteen months  in  which  the  Appellants  have
         cohabited with their son and his family, together with  the  recent
         and accepted significant deterioration in the Appellants'  health".



    The judge reached the following conclusion at paragraph 54

         "In my judgment, drawing all those matters together and considering
         them cumulatively, whilst I have accepted that there would  not  be
         very significant obstacles to the Appellants' practical  relocation
         to Pakistan, given that they could pay for homecare assistance, the
         Appellants' significantly increased dependency upon their  children
         in the United Kingdom, both emotionally and  physically,  with  the
         corresponding intensifying of  bonds  between  the  Appellants  and
         their  family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom,   do   constitute
         compelling  circumstances  which  would  render   the   Appellants'
         departure from the United Kingdom a disproportionate breach of  the
         family life rights of the Appellants and their United Kingdom based
         family".

The Grounds of Appeal

29. Ground 1  of  the  written  grounds  is  characterised  as  "inadequate
    reasons/misdirection in law/conflict of  fact  or  opinion".   In  this
    ground it is asserted that the Appellants' circumstances  do  not  meet
    the higher tests of exceptionality or compelling circumstances.  It  is
    asserted that there is a lack of sufficient detail in  the  Appellants'
    claimed medical psychological needs and the strength of claimed  family
    bonds and ties which the judge noted.  However the judge  at  paragraph
    37 found no evidence of a lack of emotional care in Pakistan that would
    be of detriment to the Appellants and that  cumulatively  the  accepted
    deterioration in the Appellants' medical conditions was not  sufficient
    grounds to depart from the  findings  of  the  2018  decision.   It  is
    asserted that the findings at paragraph 37 and 38 are contradictory  to
    those at paragraphs 51 and  54.   It  is  asserted  that  there  is  no
    emotional or financial dependency which is sufficient to engage Article
    8 with reference  to  Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

30. Ground 2 is characterised as "inadequate reasons/misdirection in  law".
    It is asserted that the judge has justified "rather  weakly"  that  the
    apparent strength of the Appellants' bonds  with  their  grandchildren,
    children in the UK is a relevant and significant  factor  in  assessing
    proportionality.  It is submitted that there is inadequate evidence  of
    these claimed bonds and the judge's reasons are  "utterly  insufficient
    to show anything exceptional in the Appellants' interests  or  that  of
    the best interests of their grandchildren or children in the UK".  Even
    with the Appellants deterioration in health  which  was  in  any  event
    insufficiently evidenced, there is nothing sufficiently exceptional  or
    compelling.  The test in Agyarko and Others is not met on the evidence.

31. The third ground is characterised as inadequate reasons/misdirection of
    the law and relates to the proportionality assessment.  It is  asserted
    that there are no compelling or exceptional reasons for the  Appellants
    to remain in the UK and the errors identified in grounds 1 and  2  have
    infected the assessment of proportionality.  The final  point  made  is
    that the judge failed to properly assess the mandatory public  interest
    considerations under Section 117B of the  2002  Act  in  light  of  the
    Appellants' precarious stay for a considerable period  since  2007  nor
    against the public interest in the economic and social welfare  of  the
    UK given that the Appellants are not financially independent or able to
    speak English and they have clearly made use of NHS resources.

32. Ms Isherwood  developed  the  ground  of  appeal  in  oral  submissions
    relaying primarily on what she said was the failure  by  the  judge  to
    weigh into the balance the public interest.

33. Ms Vidal said that  the  judge  weighed  everything  up  including  the
    Appellants' medical conditions. She drew my attention to [47] and urged
    me to consider the decision as a whole.

The Law

34. Section 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act

    117A Application of this Part

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
                to determine whether a decision made under  the  Immigration
                Acts-

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                    family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
                tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                    117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
                the question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's
                right to respect for private and family  life  is  justified
                under Article 8(2).

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all  cases



           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons  who  can
                speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                immigration status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
                where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.

    The case of Agyarko  sets  out  the  correct  approach  to  determining
    proportionality:-

         "54.     As explained in para 49 above, the European court has said
             that, in cases concerned with precarious family  life,  it  is
             "likely" only to be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of article 8. That reflects the weight  attached  to
             the contracting states' right to control their borders, as  an
             attribute of their sovereignty, and the limited  weight  which
             is generally attached to family life established in  the  full
             knowledge that its continuation in the  contracting  state  is
             unlawful or precarious. The court has repeatedly  acknowledged
             that "a state is entitled, as  a  matter  of  well-established
             international law, and subject to its treaty  obligations,  to
             control the entry of  non-nationals  into  its  territory  and
             their residence there" (Jeunesse, para 100). As the court  has
             made clear, the Convention is not intended to  undermine  that
             right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control
             by establishing a family life while present in the host  state
             unlawfully or temporarily, and then presenting it with a  fait
             accompli. On the  contrary,  "where  confronted  with  a  fait
             accompli the removal of the non-national family member by  the
             authorities would be  incompatible  with  article  8  only  in
             exceptional circumstances" (Jeunesse, para 114).

         55.  That statement reflects the strength of the claim  which  will
             normally be required, if the contracting state's  interest  in
             immigration control is to be outweighed. In the Jeunesse case,
             for  example,  the  Dutch  authorities'   tolerance   of   the
             applicant's unlawful presence  in  that  country  for  a  very
             prolonged period, during which she developed strong family and
             social  ties  there,  led  the  court  to  conclude  that  the
             circumstances were exceptional and that a fair balance had not
             been struck (paras 121-122). As the court put it, in  view  of
             the particular circumstances of the case, it was  questionable
             whether general immigration considerations could  be  regarded
             as  sufficient  justification  for  refusing   the   applicant
             residence in the host state (para 121).

         56.   The  European  court's  use  of   the   phrase   "exceptional
             circumstances" in this context was considered by the Court  of
             Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 544. Lord  Dyson
             MR, giving the judgment of the court, said:

                  "In  our  view,  that  is  not  to  say  that  a  test  of
                  exceptionality is being applied. Rather  it  is  that,  in
                  approaching  the  question  of  whether   removal   is   a
                  proportionate interference with an individual's article  8
                  rights, the scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
                  deportation and something very compelling (which  will  be
                  'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest
                  in removal." (para 42)

             Cases are not, therefore, to be approached by searching for  a
             unique or unusual feature, and in its  absence  rejecting  the
             application without further examination. Rather, as the Master
             of the Rolls made clear, the test is one  of  proportionality.
             The reference to exceptional  circumstances  in  the  European
             case law means that,  in  cases  involving  precarious  family
             life, "something very compelling ... is required  to  outweigh
             the public interest", applying  a  proportionality  test.  The
             Court of  Appeal  went  on  to  apply  that  approach  to  the
             interpretation of the  Rules  concerning  the  deportation  of
             foreign criminals, where the same phrase  appears;  and  their
             approach was approved by  this  court,  in  that  context,  in
             Hesham Ali.

         57.  That approach is also appropriate when a court or tribunal  is
             considering whether a refusal of leave to remain is compatible
             with article 8 in  the  context  of  precarious  family  life.
             Ultimately,  it  has  to  decide  whether   the   refusal   is
             proportionate in the particular case before it, balancing  the
             strength of the public interest in the removal of  the  person
             in question against the impact on private and family life.  In
             doing so, it should give appropriate weight to  the  Secretary
             of  State's  policy,  expressed   in   the   Rules   and   the
             Instructions, that the public interest in immigration  control
             can be outweighed, when considering an application  for  leave
             to remain  brought  by  a  person  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
             immigration  laws,  only  where  there   are   "insurmountable
             obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It  must
             also consider all factors relevant to  the  specific  case  in
             question, including, where relevant, the matters discussed  in
             paras 51-52  above.  The  critical  issue  will  generally  be
             whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the  public
             interest in the removal of the person in the case  before  it,
             the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  In
             general, in cases concerned with  precarious  family  life,  a
             very strong or compelling claim is required  to  outweigh  the
             public interest in immigration control.

         58.  The expression "exceptional circumstances" appears in a number
             of places in the Rules and the Instructions. Its  use  in  the
             part of the Rules concerned with the  deportation  of  foreign
             offenders  was  considered  in  Hesham  Ali.  In  the  present
             context, as has been explained, it appears in the Instructions
             dealing with the grant of leave to remain in  the  UK  outside
             the Rules. Its  use  is  challenged  on  the  basis  that  the
             Secretary of State cannot lawfully impose a  requirement  that
             there should be "exceptional circumstances", having regard  to
             the opinion of the Appellate Committee of the House  of  Lords
             in Huang.

         59.  As was explained in para  8  above,  the  case  of  Huang  was
             decided at a time when the  Rules  had  not  been  revised  to
             reflect the requirements of article 8. Instead, the  Secretary
             of State operated arrangements under which effect was given to
             article 8 outside the Rules. Lord Bingham, giving the  opinion
             of the Committee, observed that the ultimate question for  the
             appellate immigration authority was  whether  the  refusal  of
             leave to enter or remain, in circumstances where the  life  of
             the family could not reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
             elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations  weighing
             in favour of the refusal, prejudiced the family  life  of  the
             applicant in a manner sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a
             breach of article 8.  If  the  answer  to  that  question  was
             affirmative, then the refusal was unlawful. He added:

                  "It  is  not  necessary  that  the  appellate  immigration
                  authority, directing itself along the lines  indicated  in
                  this opinion, need ask in addition whether the case  meets
                  a test of exceptionality. The suggestion that it should is
                  based on an observation of Lord  Bingham  in  Razgar  [  R
                  (Razgar) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
                  [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368], para 20.  He  was  there
                  expressing an expectation,  shared  with  the  Immigration
                  Appeal Tribunal, that the number of claimants not  covered
                  by the rules and supplementary directions but entitled  to
                  succeed under article 8 would be a  very  small  minority.
                  That is still his expectation. But he was  not  purporting
                  to lay down a legal test." (para 20)

         60.  It remains the position that the ultimate question  is  how  a
             fair balance should be struck between the competing public and
             individual  interests  involved,  applying  a  proportionality
             test. The Rules and Instructions in issue in the present  case
             do not depart from that position. The Secretary of  State  has
             not imposed a test of exceptionality, in the sense which  Lord
             Bingham had in mind: that is to say, a  requirement  that  the
             case should exhibit some  highly  unusual  feature,  over  and
             above the application of the test of proportionality.  On  the
             contrary, she has defined the word "exceptional",  as  already
             explained, as meaning "circumstances in  which  refusal  would
             result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual
             such  that  the  refusal  of  the  application  would  not  be
             proportionate".  So   understood,   the   provision   in   the
             Instructions that leave can be granted outside the Rules where
             exceptional circumstances apply involves  the  application  of
             the test  of  proportionality  to  the  circumstances  of  the
             individual case, and cannot be regarded as  incompatible  with
             article  8.  That  conclusion  is  fortified  by  the  express
             statement in the Instructions that "exceptional" does not mean
             "unusual" or "unique": see para 19 above.

Error of law

35. I accept Ms Vidal's submissions as regards the decision generally.  The
    judge in my view made  findings  of  fact  on  the  evidence  that  are
    adequately reasoned.   He was entitled to accept the oral  evidence  of
    the witnesses. The grounds in so far as they challenge the findings  of
    fact amount to a disagreement with the finding of the judge.  The judge
    was entitled to conclude there was  family  life.  The  Appellants  are
    living with their son and although they depend to an extent on him.




36. However, there is a complete absence of regard to the public  interest.
    The judge was bound  to  have  regard  to  this  (s.117(A)(2)(a))  when
    assessing whether the interference with the Appellant's right to family
    life  is  justified  (s.117(A)(3)).   The  maintenance  of  immigration
    control is  in  the  public  interest  (s117B(1)).  In  this  case  the
    Appellants are overstayers. They have no right  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom and decided to remain after their appeal was dismissed by Judge
    Harris in 2018. Furthermore, the second Appellant unlawfully worked  in
    the United Kingdom. While the judge says at [47] that  he  applies  the
    provisions of s117B of the 2002 Act, at no part in the decision does he
    identify the public interest and the decision fails to disclose that he
    assessed proportionality  taking  proper  account  of  the  Appellants'
    immigration history or that he considered whether the interference  was
    proportionate in the light of the public interest. This is a materially
    error.  I set aside the decision of the judge to allow the appeal.




37. I communicated my  decision  to  the  parties.  There  was  no  further
    evidence produced in response to the directions of the Upper  Tribunal.
    Ms Vidal asked for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    and reheard. However, there was no new evidence submitted. The findings
    of fact are sustainable. It was my strong  view  that  I  could  assess
    proportionality based on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in
    the absence of further evidence.




38. I asked Ms Vidal whether she was aware of  any  further  evidence.  She
    said that because of the pandemic, there may  be,  but  that  complying
    with directions had been  difficult.  The  Appellants'  adult  children
    attended the hearing. I gave them  the  chance  to  address  the  Upper
    Tribunal to give an update as regards their  parents'  health.  I  took
    this into account when remaking the decision.




39. There was no reason for me not to accept the evidence that  the  second
    Appellant was diagnosed with Covid-19 on 11 August  2020.  He  was  not
    hospitalised; however, I accept that he becomes  breathless.  Treatment
    for the Appellants has been limited because of  the  pandemic.  If  the
    Appellants are returned to Pakistan, their  children  will  be  worried
    about them. I accept that there will be no family to look  after  them.
    If they are on their own, they will have more medical problems.




40. To  succeed  the  Appellants  must  identify  compelling  circumstances
    because they cannot meet the Rules.  The starting  point  is  that  the
    maintenance of immigration control  is  in  the  public  interest.  The
    Appellants have breached immigrations laws. While they lawfully entered
    here, neither has had leave since  2007.  To  make  matters  worse  the
    second Appellant accepts that he worked  here  unlawfully  until  2015.
    Their appeals were dismissed under Article 8 in 2018.     Judge  Harris
    concluded that the decision did not breach the Appellants under Article
    8.  The Appellants remained here. These  factors  are  weighty  matters
    that support the Secretary of State's decision.




41. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to integration. There is no cross appeal.




42. Since the decision of Judge Harris there has been  a  deterioration  in
    the Appellants' health.  The Appellants could be supported  financially
    in Pakistan and that whilst their case is  that  they  could  not  live
    independently in Pakistan, as the judge said that this does not address
    the extent to which this could be ameliorated by  the  provision  of  a
    carer.  The first Appellant has memory problems and a major  depressive
    illness. However, Dr Margo's evidence limited for the reasons  he  gave
    at [32] (see [27] above). There was little evidence of the physical  or
    mental impact of a stroke on the second Appellant. He has  weakness  in
    his left hand and needs monitoring when  in  the  bath.   His  mood  is
    depressed. There is no family to support them  in  Pakistan.  The  care
    that they have here from  their  family  would  not  be  replicated  in
    Pakistan. They would have to rely on paid carers  or  go  into  a  care
    home.




43. The second Appellant has had Covid-19 and is as a  result  weaker.  The
    Appellant's daughter said at the hearing before me  that  their  health
    will deteriorate if they are to return. This is likely because  of  the
    aging process.  There  is  an  absence  of  evidence  relating  to  the
    prognosis and level of care would be required on  return  to  Pakistan.
    However, care would be affordable and  available.  Care  would  not  be
    provided by their children with  whom  they  have  family  life  and  a
    special bond. It is wholly understandable that the Appellant would wish
    that care to continue rather than to return to Pakistan where  whatever
    level of care is needed would have to be provided by people outside  of
    the family.    There will be an interference with family life, but  the
    bonds will not be broken.  The Appellants have  each  other.  I  accept
    that the family here are anxious about their parents and  do  not  want
    them to return. However, they will be able to  help  arrange  care  for
    their parents.  There will be nothing  preventing  their  children  and
    grandchildren  visiting  them  in  Pakistan.  The  judge  assessed  the
    children's best interests; however, this must be considered in context.
    The Appellants are not care givers. They are not responsible for  their
    grandchildren.  The children will be remaining in  the  United  Kingdom
    with their parents who are responsible for them. The weight  to  attach
    to their best interests in this context is not  as  significant  as  it
    would be if the decision involved a parent.




44. The Appellants have family in Pakistan albeit they are not able to care
    for them. They are close to their family here. This explains  why  both
    Judge Harris and Judge Lemer found that there was family  life.   While
    separation will be upsetting for the family, this is not a  case  where
    the physical and medical needs of  the  Appellants  cannot  be  met  by
    others in Pakistan.  While it is  clear  and  understandable  that  the
    Appellants wish to stay here with their children and be looked after by
    them, in the absence of evidence of significant deterioration in  their
    health as a result of returning to Pakistan and taking account  of  the
    strength of the family and private life, I am unable  to  identify  any
    feature of this case, individually or cumulatively that  outweighs  the
    public interest.




45. It is open to the Appellants to make an application for entry clearance
    under the Immigration Rules as adult dependent relatives  or  on  wider
    Article 8 grounds, if there is a deterioration in their health.   There
    is no suggestion that they  currently  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The evidence does not establish that there will be a
    material deterioration in their health on return because they  will  be
    able to access treatment and assistance.  The Appellants do not rely on
    Article 3.




46. The interference in the family life will have a significant  impact  on
    the Appellants and all members  of  their  family.  However,  I  cannot
    identify  any  features  of  this  case  that  amount   to   compelling
    circumstances that can outweigh the public interest in  removal.    The
    appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 24 September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

