
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20668/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 August 2019                             |On 5 November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    B B B
                     (anonymity direction made in part)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, Solicitor from Archbold Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
  2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of  any
  matter likely to lead members of the public to identify  the  Appellant's
  children. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I
  make this order because there is no legitimate public interest  in  their
  identity and publicity about their circumstances might harm them.

2. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (First-
  tier Tribunal Judge Andrew) promulgated on 7 February 2019 dismissing the
  Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  against  a  decision  of  the
  Respondent on 10 October 2018 refusing him leave to remain subsequent  to
  his being made the subject of a deportation order.

3. The thrust of the grounds of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
  wrong when it refused an application to adjourn the hearing.

4. As I explain in more detail below, the appeal came before the  First-tier
  Tribunal December 2018 but was adjourned until 4 February 2019 and it  is
  the Decision and Reasons following the hearing on 4 February 2019 that is
  the subject of this appeal. On  both  occasions  the  appeal  was  listed
  before First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew.

5. I begin by looking carefully at the decision that  is  challenged.  Judge
  Andrew noted that in November 2018 the First-tier Tribunal sent a  notice
  for a pre-hearing review requiring a reply to be received by the Tribunal
  no later than the end of business on  20  November  2018.   A  reply  was
  received dated 16 November 2018 asking for an adjournment. The  Appellant
  wanted more time to make further enquiries.

6. Designated Immigration Judge McCarthy conducted a  pretrial  review  and,
  on 21 November 2018, (by e-mail, confirmed in a  formal  order  dated  22
  November 2018) Directed that  the  matter  should  remain  listed  unless
  better reasons were given in support of the application  to  adjourn.  In
  particular he ordered that details be provided identifying  what  reports
  were being sought and, given that the  Appellant's  representatives  were
  seeking a report into his mental health, what needed to be done  to  help
  the Appellant given his best evidence. The Directions confirmed that  the
  matter would remain listed  for  half  a  day  unless  a  different  time
  estimate  was  indicated.   Judge  McCarthy  further  directed  that  the
  Appellant should respond no later than 5 p.m. on  30  November  2018  and
  that evidence served otherwise than in  accordance  with  the  Directions
  might not be admitted.

7. Following this  history,  the  appeal  came  before  Judge  Andrew  on  7
  December 2018.  The Appellant did not appear  and  was  not  represented.
  Enquiries were made. It was said then that the Directions given by  Judge
  McCarthy had been answered in a message sent by facsimile on 29  November
  2018 but that was not on the file.  Further enquiries revealed  that  the
  facsimile had not in fact been sent.  It initially appeared that  it  had
  been sent because there was an endorsement on it to that effect but  that
  proved to be a mistake.  The Appellant's representatives said  that  they
  wanted to get an OASYs Report, an independent social worker's report  and
  a medical report.  Additionally one  of  the  witnesses  could  not  give
  evidence because she had to undergo surgery at the end of November.

8. Understandably,  Judge  Andrew  decided  that  the  appeal  ought  to  be
  adjourned and adjourned the hearing until 4 February 2019.   It  was  her
  intention for there to be sufficient time for all reports to be  obtained
  and for the witness to have recovered from surgery. Judge Andrew did  not
  give further directions.

9. Mr Adophy attended the hearing on 4 February 2019 and gave  Judge  Andrew
  a letter which she was told had been sent to the  Tribunal  by  facsimile
  but again it was not on the file.  The letter is dated  30  January  2019
  and was sent by facsimile to Birmingham IAC  and  received  on  Friday  1
  February 2019. It referred to the hearing on Monday 4 February  2019.  By
  that letter the Appellant asked for the hearing on 4 February 2019 to  be
  treated as a Case Management Review Hearing.

10. The letter was not  ignored  by  Birmingham  IAC  but  by  the  time  it
  received the letter the file was in Coventry to be ready for the hearing.
  I have seen a file note from Mr R Metcalf the  Tribunal  Case  Worker  in
  Birmingham saying:

  "1     The appellant requests that  the  substantive  hearing  listed  on
  4/2/2019 be converted to an oral Case Management Review
  2      The request is  refused.  The  conversion  would  necessitate  the
  adjournment of the substantive hearing and the appellant has not provided
  1 clear days' notice as per IAC Practice Directions r.9.q. The  appellant
  must make any applications he thinks fit to the Tribunal at the  hearing.
  In any event the letter was received too late at Birmingham IAC too  late
  to be place on the file because it had already been  transferred  to  the
  Coventry Magistrates' Court where the case was due to be heard."

11. Irritatingly, and extraordinarily, there  is  nothing  in  the  Tribunal
  records to show that Mr Metcalf's letter was ever "actioned".  Mr  Adophy
  says that he never received a reply based on  Mr  Metcalf's  instructions
  and I am satisfied that this is because it was never sent.

12. Two paragraphs of  Judge  Andrew's  decision  after  the  February  2019
  hearing are particularly important and I set them out below:

  "10    Once again it appeared from the letter [that is  the  letter  from
  the representatives given to Judge Andrew at the hearing on  4  February]
  that nothing had been  done.   I  was  told  by  the  representative  the
  Appellant was waiting for a report from an NHS psychiatrist.  He had some
  doubts that the Appellant had capacity.  I asked why this  was  the  case
  and was told that he expected  the  NHS  to  provide  a  report  for  the
  Tribunal rather than instructing a psychiatrist privately.   I  explained
  to the representative that it was not for the NHS to do so.  In any event
  the representative had handed to me a copy of a letter from  BMH  Central
  and East Assessment and Recovery Team dated 24 December 2018  from  which
  it was apparent that other than medication there  was  no  ongoing  input
  from the team.  There was no suggestion in this letter that the Appellant
  was lacking capacity.

  11.         I was also handed a copy of a letter  from  Eastville  Health
  Centre asking the Appellant to attend for a fasting blood test  and  ECG.
  The Appellant's representative told  me  that  this  had  been  requested
  because of the letter from the  Assessment  and  Recovery  Team.   It  is
  apparent from this letter that no such request had been made.  I used  my
  judicial knowledge to know that a fasting blood test will be carried  out
  to check blood glucose measures and/or cholesterol levels and that an ECG
  is a routine test carried out frequently by a practice nurse."

13. Neither was there anything before the Judge to show  that  any  approach
  had been made to the Appellant's probation  officer.   No  witnesses  had
  been told to attend.

14.  There  are  two  paragraphs  in  the  letter  that   are   particularly
  interesting. The Appellant's representatives said:

  We note that whilst in HMP Huntercomb, psychosis was a conclusion reached
  by the examining GP. At  the  session  of  the  13th  December  2018,  in
  addition to confirming that he hears voices asking him to  kill  himself,
  he states that he was sexually assaulted by a  Police  Office  whilst  in
  custody.

  It is our contention that a full investigation of his  mental  health  is
  required to determine his capacity in relation to  the  appeal.  As  this
  affects that jurisdiction of the tribunal, we are of the opinion  that  a
  clear statement of his ability  to  appreciate  the  proceeding  and  the
  reason for the proceedings, needs to be obtained. From his  statement  of
  sexual abuse whilst in custody, his appreciation of reality is minimal at
  best. His psychosis, unfortunately, appears to be progressive."

15. Although this might be thought to be  evidence  that  raised  a  concern
  about the Appellant the concern was apparent on 13 December  2018.  There
  was nothing before the Judge  in  February  2019  to  indicate  that  any
  relevant report and been commissioned. Indeed it was plain  that  it  had
  not and the  representatives  somehow  hoped  that  the  National  Health
  Service would provide  something.  It  is  trite  law  that  ill  health,
  including mental health, is rarely a reason to allow an appeal  on  human
  rights grounds unless it is of the most severe  kind  and  this  was  not
  suggested in the sketchy report of  the  general  medical  practitioner's
  observations.

16. Judge Andrew decided that there had been more  than  enough  opportunity
  to prepare for  the  hearing.   She  reminded  herself,  correctly,  that
  hearings had to be fair to both parties, not just the Appellant, and  was
  satisfied that nothing was done to comply with directions.

17. Judge Andrew decided that the hearing would continue but offered to  put
  the case back in the list if Mr Adophy would find that helpful.  He  took
  instructions and said that he had  not  been  able  to  arrange  for  any
  witness to attend.

18. Judge Andrew then decided  to  determine  the  appeal  on  the  evidence
  before her and with regard to any  submissions  that  the  representative
  wished to make.

19. The judge reminded herself of paragraphs 398, 399 and  399A  of  HC  395
  and,  arguably  more  importantly,  of  part  5A  of   the   Nationality,
  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She particularly reminded herself  that
  the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest unless one
  of the exceptions created by statute applies.

20. The Judge found that the Appellant first arrived in the  United  Kingdom
  in June 2000 as a visitor.  His leave was extended as a  student  and  he
  applied  for  further  leave  on  the  basis  of  his  marriage  but  the
  application was refused on 7 August 2003.  On 11 October 2003 he  applied
  for  asylum.   The  application  was  unsuccessful  and  the  appeal  was
  dismissed in March 2004 and he was removed in May 2004.

21. In June 2004 he applied for leave to enter as  a  husband  of  a  person
  present and settled in the United Kingdom.  The application  was  refused
  but an appeal was successful.  He was given leave to enter  as  a  spouse
  and eventually in April 2007 he was given indefinite leave to remain.

22. The Judge referred to the appellant's "long history  of  offending".  He
  started off at the lower end of the  scale.   He  was  convicted  at  the
  Mendip Magistrates' Court of wilfully obstructing free  passage  along  a
  highway and of using disorderly behaviour or  threatening  and  insulting
  words likely to  cause  harassment  and  was  subject  to  a  conditional
  discharge.  That order was imposed on 3 December 2010.  It seems that  he
  breached that order because on 23 September 2011 he was convicted at  the
  Bristol Magistrates' Court of possessing a controlled drug of class B, in
  this case cannabis and he was fined.  In May 2012 he was convicted at the
  Crown Court sitting at Bristol of possessing a controlled drug  of  class
  B, namely cannabis and he was fined.  He was also convicted of failing to
  surrender to custody at the appointed time.   On  28  June  2012  at  the
  Bristol Magistrates' Court  he  was  found  to  be  in  possession  of  a
  controlled drug of class B and  fined.   On  11  September  2012  at  the
  Bristol Magistrates' Court he was fined for possessing a controlled  drug
  and on 6 November 2012 he was made the subject of a community  order,  a
  curfew requirement and electronic tagging.

23. On 20 September 2013 at the  Crown  Court  sitting  at  Bristol  he  was
  convicted of possessing a controlled drug of class B, namely cannabis  or
  cannabis resin, and possessing a knife or blade in a  public  place.   He
  was given a two week prison sentence, suspended for twelve months with  a
  requirement to carry out unpaid work and ancillary orders.

24. On 1 February 2017 he was convicted at the  Bristol  Magistrates'  Court
  of possessing a controlled drug of class B,  namely  cannabis  resin  and
  conditionally discharged.  On 13 July 2017 at the Crown Court sitting at
  Bristol he was  sentenced  to  concurrent  terms  amounting  to  eighteen
  months' imprisonment for drugs related offences and possessing  a  knife.
  The eighteen months' sentence  was  sufficient  to  make  him  a  foreign
  criminal for the purpose of Part 5A and so his deportation in the  public
  interest unless the exceptions applied.

25. There is information from  the  Central  Assessment  and  Recovery  Team
  indicating he continued to use cannabis.

26. It appeared that the Appellant lived with his sister.  He was  separated
  from his wife.  He had two children with his wife  and  they  lived  with
  their mother.  There was no evidence about the contact the Appellant  may
  or may not have had with them.

27. One of the children, R, is dyslexic.  The other child, K appeared to  be
  doing well at school. In June 2019 R was 10 years old and K was 14  years
  old.

28. The Judge confirmed there was no claim for asylum.   She  was  concerned
  only with the human rights claim.

29. Part 5A creates statutory exceptions to the normal requirement that  the
  deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

30. Exception 1 applies to a person who has been lawfully  resident  in  the
  United Kingdom for most of his life.  The Appellant has not been lawfully
  resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life.  It does not apply.

31.  Exception  2  applies  where  there  is  a   genuine   and   subsisting
  relationship with a  qualifying  partner  or  qualifying  child  and  the
  effects of deportation on the partner or child  would  be  unduly  harsh.
  The Judge decided that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a  partner.   The
  Appellant is estranged from his wife.  The  Judge  further  decided  that
  there was no subsisting parental relationship.  He did not live with  the
  children and there was no evidence of  any  responsibility  for  decision
  making.  The Judge opined that it might be better for the children not to
  have too close a relationship with their father who was a drug  dependent
  cannabis user.  The Judge was satisfied that it  was  in  the  children's
  best interests to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their  mother.
  Occasional contact could be continued with the Appellant in Jamaica  just
  as it could with the Appellant in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  no
  question  of  separation  being  "unduly  harsh"  even  if  the  parental
  relationship was established.

32. The Judge also looked  for  very  compelling  circumstances  other  than
  those involving a  partner  or  children  and  found  none.   Rather  the
  Appellant had been convicted of  the  offences  arising  from  possessing
  drugs and later of possessing drugs with intent to supply.  Although  the
  offence leading to that conviction was a less  serious  example  of  that
  kind of offending it is nevertheless a serious offence that troubles  the
  public. The Judge found that the Appellant's offending  was  "escalating"
  and found nothing to indicate a change of heart or change of  life.   She
  dismissed the appeal.

33. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on  10  June  2019.   On  that
  occasion I was sitting with Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan.   The  case
  was not ready.  Mr Adophy attended (again) to assist as best he could.

34. We directed that the Appellant's representatives write to  the  Tribunal
  confirming that they were on the record and then, no later than  22  July
  2019, that the Appellant serve on the Tribunal and on  the  Respondent  a
  fresh paginated bundle of all the written evidence on which he  seeks  to
  rely including, if appropriate, signed witness statements drawn to  stand
  as evidence-in-chief without the need for  further  questions,  a  report
  from a psychiatrist concerning the Appellant's capacity  and  proof  that
  the solicitor's letter dated 30 January 2019 to HMCTS IAC Birmingham  was
  sent by e-mail on 31 January 2019 as alleged.

35. We directed the adjourned appeal in the Upper Tribunal be  heard  on  or
  after 12 August 2019 and  it  was  in  fact  heard  on  12  August.   The
  Appellant's solicitors had complied with directions and sent a bundle  by
  facsimile.  Of particular importance is a printout of an e-mail  sent  by
  solicitors (not Archbold Solicitors) to the IAC Birmingham on 31  January
  2019 and referring to a  letter  of  30 January  2019  saying  that  the
  Appellant is registered with Bristol Mental Health as indicated by  Judge
  Andrews and also, again as indicated by Judge Andrews, saying  that  they
  were yet to hear from the Ministry of Justice Data and Compliance Unit.

36. There was  also  material  that  post-dated  the  hearing  before  Judge
  Andrew.

37. My first task is to  decide  if  there  was  anything  unlawful  in  the
  decision made by Judge Andrew.   The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
  Tribunal are signed by Mr Adophy.   The  grounds  set  out  some  of  the
  Appellant's history and looked at the  Rules  relating  to  adjournments.
  The grounds maintain that it is not the Appellant's fault that there  was
  an "administrative lapses" (Ground 5(v)).

38. I have reflected on this.   I  must  establish  first  why  the  hearing
  before Judge Andrew on 4 February 2019 was not ready.   The  problem  was
  not that the "last minute" request for the hearing to be recategorized as
  Case Management Review was not handled satisfactorily by  the  First-tier
  Tribunal administration. The problem  was  that  the  Appellant  had  not
  prepared the necessary evidence and that is why the late application  was
  made.

39. I realise that funding is often a problem (although  not  one  to  which
  the judges can give much weight) and that particular care  is  needed  in
  cases involving people who are mentally  ill  because  an  attitude  that
  might seem to be infuriatingly lackadaisical could be a symptom of  their
  illness. Some kind of explanation was offered for an  independent  social
  worker's report not being available and an OASYSs or probation  officer's
  report is more likely to  be  helpful  in  addressing  concerns  that  an
  appellant is likely to re-offend than it is to support a reason to  allow
  a "deportation appeal" so it unlikely to be of great importance.  However
  medical evidence is crucial if a case to be advanced on  medical  grounds
  and nothing had had been done to obtain such a report. Further there  was
  no statements supporting any claim about the Appellant's  involvement  in
  the lives of his children. For example teachers are often able to confirm
  that both parents are known to the school and attend  appropriate  events
  such as school productions or parents' evenings  and  that  both  parents
  sometimes meet the children from school. It seems me that there is  every
  reason for teachers to give that kind of evidence when the  facts  permit
  it. Nothing like that had been done. At the  very  least  signed  witness
  statements could have been provided.

40. The simple fact of the matter is the case was not prepared  properly  by
  the time Judge Andrew came to hear it in February 2019.

41. Mr Adophy did attend on 4 February as he was required to do.  He  should
  have attended expecting to present his case.

42. Judge Andrew did not  insist  unthinkingly  on  the  case  going  ahead.
  Paragraph 14 of the Decision and Reasons is important. The Judge said:

  "I took the view that the Appellant and his representatives had more than
  enough time in which to prepare for  the  hearing.  The  purpose  of  the
  hearing is to be fair to both sides - not  just  the  Appellant.  It  was
  apparent that nothing had been done to comply with any of the  Directions
  that had been made in the matter and that there seemed to be  a  complete
  disinterest in doing anything at all until a very short period  prior  to
  the hearing being listed when applications for adjournments were made."

43. Before reaching this  conclusion  Judge  Andrew  had  reflected  on  the
  limited evidence concerning the steps that had been take in the appeal.

44. Judge Andrews considered the  very  skimpy  medical  evidence  that  was
  available and is criticised in the  grounds  for  saying  that  she  took
  "judicial notice" that a fasting blood test was used to check blood sugar
  and/or cholesterol levels and an ECG test was frequently carried out by a
  practice nurse. I  do  not  accept  that  these  findings  are  based  on
  sufficiently notorious and irrefutable evidence to be a proper example of
  judicial notice. However the rules  of  evidence  do  not  apply  in  the
  Tribunal. Much more importantly there was nothing to  indicate  that  any
  detailed report had been requested.

45. The Appellant's mental health is important for  two  reasons.  He  might
  not be fit to give instructions and he might be so poorly that  he  could
  not establish himself in Jamaica. No doubt Judge Andrew had these  things
  in mind when she adjourned the hearing in December.

46. Judge Andrew was clearly entitled to conclude that there had been  ample
  opportunity at least to establish an outline case. That  opportunity  had
  not been taken and there was no good reason to think  that  the  position
  would be any better of more time was given.

47. Contrary to the contention in the grounds,  there  is  nothing  "unfair"
  about Judge Andrew's decision to adjourn the hearing. She was faced  with
  someone who had not improved the preparation of case since  it  was  last
  adjourned and had not even taken  witness  statements  which  could  have
  assisted the Appellant.

48. I see no merit in the materiality of the criticism of the  Tribunal  for
  not passing on the application to re-designate to a Judge the hearing  on
  4 February. The application arrived too late to  be  considered  properly
  as, for good reason, the file had left the building and the Appellant had
  no  reason  to  equate  indecision  with  approval.  It  is  an  annoying
  administrative error. It is not a material error of law.

49. The grounds do not criticise the decision that was made.

50. I am not persuaded there is any error by  Judge  Andrew.   Her  decision
  was entirely sensible on the material before her. She balanced  carefully
  the public interest  in  deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  with  the
  statutory exceptions.

51. There was no evidence that this Appellant is not competent or  that  his
  mental health has deteriorated to anywhere near the level where he  would
  have established a human right to remain.

52. Having decided that there is no merit in the grounds  I  risk  criticism
  by going further but this an  appeal  touching  on  the  welfare  of  two
  children. I have considered the material even though it  was  not  before
  the Upper Tribunal.

53. There is now a medical report now dated 3 July 2019 that refers  to  his
  claim the Appellant experienced voices telling him to self-harm and  that
  he is now taking Mirtazapine and Olanzapine which are commonly prescribed
  for depression and bipolar disorders.

54. There are statements by members of the Appellant's family.  There  is  a
  statement from one Nicola Higgins who is the mother  of  the  Appellant's
  sons.  She confirms that the relationship between her and  the  Appellant
  had broken down but they remained close for the  sake  of  the  children.
  She said she was working  holding  down  two  jobs.   She  wrote  to  the
  Appellant in appreciative terms  describing  him  as  "a  godsend".   She
  worked in a hospice providing palliative care and said that the Appellant
  takes his sons into town to buy their school uniform, clothes  and  toys.
  She said the Appellant knows nothing of life in Jamaica, he has no family
  there.  She denied the Appellant had ever been  removed  to  Jamaica  but
  said he returned voluntarily at his own expense.

55. There is a letter from the children referring to their  extremely  close
  relationship with their father.

56. There is a letter from the Appellant's sister saying in effect  that  he
  has no contacts in Jamaica  and  that  he  had  suffered  the  ironically
  unattractive handicap of contracting TB when he was working as a hospital
  porter and that had left him with a damaged lung.

57. There is a supporting letter from a Member of Parliament but that  is  a
  perfectly appropriate prompt to give the matter proper care.  The  member
  does not write from a position of being particularly well informed  about
  the Appellant.  The writer did reflect on the undesirability of taking  K
  out of school in a school year that is critical for his GCSE but this  is
  not a case where there is any plan (or power) to remove the children and,
  at the age of 14, I am not sure that the school year is that critical.

58. There are photographs tending to show some sort of family life.

59. I have reflected on the information  that  I  have.   I  have  read  the
  statements.  I want the children to know that the  statements  have  been
  read and considered.

60. It may be that there is a stronger family  life  between  the  Appellant
  and his children and the Appellant and his former partner than the First-
  tier Tribunal Judge appreciated.  It may be that there  is  some  contact
  that extends to practical care and that makes it easier for the mother to
  be employed and sometimes some of the administrative  tasks  involved  in
  managing the children is discharged by the Appellant.  He may not be  the
  absentee father that he might have been thought to be.

61. Without in any way wanting to suggest that the Appellant  has  a  strong
  case, there are strands of evidence here that  Judge  Andrew  would  have
  wanted to consider and no doubt would have considered if  they  had  been
  placed before her but it is not an error  of  law  to  fail  to  consider
  evidence that had not been served.

62. The Appellant is subject to deportation because he is  a  criminal.   He
  is a criminal who has persistently flouted the law, working his way up to
  an  eighteen  months'  sentence  of  imprisonment  which  activated   the
  automatic deportation provisions.  That is his fault and no  one  else's.
  Parliament has taken a strict view which the  courts  must  uphold.   The
  strict view is tempered by certain exceptions  that  were  not  shown  to
  apply here because the  necessary  evidence  was  not  available.  Better
  evidence is available now and the Appellant  can  consider  making  fresh
  submission if he wishes but he must not assume that it would amount to  a
  fresh claim in law.

63. I am sorry if the Appellant feels a sense of injustice  because  he  has
  not had a hearing.  In fact he has had several but was not able  to  take
  advantage of them.  As the First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised, she  had
  to be fair to both parties and cases have  to  be  decided,  rather  than
  adjourned endlessly.

Notice of Decision

64. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and the appeal is dismissed.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 November 2019                |



