
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20296/2016
                                                HU/20300/2016, HU/20302/2016
                                                             & HU/20304/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2018                   |On 1 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                        |Nargis Begum            |First Appellant         |
|                        |Marufa Begum            |Second Appellant        |
|                        |Sabine Begum            |Third Appellant         |
|                        |Rugina Begum            |Fourth Appellant        |


                        (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Danial, Solicitor from Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing the appeal of the appellants against the decision of  the
       respondent by the Entry Clearance Officer New Delhi refusing them  a
       Certificate of Entitlement to the  Right  of  Abode  in  the  United
       Kingdom under Section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.

    2. The appellants are sisters.  They were born in 1973, 1985, 1988  and
       1992.  It is their case that they are the  daughters  of  one  Abdul
       Bari who was a British citizen and who is now dead.

    3. It is not doubted that a Mr Abdul Bari who was born on 15 March 1939
       had registered as a British citizen.  Neither is it doubted that  if
       these appellants are in fact his daughters then they are entitled to
       the certificate of entitlement that they seek.

    4. Their cases depended primarily on DNA evidence.  There  is  evidence
       provided to the Secretary of State which shows that  the  appellants
       are sisters and also that their brother is one Jahad Ahmed who on  a
       different occasion satisfied the First-tier Tribunal that he  was  a
       British citizen by descent.  The appellants' case before the  First-
       tier Tribunal  was  very  simple.   They  maintained  that  the  DNA
       evidence was entirely satisfactory which meant they were related  as
       the full sisters of Jahad Ahmed and that  their  appeals  should  be
       allowed like his.  The respondent's only  reason  for  refusing  the
       applications is that he was dissatisfied with the DNA evidence.   It
       came from a respected source but  was  not  subject  to  the  strict
       procedures that apply to tests organised by the respondent  and  the
       respondent had no  confidence  that  the  samples  supplied  to  the
       laboratory were what they purported to be.

    5. As far as I can see the First-tier Tribunal made no findings on  the
       respondent's reasons for refusing the application.  It is  right  to
       acknowledge the appellants'  solicitors  went  to  some  trouble  to
       explain fully in the evidence how the samples  were  taken  and  why
       they  should  be  relied  upon.   However  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissed the appeal because of difficulties  in  the  case  of  the
       appellants' brother.  His appeal  had  been  allowed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal  Judge  Gibb  (Immigration  Judge  Gibb)  in   a   decision
       promulgated on 6 April 2010.  Judge Gibb was  undoubtedly  satisfied
       on the balance of probabilities on the evidence before him  that  Mr
       Jahad Ahmed was indeed the son of Abdul Bari but it is also right to
       say that  Judge  Gibb's  decision  was  made  on  an  unsatisfactory
       evidential basis.   He  began  his  deliberations  at  paragraph  15
       stating:

  "In making findings in this appeal I am aware of being in the  unenviable
  position of having limited evidence before me."

    6. He was particularly critical of not having the benefit of an earlier
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  which  the  appeals  against
       similar decisions of the first appellant and others were  dismissed.
       Judge Gibb had given directions that a copy of the determination  be
       produced but the Secretary  of  State  ignored  the  directions  and
       failed to attend the hearing before Judge Gibb to give him any help.
        Judge Gibb's decision, with respect, is a  careful  and  considered
       decision on limited evidence but, as he was quick  to  explain,  the
       evidential basis was limited and that is something to be considered.

    7. The earlier decision is a decision of an Adjudicator  Ms  R  Meates.
       There are several findings in that decision that cause  the  present
       appellants difficulties.  The appellants had been represented by the
       Immigration Advisory Service but on  21  April  2004  they  withdrew
       their representation.  The Home Office  produced  papers  suggesting
       that the putative father, Mr Bari, died in 1978.  If that  is  right
       then he clearly could not be the father of  the  second,  third  and
       fourth appellants.  A main reason for thinking that the  appellants'
       putative father died in 1978 is  a  letter  from  solicitors,  Coode
       Kingdon Somper & Co, who practised from an address in the Temple. In
       a letter dated 6 October 1978 they wrote to the widow  of  Mr  Abdul
       Bari referring to his will dated 10 October 1975 and asking  her  if
       she knew of a later will and also asked for  a  copy  of  the  death
       certificate.

    8. Clearly those solicitors had good reason to think that Mr Abdul Bari
       had died.  The most likely explanation for  them  thinking  that  is
       that is what they had been told and the most likely explanation  for
       being told that someone has died is that someone has died.

    9. I note that according to the Adjudicator's decision Mr Bari's  widow
       was born on 8 June 1940.  If that is right then I do not  think  she
       could possibly be the mother of the  fourth  appellant.   However  I
       also note that on the certificate of confirmation of registration as
       a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies Mr Bari's wife was said
       to have been born on 16 May  1946  (I  think,  the  photocopying  is
       poor).  This is a date relied upon in  the  present  case.   However
       although the photocopying is poor I  cannot  make  the  name  of  Mr
       Bari's wife into Asmatun Bibi which is  the  spelling  used  on  the
       letter from Coode Kingdon Somper & Co.   The  woman's  name  in  the
       bundle prepared for the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal  is  given
       as  Asmotun  Bibi  Tula  but  the  name  on  the   confirmation   of
       registration looks to me  like  Asmoten  T  Bibi.   These  could  be
       phonetic  attempts  at  the  same  name  but  the  inconsistency  is
       puzzling.

   10. There are, broadly, two challenges in the grounds of appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal and the skeleton argument.

   11. It is contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  wrong  to
       entertain the line of argument that decided the case.

   12. I cannot agree with that.  It is settled law as long ago as 1981  in
       R v IAT and another ex parte Kwok On Tong [1981]  Imm  AR  214,  and
       affirmed in RM (Kwok On Tong, HC 395 para 320)  India  [2006]  UKAIT
       00039, that a judge must be satisfied  that  each  of  the  required
       elements of a case must be met beore an appeal can be allowed.  Very
       often this is uncontroversial because matters are not in dispute but
       unless they are clearly established they have to be considered.

   13. The second contention is that the judge should  have  adjourned  the
       case  but  there  was  no  application  for  adjournment  and,  more
       significantly, no material disadvantage has  been  identified.   The
       appellants have not explained what they would have done if they  had
       more time and have not tried to introduce further evidence  at  this
       stage.  Any error there was immaterial because it would have made no
       difference.

   14. Here the First-tier Tribunal Judge felt he had to choose between two
       conflicting decisions of the First-tier Tribunal. That is not right.
       He had to decide the appeal before him. Intriguingly,  although  the
       judge appeared to think that he had to choose between two decisions,
       when it came to his conclusions it is clear that  he  appraised  the
       evidence as a whole and reached a conclusion on that  evidence.   He
       directed himself, correctly, that he was dealing with a human rights
       appeal and compliance with the Rules merely illuminated an Article 8
       balancing exercise. He identified the statements  that  were  before
       him and particularly saw a copy of  the  death  certificate  showing
       that Mr Bari died in August 2000.

   15. He also saw the witness statement of Mr Bari's widow confirming  the
       death was in August 2000.  I note that in her witness statement  she
       said she was born in May 1946.  The judge  also  acknowledged  there
       was a photocopy of Mr Bari's passport.  The judge said it was issued
       on 15 July 2015 but that is plainly a mistake.  It is  obvious  from
       inspection  it  was  issued  on  15  July  1994.   The  judge   also
       acknowledged DNA evidence proving that the  appellants  are  sisters
       but the judge noted correctly that the DNA  evidence  cannot  assist
       with paternity.  The judge clearly identified with the weight  given
       by Ms Meates to the evidence from the London solicitor and Ms Meates
       finding it preferable to the evidence  from  Bangladesh.   He  noted
       too, correctly, that the decision of Judge Gibb was not  a  decision
       involving these parties but involving the brother and noted that the
       decision was based on the evidence before the judge  (as  it  should
       have been) and Judge Gibb was very critical of the  failure  of  the
       Secretary of State to provide evidence that appeared to be with  his
       control.

   16. The judge was also alert to the possibility of unfairness by  points
       being raised on the morning of the hearing.  He dealt with  that  at
       paragraph 39.  He noted there was no request for an adjournment.  It
       was also his view that  the  appellants  would  have  known  of  the
       decision of Ms Meates and should have dealt with  it  but  chose  to
       make no comment on it in  their  statement.   That  it  an  entirely
       reasonable position to adopt.  He noted, again correctly,  that  the
       decision in Ms Meates' case related to the same parties and  issues.
       The DNA evidence was clearly new but of limited  value.   It  showed
       the appellants were sisters and also sisters of someone who had been
       recognised as entitled to a certificate of entitlement but only on a
       particular basis.

   17. He concluded expressly that Mr Bari died in 1978. It  followed  that
       the second, third and fourth appellants were born after  his  death.
       He  said  there  was  no   unfairness.    Rather   the   appellants'
       representatives had not given the whole  story  to  the  Immigration
       Officer.  That of  course  is  not  necessarily  the  fault  of  the
       representatives but it was the judge's point that it was not  unfair
       to rely on things that the appellants should have known about.

   18. The grounds of appeal are full and were relied upon.

   19. The first point taken is that there was no notice but no  indication
       is given of how the points would have been answered  and  there  was
       plenty of time to deal with that.  It  is  not  a  question  of  the
       solicitors being caught  out  by  not  asking  for  an  adjournment.
       Rather the reality is that there was no point in  adjourning.   They
       were in as good a position to deal with the point then as they  were
       later.

   20. The point was reworked saying that the appellants should have had an
       opportunity of dealing with the letter from Coode Kingdon  Somper  &
       Co but this meets the same answer.  There was no advantage in having
       notice.  The judge was perfectly aware of the British passport being
       issued to the  reputedly  dead  man.   He  factored  that  into  his
       analysis.  It must be  that  he  thought  the  passport  was  issued
       wrongly and that decision was entirely open to him.

   21. There is nothing perverse or irrational in considering the  evidence
       of the letter from Coode Kingdon Somper & Co  as  very  significant.
       Apparently  independent  solicitors  do  not  write  letters   about
       administering an estate unless they have a proper  reason  to  think
       that  somebody  is  dead.   The  fact  that  there   is   subsequent
       correspondence from Bangladesh that tends to suggest he was not dead
       is not something that need have weighed heavily in the judge's mind.
        The reality is that it was all a very  long  way  from  the  United
       Kingdom and little chance of imposing any sanction on any  dishonest
       witness.

   22. There is no Devaseelan error here.  The  judge  correctly  took  the
       first Adjudicator's determination as the  starting  point.   He  was
       perfectly prepared to depart from it and considered  the  additional
       evidence but found it unimpressive.  That is the kind of decision he
       was there to make and he made it lawfully.  Nothing turns on whether
       or not the appellant sisters are related to the alleged brother that
       is claimed.  They may well be.  There has been inconsistent evidence
       given about the nature of the family relationship.  Not  necessarily
       from these appellants.  The position is unclear.  I simply make  the
       point the fact that the four  appellants  are  related  and  have  a
       brother is not evidence that they  are  the  son  of  the  purported
       father.  I have reviewed my notes of the submissions as well as  the
       documents.  I appreciate from the appellants' point of  view  it  is
       greatly disappointing because they thought they had  done  what  was
       required.

   23. However what they had not done is address  the  deficiencies  in  an
       earlier decision that must have been known at  least  to  the  first
       appellant.  There is no irrationality or other unlawfulness  on  the
       part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissing the  appeal  and  I
       uphold  this  decision.   It  follows  therefore  this   appeal   is
       dismissed.

Notice of Decision

   24. These appeals are dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 26 April 2019                  |



