

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/20239/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                         |                                  |
|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 September 2017                     |    On 11 September 2017          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
         on behalf of an Entry Clearance Officer (New Delhi 4060082)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NEERAJ KUMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr P Singh Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:     Mr Raza instructed by Charles Simmons Immigration
Solicitors

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal T Jones promulgated  on  28  February  2017  in
        which the Judge allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
        against the refusal of an application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
        partner under Appendix FM.



Error of law


     2. The Secretary of State challenged the decision on two  grounds  the
        first of which asserted the Judge failed to explain how it was that
        the sponsor's evidence satisfied the requirements of  Appendix  FM-
        SE. Mr Singh did not pursue this ground on the basis the Judge sets
        out the appellant's evidence at [8 - 10].  The  Judge  was  clearly
        aware of the evidence provided in the sponsor's  witness  statement
        together with skeleton argument which clearly, when taken  together
        show the Judge does explain how the requirements of Appendix  FM-SE
        were satisfied. Accordingly, no arguable legal error is made out in
        relation to Ground 1.
     3. Ground 2 asserted that as the application was made on 7  June  2016
        and refused on 26 July 2016 the appeal was limited to human  rights
        grounds only. Whilst the Secretary of State accepts that compliance
        with the Rules is  capable  of  being  an  important  part  of  the
        assessment of proportionality it is  not  the  only  consideration,
        particularly when the Judge has not  adequately  engaged  with  the
        Rules.
     4. It is not disputed that article 8 ECHR formed a ground of appeal to
        the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  changes
        brought about by the Immigration Act 2014 removed as  a  ground  of
        appeal that a decision is not in accordance  with  the  Immigration
        Rules. Notwithstanding, the Judge only allows the appeal by finding
        that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met.
     5. The Upper Tribunal is grateful to Mr  Singh  who,  having  accepted
        that the requirements of the Rules are met and in  the  absence  of
        countervailing factors, accepted that although arguable legal error
        had been made on a ground of jurisdiction the Upper  Tribunal  were
        entitled to substitute a decision allowing the appeal on the  human
        rights grounds.
     6. The Upper Tribunal finds the Judge erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
        under the Rules when he had no jurisdiction to  do  so.  The  Upper
        Tribunal  sets  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        although  the  findings  in  relation  to  maintenance   shall   be
        preserved. In light of the ability of the appellant to satisfy  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules, the factors to be considered
        pursuant to section 117 of the 2002 Act,  and  in  the  absence  of
        countervailing factors, the Upper Tribunal substitutes  a  decision
        allowing the appeal on human rights grounds pursuant to  article  8
        ECHR.


Decision

     7. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake  the  decision
        as follows. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 11 September 2017






