
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20534/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 1 August 2019             |
|On 3 July 2019                                |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                 Jagjeet [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by ATM Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India who appealed against the  decision
    of the respondent to refuse  her  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   Her
    application had been made outside the Rules and had been refused  on  2
    October 2018.  The basis of the refusal  was  that  she  had  exercised
    deception when previously taking an English language test in 2013.   It
    was asserted by the respondent that her TOEIC certificate from ETS  had
    been obtained fraudulently through the use of a proxy.  The appellant's
    appeal against this decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  J  P
    Groom in  a  Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  after  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham Justice Centre on 27 March 2019.  The appellant now  appeals
    to the Upper Tribunal with leave  having  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gibb on 4 June 2019.

 2. The appellant and her husband have two children.  Those  children  have
    been  registered  as  English  nationals.   The  appellant's  husband's
    application for leave to remain outside the Rules which had  been  made
    on or about the same time as that of this appellant was allowed because
    he had British children.  It is only this appellant's application which
    was refused and the sole basis of  refusal  was  that  the  application
    failed on grounds of suitability because of what was said to have  been
    a fraud in obtaining her TOEIC certificate from ETS.  Curiously, and it
    ought to be surprisingly, in the decision letter the respondent  stated
    as follows:

         "You have told us that your child is a British national  and  lives
         in the UK with you and your spouse.

         You have told us that you have a British child, we  do  not  expect
         the British child to leave the UK as the child can live in  the  UK
         with your partner, the child's father.  However as you  have  taken
         part in fraudulent activity with Educational Testing Service  (ETS)
         your conduct is not conducive to the public good."

 3. What is surprising about this bald statement of the respondent's reason
    for  refusing  the  application  is  that  having  accepted  that   the
    respondent has a British child (in fact she has two) the respondent has
    not given any consideration at all to what is contained within  Section
    117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  which
    provides as follows:

         "117B.   Article 8: Public interest  considerations  applicable  in
                all cases ...

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public  interest  does  not  require  a
                    person's removal where -

                    (a)    a person has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom."

 4. Within Section 117D, a "qualifying child" is defined as meaning:

         "A person who is under the age of 18 and who -

         (a)  is a British citizen ...".

 5. Accordingly the public interest does not in  this  case,  according  to
    Statute, require the  appellant's  removal  because  she  does  (as  is
    seemingly accepted in the refusal letter) have a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child.

 6. No other reason was given within the refusal letter for the refusal  of
    the application.

 7. There is no reference within Judge Groom's Decision to Section  117B(6)
    either.  Furthermore, it appears (and this is accepted on behalf of the
    respondent today by Ms Cunha) that there was  a  further  error  and/or
    procedural irregularity in these proceedings because  at  the  hearing,
    during cross-examination, the Home Office representative then submitted
    that there was a further reason why permission should be  refused.   At
    this hearing the only evidence which had been produced on behalf of the
    respondent justifying the assertion that the  appellant  had  exercised
    fraud  in  obtaining  her  English  language  certificate  was  generic
    evidence such as has been produced in a multitude  of  cases.   It  was
    accepted that the appellant had put forward an  explanation  (that  she
    had not used fraud and had taken the test herself) which was sufficient
    at least to  rebut  the  presumption  without  more.   Accordingly,  on
    settled authority the position  was  that  it  was  necessary  for  the
    respondent to establish on the balance of probabilities that fraud  had
    indeed  been  used  notwithstanding  the  explanation  given   by   the
    appellant.

 8. At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent's
    representative raised another issue, which was it  was  said  that  the
    appellant had obtained the registration  of  her  children  as  English
    nationals by using deception.  At the hearing today Ms Cunha stated  as
    follows:

         "[What I am about to say]  is  based  upon  what  the  respondent's
         Presenting Officer [at the First-tier hearing] has  stated  in  her
         minutes.  Based on what was said, the  evidence  that  the  parties
         went to the Indian High Commission and requested from them a letter
         stating that their children were stateless came out  during  cross-
         examination.  So it  was  inferred  that  the  appellant  [and  her
         husband] by doing so,  had  acted  dishonestly  because  as  Indian
         nationals their children would have been entitled to obtain  Indian
         citizenship.  What the HOPO submitted was that in fact, because the
         parents were  from  Indian  nationality,  the  children  were  also
         automatically Indian nationals and that this act was done in  order
         to deceive the  respondent  in  thinking  that  the  children  were
         stateless and into forcing the respondent into granting as a result
         of the children's statelessness, British citizenship.

         The HOPO's representations, from reading the  notes,  and  from  an
         inference drawn from paragraphs 15 to  17  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Groom's decision, were designed to infer that  by  acting  in
         this way, in  other  words  dishonestly,  the  appellant  [and  her
         partner] had a propensity to act dishonestly more generally,  which
         was sufficient to prove that  one  of  the  appellants  would  have
         employed dishonesty in obtaining a fraudulent TOEIC test  in  order
         to obtain leave previously.

         The judge in regarding this submission as valid (see  paragraph  17
         of the decision) erred because she did  not  consider  that  Indian
         nationals do not automatically transfer their nationality to  their
         offspring.  This is supported by paragraphs 36  and  37  of  MK  (a
         child by her litigation friend CAE) [2017] EWHC 1365 (a decision of
         the Vice-President of this Tribunal, CMG  Ockelton,  sitting  as  a
         Deputy High Court Judge).

         It therefore appears that the conclusion that the judge drew was in
         error because in fact if what  the  appellant  was  saying  at  the
         hearing is true, then they had not registered their  two  daughters
         with the Indian High Commission  in  the  UK  [on  a  false  basis]
         because they were stateless.

         Given that the judge does not refer to SM  Qadir  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         1167, at paragraph 17 in this context (although she had referred to
         it earlier) she erred because  written  evidence  provided  by  the
         respondent merely discharged the  evidential  burden  but  did  not
         establish the respondent's case.  Given that  the  only  conclusion
         that would have established the respondent's case was the assertion
         of  the  propensity  to  be  dishonest,  it  therefore  seems  that
         paragraph 17 of the decision was  flawed  and  therefore  not  well
         considered in  that  there  is  no  sustainable  finding  that  the
         appellant was in fact dishonest.  For these reasons we accept  that
         this decision is flawed and will have to be remade."

 9. It was the respondent's submission that it would be appropriate for the
    appeal to be reheard either in the Upper Tribunal or by a fresh hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal in order that the appellant  could  have  an
    opportunity of providing evidence in court in relation to dishonesty in
    general and enabling the respondent to have  the  opportunity  to  test
    this evidence.

10. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Harris submitted that the respondent had
    already had this opportunity.  She asked the Tribunal to note that  the
    only basis upon which the  judge  had  found  that  the  appellant  had
    exercised  dishonesty  on  obtaining  the  ETS  certificate   was   her
    propensity to be dishonest as shown by her being dishonest in obtaining
    the registration of her  children  as  English  citizens  and  as  this
    finding could no longer be sustained that there was no longer any basis
    upon which a finding of dishonesty and therefore unsuitability could be
    maintained.  She in particular asked the court to note that  there  had
    been no cross-appeal by the respondent and furthermore  the  respondent
    had not even put in a Rule 24 statement setting out his position (if it
    was his position) that there were other reasons which could  have  been
    given for justifying a finding of dishonesty.

11. Very fairly, Ms Cunha accepted that in the absence of a cross-appeal or
    even a Rule 24 statement on  behalf  of  the  respondent  it  would  be
    difficult to argue that a finding of dishonesty against this  appellant
    could be sustained.

Discussion

12. In my judgment, there is no answer to Ms Harris's submission that there
    is now no basis upon which a finding of dishonesty can  be  maintained.
    As she says, the only reason given by  the  judge  to  support  such  a
    finding was an erroneous conclusion that the appellant and her  husband
    had  exercised  dishonesty  when  claiming  that  their  children  were
    stateless.  On this point, it is worth setting out  what  was  said  by
    Judge Ockelton, in MK at paragraph 36, as follows:

         "36. The conclusions from what is set out  above  are  as  follows.
             For the purposes of  the  statutory  provisions  in  issue,  a
             person is stateless if he  has  no  nationality.   Ability  to
             acquire a nationality was irrelevant for  these  purposes.   A
             child born on or after 3  December  2004,  outside  India,  of
             parents at least one of whom is an Indian  national,  and  who
             has not been to  India,  is  not  an  Indian  national  unless
             registration of the birth has taken place in  accordance  with
             the provisions of the Citizenship Act 1955 (India) as amended.
              If the child has no other nationality, the child is stateless
             for the purposes of paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to  the  British
             Nationality Act 1981 and, if the other  requirements  of  that
             paragraph are met, is entitled to be registered as  a  British
             citizen.  If, therefore, C's birth [in that  particular  case]
             had on the date of  the  decision  under  challenge  not  been
             registered, she is entitled to British citizenship."

13. This Tribunal has had regard to  the  relevant  parts  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 which is paragraph 3 of Schedule  2  of  that  Act
    which provides as follows:

         "3-(1)   A person born in the United Kingdom ... shall be entitled,
                on an application for his registration under this paragraph,
                to be  so  registered  if  the  following  requirements  are
                satisfied in his case, namely -

                (a)    that he is and always has been stateless; and

                (b)    that on the date of the application he ... was  under
                    the age of 22; and

                (c)    that  he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  ...  at  the
                    beginning of the period of five years ending  with  that
                    date and that (subject to paragraph (6)) the  number  of
                    days on which he was absent from both the United Kingdom
                    and the British Overseas Territories in that period does
                    not exceed 450.

           (2)    A person entitled to registration under this paragraph -

                (a)    shall be registered under it as a British citizen if,
                    in the period of five years mentioned  in  sub-paragraph
                    (1), the number of days wholly or in partly spent by him
                    in the United Kingdom exceeds the number of days  wholly
                    or  partly  spent  by  him  in  the   British   Oversees
                    Territories

                 ...

           (6)    If in the special circumstances of  any  particular  case
                the Secretary of State thinks fit, he may for  the  purposes
                of paragraphs 3 or 4 treat the person as the subject of  the
                application as fulfilling the requirement certified in  some
                paragraph (1)(c) of that paragraph although  the  number  of
                days on which he was absent from both the United Kingdom and
                the  British  Overseas  Territories  in  the  period   there
                mentioned exceeds the number there mentioned)."

14. It is accepted, as already noted above, on behalf of the respondent  by
    Ms Cunha that in the circumstances of this case because no  application
    had been made in accordance with Indian law for the registration of the
    children as Indian nationals, those children were in fact stateless and
    were accordingly entitled to British nationality as claimed.

15. It follows that  the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant,  and  her
    partner, must have exercised deception when seeking the registration of
    their children as British nationals cannot stand.

16. There are two things that follow from this finding.  The first is that,
    as Ms Harris submits, there is no other basis upon which the finding of
    dishonesty  in  the  taking  of  the  English  language  test  can   be
    maintained.  In response to the generic evidence the appellant had  put
    forward her explanation.  Absent the finding of dishonesty in obtaining
    registrations as English nationals of her children, which justifies the
    finding of the propensity to dishonesty, there is no other basis for  a
    finding that the respondent has satisfied the  requirement  overall  of
    countering the  appellant's  response  to  the  generic  evidence.   It
    follows that that finding of dishonesty cannot be sustained.

17. The second consequence is that it follows that it could only be said to
    be in the public interest to remove this appellant  (having  regard  to
    Section 117B(6)) if it could be said to be reasonable to expect the two
    British children to leave the UK.  Whatever might ultimately  be  found
    to be the correct interpretation of the guidance given recently by  the
    Supreme Court in KO, it is not suggested that it would be reasonable in
    the circumstances  of  this  particular  case  to  expect  two  British
    children one of whose parents have a  legal  right  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom to leave this country.  Indeed, in  the  refusal  letter
    itself, this is not suggested.

18. Considering all the factors in this  case,  and  that  the  appellant's
    husband was granted permission to remain  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    British children in this country, it cannot in  the  judgment  of  this
    Tribunal on the facts of this case be reasonable to expect the children
    to leave the UK and nor  would  it  be  proportionate  to  expect  this
    appellant to leave either.

19. It follows this appeal must be allowed and I so find.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Groom  and  substitute
the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, under Article 8, outside the Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2019

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may  be
payable.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2019

