
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20680/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|By Remote Hearing                  |                                   |
|On 30 September 2020               |On 13 October 2020                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                        MOHAMMED JAMIU ABIODUN THANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fazli, Counsel instructed by Supreme Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born in 1970. He  entered  the
       UK in 2002 and, after  making  an  unsuccessful  asylum  application,
       remained in the UK thereafter without leave. He is appealing  against
       the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buttar ("the judge")
       promulgated on 28 April 2020 refusing his human rights claim.

    2. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal, in summary,  was
       that removal to Nigeria would be contrary to article 8  ECHR  because
       of the private life he has developed in  the  UK  over  the  last  18
       years,  the  length  of  time  he  has  been   outside   of   Nigeria
       (approximately 24 years, as he spent 6 years in  Saudi  Arabia),  his
       relationship with family in the UK (in particular,  his  nephews  and
       siblings, who are British citizens), and the  difficulties  he  would
       face  in  Nigeria  (primarily  arising  because   of   his   father's
       politically motivated murder and the adverse interest he  would  face
       from the authorities).

    3. The judge firstly assessed whether the appellant satisfied  Paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules on the basis  of  there  being
       very significant obstacles to his integration in Nigeria.  The  judge
       found that the appellant would be able to integrate in  Nigeria,  and
       would not face very significant obstacles doing so, for  a  range  of
       reasons. These were:

        a. he has extended family in Nigeria;

        b. he would receive support from his sisters in the UK;

        c. he is not taking any medication or accessing  treatment  in  the
           UK, and is not suffering from a mental  health  condition,  that
           would prevent integration in Nigeria;

        d. he was born and lived in Nigeria until 22 years old;

        e. he has managed to live in and adapt to life in both the  UK  and
           Saudi Arabia, where he lived for 6 years prior to coming to  the
           UK, and there is no  reason  why  he  could  not  adapt  to  new
           circumstances again;

        f. he could study in  Nigeria,  whilst  supported  by  family,  and
           eventually find work; and

        g. the authorities in Nigeria do not have any adverse, or  ongoing,
           interested in him.

    4. The judge then  considered  whether  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
       "outside  the  immigration  rules".  The  judge,  at  paragraph   38,
       considered  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  family.  After
       describing the appellant's relationship with his nephews,  the  judge
       stated:

           "I find that this does not go beyond  the  emotional  ties  that
           exist between uncles and nephews so that his removal to  Nigeria
           would be a disproportionate interference with their right  to  a
           family life. Even if I am wrong about this, this family life was
           established at a time when his immigration status was precarious
           throughout the UK."

The Grounds of Appeal

    5. The grounds are divided into three sections.

    6. The first section concerns the judge's finding that there  would  not
       be very significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria. It is argued
       that the only reasonable conclusion open to the judge, based  on  the
       evidence about the appellant's connection to the UK,  the  length  of
       time  he  has  been  outside  of  Nigeria,  his   genuine   fear   of
       persecution, and the  lack  of  accommodation  available  to  him  in
       Nigeria, was to find that there were very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration.

    7. It is also argued that the judge erred by not giving weight  to  what
       the appellant would be forced to  leave  behind  in  the  UK.  It  is
       asserted that the judge should  have  followed  a  Scottish  Judicial
       Review: Petition of MC for Judicial Review, dated  1  September  2014
       [2016] CSOH 7, where it was stated that Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is as
       much concerned with an appellant's private life in and ties to the UK
       as the circumstances that will be faced in the country of return.

    8. The second section of  the  grounds  of  appeal  concerns  article  8
       outside the Immigration Rules. It is  argued  that  the  judge  erred
       because family life was made out, given the  dependency  between  the
       appellant and his family. Further, it is argued that on any  rational
       view the  appellant's  removal  would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh
       consequences for him and his family.

    9. The third section  of  the  grounds  concerns  section  117B  of  the
       Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  It  is
       argued that the appellant satisfied section 117B(3)  because  he  has
       been accommodated by his sisters and therefore has not been a  burden
       on the state; speaks good English; and has a private life that is  of
       such weight that, in accordance with Rhuppiah v  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department  [2018] UKSC 58, should be  given  more  than
       little weight under 117B(5).

Grant of Permission

   10. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  In  the
       grant of permission it is stated that the  judge  did  not  give  any
       reasons at paragraph 35 (iii) for finding that the appellant did  not
       meet the Immigration Rules; or explain the extent to which he did not
       meet them. It is also stated that at paragraph 38 the judge  arguably
       erred by stating that the appellant's family life with his mother and
       siblings was established when his immigration status was  precarious,
       when it was established many years previously in Nigeria.

Analysis

   11. Before addressing the arguments in the  grounds  of  appeal,  I  will
       briefly address the two additional  points  raised  in  the  decision
       granting permission.

   12. In the grant of permission it is asserted  that  the  judge  arguably
       erred by not giving reasons for her conclusion at  paragraph  35(iii)
       that the Immigration Rules were not satisfied. This  is  plainly  not
       correct because, having identified that the relevant issue under  the
       Immigration Rules was whether there were very  significant  obstacles
       to integration in Nigeria (pursuant to Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)),  the
       judge proceeded  to  consider  in  detail  whether  there  were  very
       significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria. The reasons are  not
       given in paragraph 35(iii) of the decision, but  they  are  given  in
       paragraphs 23 - 28.

   13. The assertion in the grant of  permission  that  the  judge  arguably
       erred by stating, at paragraph 38, that the appellant's  family  life
       with his mother and siblings was  established  when  his  immigration
       status was precarious is equally lacking in merit because it is plain
       that relevant part of paragraph 38 is concerned with the  appellant's
       relationship with his nephews, not his mother and siblings.

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)

   14. The meaning of "very significant obstacles" has  been  considered  by
       the Court of  Appeal  in  several  recent  decisions.  These  include
       Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016]  EWCA  Civ
       813, AS v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ
       1284, Parveen v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
       EWCA Civ 932, and SA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department [2019] EWCA Civ 53. It is these  decisions  that  are  the
       guiding - indeed, binding -  authorities  on  the  interpretation  of
       "very significant obstacles", not a Judicial Review Decision  in  the
       Outer House, Court of Session that predates them, which is  cited  at
       length and relied upon in the grounds of appeal.

   15. The Court of Appeal authorities are clear that the assessment of very
       significant obstacles is concerned with how a person will be able  to
       participate in, and cope with, life in the country  to  which  he  is
       returned. The strength of his private life in the UK is relevant only
       to the extent that it sheds light on, or  assists  in  understanding,
       the obstacles that will be faced in the country of return.

   16. As explained by Sales LJ  in  Kamara  at  [14],  a  broad  evaluative
       assessment of what the appellant will face in the country to which he
       is returned is required:

           "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment
           to be made as to whether the individual will  be  enough  of  an
           insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
           that country is carried on and a capacity to participate in  it,
           so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there,  to
           be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to
           build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a   variety   of   human
           relationships to give substance to the individual's private  and
           family life."

   17. Mr Fazli argued that  the  judge's  evaluation  of  very  significant
       obstacles was  deficient  because  she  did  not  consider  what  the
       appellant would leave behind in the UK, and in particular  the  close
       relationship with his family that would be disrupted. However, as  is
       clear from Kamara and the other authorities cited above, the question
       for the judge under Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was not whether, and  the
       extent to which, there would be an interference with the  appellant's
       family life in the UK,  but  rather  the  challenges  he  would  face
       integrating in Nigeria. The fact that the appellant is very close  to
       his nephews and sisters, for example,  is  relevant  to  the  overall
       article  8  assessment,  but  not  to  the  obstacles  he  will  face
       integrating in Nigeria.

   18. Mr Fazli also argued that the judge failed  to  undertake  the  broad
       evaluative assessment required by Kamara. I disagree. As can be  seen
       from the summary above in paragraph 3, the judge had  regard  to  all
       material considerations when assessing the question of whether  there
       would be very significant obstacles to integration.

   19. I also do not accept that that there  is  merit  to  the  rationality
       challenge. Given that the appellant spent the first 22 years  of  his
       life in Nigeria, does not have a medical/mental health condition  for
       which he receives treatment, will receive support from his sisters in
       the UK, and will not face any  risk  from  the  authorities,  it  was
       plainly open to the judge to conclude that there would  not  be  very
       significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria.

   20. Mr Fazli submitted that the judge erred because he  stated  that  the
       appellant returned to  Nigeria,  after  spending  6  years  in  Saudi
       Arabia, for 3 years, when in fact he returned for only 3 months. This
       argument is not raised in the grounds and an application to amend the
       grounds to include it was not made. In any event, it is immaterial to
       the question of whether there would be very significant obstacles  to
       integration, as it does not change the fact that the appellant  spent
       his first 22 years in Nigeria or that he has been able  to  adapt  to
       living in more than one society, which indicates a capability to cope
       with challenges that may arise when reintegrating in Nigeria.

Article 8 outside the Rules and Section 117B of the 2002 Act

   21. The judge had regard to, and considered the evidence concerning,  all
       of the material considerations relevant to Article 8 ECHR,  including
       in particular the appellant's relationship with his  family  and  the
       length of time he has been in the UK (and outside  of  Nigeria);  and
       the judge adequately explained why she reached  the  conclusion  that
       the appellant's ties with his nephews did not go  beyond  the  normal
       emotional ties between uncles and  nephews.  There  is  therefore  no
       merit to Mr  Fazli's  argument  that  relevant  information  was  not
       considered, or that the assessment of  the  appellant's  relationship
       with his nephews was deficient.

   22. Nor is there any merit to the contention that  the  judge's  findings
       were irrational. The appellant has been in the UK  for  a  long  time
       (and outside of Nigeria for even longer). However, he has been in the
       UK unlawfully and therefore only little weight could be  attached  to
       his private life (section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act). Mr  Fazli  relied
       on Rhuppiah, where  it  was  acknowledged  that  particularly  strong
       features of a private life can justify a departure  from  the  result
       indicated by section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.  However,  he  did  not
       identify (and it is not discernible from the  decision,  or  evidence
       before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  there  was)   evidence   of
       particularly strong features of a private life in the UK in the sense
       contemplated in Rhuppiah.

   23. The appellant relies on sections 117B(2) and (3) of the 2002  Act  to
       support his case, but the judge  took  into  consideration  that  the
       appellant speaks English (paragraph 36(i) of the decision)  and  that
       he would be able to find employment in the UK (paragraph  36(iii)  of
       the decision). There is therefore no basis  to  the  contention  that
       these issues were not  considered.  Moreover,  given  that  they  are
       neutral factors (see Rhuppiah at [57]), there is clearly no basis  to
       the argument that it was  irrational  to  not  give  the  appellant's
       English-language ability and potential financial independence greater
       weight in assessing the proportionality of his removal under  Article
       8. Based on the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was
       clearly open to the judge to conclude that removal of  the  appellant
       would not breach article 8.



Notice of Decision

   24. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does
       not contain an error of law and stands.

|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |Dated: 7 October 2020             |

