
                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20928/2018
                                                               HU/20933/2018
                                                               HU/20936/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 May 2019                     |On 31 May 2019                     |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SANGEETHA [T]
                                 GEORGE [P]
                                    [N P]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha (Specialist Appeals Team)
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw (for AAN Joseph Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal of 6 February 2019 to allow  the  appeals  of
       Sangeetha  [T],  George  [P]  and  [NP],  citizens  of  India,   born
       respectively 19 May 1976, 7 December 1967 and  20  June  2002,  those
       appeals having been brought against the refusal of 28 September  2018
       of their human rights claims.

    2. The applications to remain on human rights  and  exceptional  grounds
       giving rise  to  these  proceedings  were  made  on  the  basis  that
       Sangeetha's leave as  Tier  2  migrant  had  been  revoked;  she  was
       pursuing reconsideration via the Pre-Action Protocol letter  process.
       Furthermore, she suffered from Tuberculosis  diagnosed  on  1  August
       2018, possibly as a consequence of the aggressive breast  cancer  she
       had suffered from since 2013 which  had  required  a  mastectomy  and
       monthly hormone treatment via Letrozole and Tamoxifen,  scheduled  to
       continue until 2024. [N] was at a crucial stage of his  education  as
       he was studying for his A levels. The applications  were  refused  on
       the basis that the Secretary  of  State  believed  that  the  medical
       treatment would be  available  in  India,  that  the  medical  report
       indicated her TB was not infectious, and that [N] could transfer  his
       studies to the Indian education system where he could adapt with  the
       support of his parents.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal noted the evidence  given  before  it,  which
       included the fact that the Appellant stated she had investigated  the
       cost of hormone treatment in India which came to  nearly  a  thousand
       pounds a month, which would be beyond the family's means; she and her
       husband had sold all their  assets  in  India  to  come  to  the  UK.
       Sometime after her arrival here she was  diagnosed  with  cancer.  Dr
       Vitta had  written  a  letter  of  29  January  2019  recording  that
       Sangeetha had gone through a horrendous experience  with  her  breast
       cancer, with ongoing treatment and complications,  leaving  her  with
       complex health needs requiring MDT involvement.

    4. The First-tier Tribunal accepted the  evidence  it  had  received  as
       credible, and considered the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
       finding that the family would not face very significant obstacles  to
       integration  given  they  had  spent  their  formative  years  there.
       However, considering the case outside the Rules, the family was  well
       integrated into British life, spoke  English,  and  were  financially
       independent having never been a burden on the  taxpayer.  Overall  it
       would be disproportionate to expect them to leave given the  virulent
       breast cancer which required ongoing treatment: this  made  the  case
       one not of choice but reality. It would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  to
       expect the family to return to India, and it would be appropriate  to
       grant some form of  limited  leave  so  as  to  permit  Sangeetha  to
       continue to engage with her  medical  treatment  regime  without  the
       treatment break that relocation to India would necessarily entail.

    5. Grounds of appeal contended that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
       law:

      a) In finding the consequences of the family's departure to be
         unjustifiably harsh notwithstanding having concluded there being
         no significant obstacles to integrating in India;

      b) Accepting the family's evidence absent independent confirmation of
         the costs of medical treatment in India, and failing to evaluate
         the availability of alternative medications or to assess the
         consequences of a change of healthcare regime;

      c) In finding that the family had not been a burden on public funds,
         in failing to take account of Sangeetha's reliance on the National
         Health Service.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted  on  15  April  2019  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal.

    7. Before me Ms Cunha explained that the Secretary of  State  would  not
       pursue the point on the costs of NHS care,  on  the  basis  that  the
       husband and wife  had  paid  taxes  whilst  present  lawfully,  which
       represented an appropriate contribution to public funds. However, the
       Home Office appeal was still pursued, on the  basis  that  inadequate
       reasons had been given for why it was  that  the  Appellant's  return
       would be unduly harsh, particularly bearing in mind that there was no
       corroboration of the cost of health  treatment.  If  Sangeetha  could
       access medical treatment financially then  she  would  not  face  any
       problems in finding work.

    8. Ms Shaw submitted that the Appellant would not be fit to  work  on  a
       return to India without reliable treatment; and she  had  given  oral
       evidence of making enquiries in India which had revealed the cost  of
       the injections she needed every 28 days as being a  thousand  pounds.
       The Home Office Guidance of 11 April 2019 did not  reference  medical
       issues as relevant to the "very significant obstacles to integration"
       question, and thus it was unsurprising that an  adverse  finding  had
       been made on private life  within  the  Rules  but  that  the  appeal
       nevertheless succeeded outside the Rules, where the health issues had
       greater resonance.

Decision and reasons

    9. It seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  come  to
       the conclusions which it did. Indeed, its reasoning is  unsurprising,
       and essentially to the effect  that  it  is  unjustifiably  harsh  to
       expect a woman with  serious  ongoing  cancer  problems  receiving  a
       course of treatment in the United Kingdom to relocate to India  where
       she would be unable to afford the essential treatment.

   10. Ms Cunha was doubtless  correct  not  to  pursue  the  point  on  the
       recourse to NHS treatment following the unanticipated development  of
       a serious illness. Migrants lawfully present in the UK will have paid
       the NHS surcharge  as  well  as  contributed  towards  the  country's
       finances via income and other tax payments.

   11. There is no tension between the appeals' success  outside  the  Rules
       but failure within them. The  Rules  are  only  the  starting  point,
       albeit that they comprise the embodiment of public policy  objectives
       that combine such that only a "compelling" case can  succeed  outside
       them. It is clear the First Tier Tribunal was aware of  this;  indeed
       it cited and applied the Secretary of State's own preferred term that
       encapsulates that notion, the "unjustifiably harsh" benchmark.

   12. As to the ground of appeal challenging the reliance on oral  evidence
       for satisfaction as to the cost of medical treatment, one  sees,  not
       infrequently, refusal letters where the Secretary  of  State  puts  a
       fully researched case as to the availability of medical treatment  in
       the country of origin. However, here there is  nothing  more  than  a
       bare assertion that the relevant treatment would be  available,  with
       no consideration whatsoever of the impact on  the  Appellant  of  the
       inevitable change in her  medical  support  arrangements  or  of  the
       question  of  the  affordability  of   any   medication.   In   those
       circumstances I do not consider the First-tier Tribunal needed to  do
       more than decide whether it accepted  the  Appellant's  own  evidence
       that she had researched the available medical treatment and would not
       be able to afford it without working  to  an  extent  that  would  be
       unrealistic given her state of health. It found that evidence  to  be
       credible. That was a conclusion properly open to it.

   13. In these circumstances I uphold the decision below.



Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                       Date 24 May 2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

