
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20010/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2018                              |On 16 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     a m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                   CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Salfolahi of Counsel) instructed by Temple Gate
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Malcolm promulgated on  29  August  2017  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of entry clearance dated  26  July
    2016.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  28  May  2008.   He
    applied for entry clearance to join his mother, 'SG' ('the sponsor') in
    the United Kingdom.  The sponsor holds indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  The application was refused for reasons set out in
    a Notice of Immigration Decision dated 26 July 2016 with  reference  to
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


4.   Before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  relied  on  Article  8
    grounds but did so with reference to the provisions of the  Immigration
    Rules.  Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal expressly indicated that
    the Appellant's appeal stood or fell with the requirements of the Rules
    - even though Article 8 was formally being relied upon.  In  particular
    it was submitted that if the  arguments  on  'sole  responsibility'  or
    'compelling reasons' under paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) were not  to  be
    accepted then there were no further matters to be advanced  in  respect
    of Article 8: see Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  paragraphs
    46 and 47.


5.   The  relevant  provisions  of  the  Rules  that  were  the  subject  of
    consideration both before the First-tier Tribunal and now before me are
    in these terms:

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:


             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
                  parents  or  a  relative   in   one   of   the   following
                  circumstances:


                  ...


                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and has had sole  responsibility  for  the
                      child's upbringing; or


                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                      the United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement and  there  are  serious  and
                      compelling family or other considerations which  make
                      exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                      arrangements have been made for the child's care."


6.   The Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm.


7.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  on  16  April  2018.   In  granting
    permission to appeal Judge Osborne acknowledged that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was to a significant extent  careful,  nuanced,
    and focused; but nonetheless it was recognised  that  it  was  arguable
    that the Judge had failed adequately to reason "why  the  [Appellant's]
    father's degree of neglect... was insufficient to allow  the  Judge  to
    find  that  the  sponsor  had   sole   responsibility".    Further   or
    alternatively it was  also  considered  arguable  that  the  Judge  had
    misdirected herself in law in the interpretation of paragraph 297(i)(f)
    of the Rules by relying upon the possibility of the  sponsor  returning
    to Sri Lanka to care for the Appellant.


8.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 21 May 2018. I  shall
    return to an element of that response in due course.


9.   I am grateful for the assistance of, and approach adopted by, Mr  Duffy
    before me. In light of his approach I do not consider it  necessary  to
    rehearse all of the facts  and  circumstances  by  way  of  background.
    These matters are set out in some detail in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and are in any event known to the parties.


10.  What is particularly pertinent - as hinted in the quotation above  from
    the grant of permission to appeal - is that the Appellant's father, who
    continued to live in Sri Lanka, was suffering from alcoholism which led
    to a significant degree of neglect, and indeed allegations  of  violent
    conduct and abuse, of which the Appellant  and  his  brother  had  been
    victims.  (The Appellant's brother, a  haemophiliac,  had  applied  for
    entry clearance at the same  time  as  the  Appellant;  a  refusal  had
    resulted in his appeal initially being  linked  in  these  proceedings.
    However, sadly he died in March 2017 and  his  appeal  has  accordingly
    been treated as withdrawn.)


11.  Mr Duffy conceded before me that in circumstances where the  Judge  had
    made findings in respect of the  Appellant's  father's  alcoholism  and
    neglect of the children, and bearing in mind the other evidence in  the
    appeal, it was not a sustainable conclusion that the  sponsor  was  not
    exercising sole responsibility for the Appellant within the meaning  of
    297(i)(e).


12.  Mr Duffy was content to acknowledge that this was a material  error  of
    law that would require the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    set aside.  He also acknowledged that the  logic  of  the  Respondent's
    position was now such that the appeal required  to  be  remade  in  the
    Appellant's favour.


13.  I accepted Mr Duffy's concession - both as to error of law and  outcome
    on re-making the decision - as being properly made.  On  that  basis  I
    found it unnecessary to trouble Ms Salfolahi for submissions.


14.  I have noted above that permission to  appeal  was  also  granted  with
    reference to paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules.   I  invited
    Mr Duffy's observations in this regard, notwithstanding his  concession
    on paragraph 297(i)(e).


15.  In context the Judge addressed this matter at paragraphs 69-72  of  the
    Decision in the following terms

         "69. I have gone on to give consideration to  paragraph  297(i)(f).
             It was argued by Ms Pinder that the question  of  whether  the
             Sponsor could return to Sri  Lanka  is  not  relevant  to  the
             consideration  of  297(i)(f).   I  do  not  agree  with   this
             interpretation.  In considering whether there are serious  and
             compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion
             of the child undesirable I am  being  asked  to  consider  the
             child's circumstances in Sri Lanka.  In doing  so  I  consider
             that whether the child could be looked after by his mother  in
             Sri Lanka is a relevant consideration.


         70.  The child [is] presently residing with the  Sponsor's  mother.
             The Sponsor has over the years spent time in Sri Lanka  and  I
             consider that the Sponsor could return to Sri  Lanka  to  live
             with her child.


         71.  I accept that clearly the Sponsor wishes  to  have  her  child
             living with her  in  the  UK.   The  Sponsor  has  also  given
             evidence that she does not wish to return to Sri Lanka as  she
             is fearful of her husband.


         72.  I consider that the Sponsor could return to Sri Lanka (as  she
             has done in the past) and if indeed she does not wish to  live
             in the same area as her husband then there would be no  reason
             why she would be unable to relocate to a different area."


16.  Challenge was made to this aspect of the  Decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal essentially along the lines of the submission advanced by  the
    Appellant's counsel before the First-tier Tribunal (Ms Pinder) - to the
    effect that the possible return of the sponsor to  Sri  Lanka  was  not
    part of the consideration of 297(i)(f).  In this context  the  Rule  24
    response of the Respondent suggests "the error at paragraph 69  is  not
    material to the outcome of the decision".  On its face this constitutes
    an acceptance that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  misdirected  herself
    with regard to paragraph 297(i)(f).  Mr Duffy acknowledged that it  was
    not the Secretary of State's understanding  or  approach  to  paragraph
    297(i)(f) that an application could be answered by  a  suggestion  that
    the settled sponsor could relocate to the country of the applicant.


17.  To that extent Mr Duffy again conceded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had fallen into error.  Moreover - and contrary to the submission
    in the Rule 24 response - such  an  error  would  be  material  if  the
    297(i)(e) argument did not succeed.


18.  I am again prepared to  accept  the  Respondent's  concession  in  this
    regard, which it seems to me is entirely in accordance with the natural
    wording of the Immigration  Rule  and  my  understanding  of  the  law.
    Indeed I have  never  come  across  a  circumstance  in  which  it  was
    suggested that an application made under 297(i)(f) was to  be  defeated
    on the basis that the settled sponsor should relocate.  In my  judgment
    it is clear that paragraph 297 of the Rules is premised on the presence
    of a parent or relative sponsor in the UK, and focused on the  question
    of exclusion or admission of the applicant.   It  is  no  part  of  the
    consideration under the Rule that any issue  or  problem  amounting  to
    'serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion undesirable' are potentially to be resolved by the sponsoring
    settled parent or relative relocating - with the inevitable significant
    interference to the sponsor's private and/or  family  life.   Mr  Duffy
    confirms that this is also the Secretary of  State's  understanding  of
    the Rules, which necessarily informs  the  practice  adopted  by  entry
    clearance officers.


19.  In such circumstances, even if it had not been for the concession  made
    by the Respondent in respect of paragraph  297(i)(e)  I  would  in  any
    event have found material error in respect of 297(i)(f) and  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on that basis.  It  would  also
    follow that a proper application of 297(i)(f) would  have  resulted  in
    the decision being remade in favour of the Appellant.


20.  I am mindful of course that I  am  considering  an  appeal  brought  on
    Article 8 grounds, and not based on Immigration Rules grounds. However,
    I acknowledge and accept the thrust of the submission made  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal: refusal of entry clearance  to  the  Appellant  in
    circumstances where in substance he satisfies  the  requirements  of  a
    Rule designed to protect and promote family life in the best  interests
    of a minor, results in a disproportionate interference with the  mutual
    family life of the sponsor and the Appellant.


21.  An anonymity direction is made in these proceedings on the  basis  that
    they involve a child and sensitive material in respect of  the  child's
    background and interrelationship with one of his parents.


Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


23.  I remake the decision in the appeal: the appeal  is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represent a corrected transcript of ex tempore  reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all of the circumstances make  a  full  fee
award.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)

