
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20175/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                Siyabonga [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell, instructed on Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appellant's appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Birrell promulgated on 24 January 2019 dismissing on all grounds his
appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to deport him and to
refuse his human rights claim.

First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe granted permission to appeal on 18
February 2019.

As a result, the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal on 30
May 2019.

Error of Law

In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there was an error
of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to
require it to be set aside.

In granting permission to appeal Judge O'Keeffe stated:

"It is arguable that where the appellant was sentenced to nine months'
imprisonment, the judge erred by not making any finding as to whether or
not the appellant was a foreign criminal as defined in Section 117D(c) of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The appellant does not
accept as recorded by the judge that there was no dispute that he was a
foreign criminal."

At paragraph 26 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell
stated: "There is no dispute that the appellant is a foreign criminal and
is liable to deportation."  Mr Ell tells me that that is not accurate in
that when he represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal he
challenged and took argument before the Tribunal as to whether the
appellant is a foreign criminal.  It is clear that the issue as to whether
the appellant is a foreign criminal is an important point.

As defined by Section 117D(2), a foreign criminal under the 2002 Act is:

      a) a person who is not a British citizen,

      b) a person who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence
         and

      c) who

      i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve
         months

     ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm or

    iii) is a persistent offender.

The judge appears to have assumed that there was no dispute that the
appellant is a foreign criminal.  It is clear from the submissions made to
the Secretary of State by the appellant's representatives set out, for
example, at E6 of the respondent's bundle, that it was challenged as to
whether the appellant was a foreign criminal.  It is clear from the refusal
decision that the Secretary of State relied on the conviction for drugs
offences, being an offence that has caused serious harm.  It is not
suggested that the appellant is a persistent offender, neither had he been
sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months. He was in
fact sentenced to a period of imprisonment of nine months for a variety of
offences in relation to a class C controlled drug, namely cannabis.  The
judge did not engage with the issue as to whether the offence caused
serious harm, despite the arguments put before the Tribunal at the First-
tier Tribunal hearing.

I accept that the judge moves on at [27] of the decision to consider the
seriousness of the offence but that is under a different provision, Section
117C(2), where the Act provides that the more serious the offence, the
greater the public interest in deportation.  I accept Mr Ell's argument
that what follows, particularly at [29] of the decision, is an assessment
of seriousness but not an assessment of seriousness within the meaning or
within the assessment required to determine whether the appellant is a
foreign criminal.  For example, at 29] the judge begins, "Deportation of
foreign criminals expresses society's condemnation of serious criminal
activity and promotes public confidence in the treatment of foreign
citizens who have committed them."  Whilst this is in a way an assessment
of seriousness, it does not appear to me that the judge engaged with the
issue as to whether the appellant was a foreign criminal in the first
place.  Clearly, if he is not a foreign criminal, then the provisions of
Section 117D and C do not apply to him.

I have considered the counterargument of Mr Tan that [29] of the decision
is sufficient to address the issue of seriousness.  I do not accept that
submission and I find that the decision fails to adequately engage with the
matter in issue, whether the appellant is indeed a foreign criminal.  The
rest of the appeal and the issues turn on that primary consideration,
namely whether or not the appellant is a foreign criminal.

In all the circumstances, I am driven to the conclusion that in an
otherwise careful decision that there is an error of law, which is
material, and which affects the balance of the decision, so that it cannot
stand and must be set aside.

I have considered Mr Ell's submissions in relation to the second, third and
fourth grounds but I find that in large measure, as submitted by Mr Tan,
these are little more than disagreements with the judge's findings.  It is
not required of the judge to make a list of every single factor that is
relevant, it is clear that the judge took into account relevant factors
both for and against the appellant's removal.  In any event, given my
findings in relation to the first ground in relation to the issue as to
whether the appellant is a foreign criminal, it is not necessary for me to
address these any further.

Where a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside Section
12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions or it
must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The scheme of the Tribunals, Courts
and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of primary fact-
finding to the Upper Tribunal.  Where the facts are unclear on a crucial
issue at the heart of the appeal, as they are in this case, effectively
there has not been a valid determination of those issues.  The errors of
the First-tier Tribunal vitiate all other findings and the conclusions from
those facts so that I am satisfied there has not been a valid determination
of the issues in the appeal.

In the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-
tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester and do so on the basis that this is a
case which falls squarely within the Senior President's practice statement
at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision should be set
aside.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal in
accordance with the attached direction.



                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 30 May 2019


Consequential Directions

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester.

The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved.  The
appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge with the
exception of Judge Birrell and Judge O'Keeffe.

There has been no request for anonymity.  In the circumstances, I make no
anonymity direction.


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award as the outcome of the appeal remains unresolved.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 30 May 2019
