
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20081/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 October 2020                 |On 4 November 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                     D S

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     No submissions received.

For the respondent:    No submissions received



                            DECISION AND REASONS








    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 30  July
         2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ficklin
         promulgated on 9 April 2020 following a hearing at Manchester on  9
         March 2020.

      2. The appellant is a national of Ghana born  on  15  March  1973.  He
         appeals against the decision of the respondent on 19 November  2019
         to refuse his application for leave  based  on  his  private/family
         life with his partner AA), her adult daughter (RT) and  RT's  child
         (PU) who was aged four at the date of the  hearing.  The  appellant
         entered the UK in transit in 2002 but never departed.  He  did  not
         seek to regularise his stay until October 2019.

      3. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant,  AA  and  RT.  He
         accepted that the appellant and AA were in a genuine and subsisting
         relationship and that they had been cohabiting since  January  2017
         but that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the continuation
         of family life in Ghana and that EX.1(b) did not  apply.  He  found
         that there was no family life between  the  appellant  and  RT.  He
         found that the appellant helped with PU's case but that he did  not
         have a parental relationship with him and that EX.1(a)(i)  did  not
         apply. With respect to paragraph 276ADE he found that  there  would
         not be very  significant  obstacles  to  his  re-integration  to  a
         country where he had spent  the  majority  of  his  life.  He  took
         account of the fact that the appellant spoke English  and  not  was
         not a financial burden on the state but that all the  relationships
         were formed at a time when the appellant was  here  unlawfully.  He
         found that AA's income exceeded the required  threshold  under  the
         Immigration Rules but he found that  the  principles  in  Chikwamba
         [2008] UKHL 40 did not apply because  the  appellant  and  AA  were
         unmarried. Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

      4. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  Two  grounds  were  put
         forward. The first  was  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in
         holding that the Chikwamba principles did  not  apply  because  the
         appellant was unmarried. The second was that that the  judge  erred
         in his finding that there was no parental relationship between  the
         appellant and PU and that this impacted  upon  the  best  interests
         consideration.  The First-tier Tribunal refused the application for
         permission but it was granted upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

    Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      5. The matter would ordinarily have then been listed for a hearing but
         due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take  precautions  against
         its spread,  this  did  not  happen  and  instead  directions  were
         included in the grant of permission  sent  to  the  parties  on  14
         August 2020.  They were asked to  present  any  objections  to  the
         matter being dealt with on the  papers  and  to  make  any  further
         submissions on the error of law issue within certain time limits.

      6. The Tribunal has not received any submissions from either party  in
         compliance with the directions.  The  appellant's  representatives,
         have, however indicated that the appellant  has  changed  his  mind
         about withdrawing his appeal (as he had  requested  in  an  earlier
         email to the Upper Tribunal) and wished to  proceed  on  the  basis
         proposed by the Tribunal. The respondent was not copied in to their
         notification  to  the  Tribunal.  I  now  consider  whether  it  is
         appropriate to determine the matter on the papers.

      7. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      8. I have had careful regard to all  the  evidence  before  me  before
         deciding how to proceed. I take the view that a full account of the
         facts are set out in those  papers,  that  the  arguments  for  and
         against the appellant have been clearly set out and that the issues
         to be decided are uncomplicated. I have regard to the importance of
         the matter to the appellant and his  family  and  consider  that  a
         speedy determination of this matter is in his best interests. I  am
         satisfied that the grant of permission with directions was properly
         served on the respondent and that she has had ample opportunity  to
         respond. I consider that I am able to fairly and justly  deal  with
         this matter on the papers and now proceed to do so.

    Findings and reasons

      9. I have considered the evidence, the determination, the grounds  for
         permission and the grant of permission.

     10. With respect to ground 1, the judge  properly  took  the  Chikwamba
         judgment into account but wrongly concluded that it did  not  apply
         because the appellant and sponsor were not married and so  did  not
         meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  Given  that  the
         judge found that the relationship was between them was genuine  and
         subsisting and that they had been living together in a relationship
         akin to marriage for over two years preceding the hearing  and  the
         application for leave,  he  erred  in  finding  that  marriage  was
         necessary for the rules to be met. The circumstances would  suggest
         that the appellant would meet the requirements of a partner for the
         purposes of the rules.

     11. It is also argued that the judge was wrong to find that there would
         be no disruption to PU's life beyond the emotional distress  caused
         by the  appellant's  departure  and  that  this  should  have  been
         factored into the consideration of whether it was proportionate  to
         expect the  appellant  to  return  to  Ghana  to  apply  for  entry
         clearance. This argument overlaps  with  the  second  ground,  upon
         which it is largely dependent, and I now turn to consider it.

     12. Ground 2 argues that the judge erred in his finding that there  was
         no parental relationship between the appellant and PU.  PU  is  the
         grandson of the appellant's partner. He lives with RT, his  mother.
         She is a single parent. The claim in the  grounds  that  the  judge
         failed to take account of the fact that  RT  worked  full  time  is
         misconceived as, by her own written and oral evidence,  she  worked
         part time and not full time. The judge accepted  that  AA  and  the
         appellant were both involved in the child's  care  but  found  that
         this did not amount to a parental  responsibility.  I  can  see  no
         error in his  findings  and  conclusions.  According  to  the  AA's
         witness statement,  she  and  the  appellant  looked  after  PU  at
         weekends when RT worked and they would sometimes collect  him  from
         school and take him out to eat. This is confirmed by RT.  I  cannot
         see how that can be said to amount to a parental relationship.  The
         child continues to live with his mother and the  care  he  receives
         from his grandmother and the appellant does not go beyond what  one
         would expect from grandparents.  The judge  was  entitled  to  find
         that the appellant's role in PU's life did not reach the level of a
         parent (at 17); it cannot sensibly be argued that the appellant had
         'stepped into the shoes' of a parent. He was also entitled to  find
         that the appellant's absence would not mean that AA would be unable
         to continue caring for PU on her own, if she chose to stay  in  the
         UK without the appellant, or that some other arrangement could  not
         be made (ibid). His conclusion that EX.1(a)(i) did  not  apply  and
         that the best  interests  of  the  child  would  not  be  adversely
         affected by the appellant's departure, was properly reached.

     13. The judge also  found  that  the  appellant  would  not  face  very
         significant obstacles on re-integration on  return  to  Ghana  and,
         further, that he and AA would not face insurmountable obstacles  to
         continuing their family life there (at 19-22). These findings  have
         not been challenged in the grounds and so  they  stand.  The  judge
         also considered whether there were  any  exceptional  circumstances
         outside the rules which warranted a grant  of  discretionary  leave
         but found there were none (at 23-29). That conclusion has not  been
         challenged either.

     14. The consequence of the absence of any challenge to the  conclusions
         summarised in the preceding paragraph,  and  my  finding  that  the
         judge did not err with respect to his conclusion about there  being
         no parental religious between the appellant and PU, is, in  effect,
         that the judge's error in respect to ground 1 is not a material one
         because the appellant and AA have  the  option  to  continue  their
         family life in Ghana and because their separation from PU does  not
         amount to a breach of article 8 for any one of them. It  is,  thus,
         immaterial that the judge did not  consider  whether  it  would  be
         disproportionate to  require  the  appellant  to  apply  for  entry
         clearance from Ghana because the judge's finding that the appellant
         and AA could live in Ghana went unchallenged and provides them with
         an alternative remedy.

    Decision

     15. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
         material errors of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity

     16. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, I continue the anonymity order made by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge.

     17. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  reports
         of these proceedings of  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to protect the  identity  of
         the child.


         Signed:


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 28 October 2020
