
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20426/2016
                                                               HU/20432/2016
                                                               HU/20435/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 March 2018                      |On 10th April 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         sondu [a] - First appellant
                       jahanara [a] - Second appellant
                            m I - third appellant
          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made EXCEPT FOR THIRD APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Mustafa, Solicitor, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants challenge the decision of Judge Herwald  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on  22  June  2017  dismissing  their  appeals
    against the decision made by the respondent on 9 August  2016  refusing
    them leave to enter.

2.   The principal ground mustered by  the  appellants  is  that  the  judge
    failed to carry out an adequate assessment of the best interests of the
    child and also failed to properly apply the  principles  applicable  in
    cases where a child has resided in the UK (as has the third  appellant)
    for seven years by the date of hearing.

3.   I heard very targeted submissions from both representatives, for  which
    I express my gratitude.

4.   I find that the appellants' principal  ground  succeeds.   The  judge's
    treatment of the third appellant's circumstances  was  clearly  flawed.
    First, his  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal  were  based  on  the
    incorrect understanding that  the  child  is  aged  7.   Although  when
    setting out the appellant's claim the judge  at  para  16(e)  correctly
    states that the third appellant was 14, everywhere else,  including  in
    the section headed 'My Findings', refers to the child as  aged  7  (see
    paras 1, 35 and 38) and the judge's treatment at para 33 regarding  the
    third appellant's linguistic abilities in Bengali makes no sense unless
    it refers to a child who has only ever lived in  the  UK  (whereas  the
    third appellant lived for six years in Bangladesh).

5.   Second, although the judge refers to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705
    and EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  374  it  is  apparent  that  he
    diverged from the guidance given in these cases.   The  judge  did  not
    take as his start-point that in the cases of a child resident for seven
    years "strong reasons" have to be given for refusing  leave  ([46]  and
    "very powerful reasons" would have to  be  shown  to  justify  refusing
    leave [49]).  Nor did the judge correctly apply factor (a) set  out  in
    EV (Philippines) (as quoted in MA (Pakistan) at [48] as regards age, or
    factor (c) (as regards what stage their education has reached).

6.   Mr Bates  sought  valiantly  to  defend  the  decision  of  the  judge,
    emphasising  that  judge  the  had  given  consideration  to  the  best
    interests of the child and the limited extent of the  difficulties  the
    third appellant would have in (re)-integrating into Bangladesh society.
     He submitted that the apparent mistake made by the  judge  as  to  the
    third appellant's age was not material.  I am  unable  to  agree.   The
    best interests of the child assessment in respect  of  a  14  year  old
    child cannot be equated with that of a  7  year  old  and  the  judge's
    treatment of  the  issue  of  reasonableness  failed  to  take  the  MA
    (Pakistan) principles as its start-point.  The  judge's  assessment  of
    the third appellant's circumstances was also incomplete.

7.   For the above reasons I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  judge  for
    material error of law.  Given that the heart of these  appeals  relates
    to the issue of the reasonableness  of  refusing  leave  to  the  third
    appellant, which presupposes a proper assessment of  the  child's  best
    interests, I consider the case is best remitted to the FtT so that this
    assessment can be made by reference to an accurate factual matrix.

8.   I would observe, however, that the appellants should  not  assume  they
    will necessarily succeed when the case is heard again.  The appellants'
    grounds raise no challenge to a number of findings made  by  the  judge
    regarding: the existence of siblings in Bangladesh and  family,  social
    and  cultural  ties  with  Bangladesh  (para  36);  and  the  lack   of
    credibility on the part of the first and second appellants  as  regards
    the availability of care for [FB] (the first appellant's mother)  (para
    37).  At para 34 the judge also rejected  the  appellants'  claim  that
    they had suffered a "historical wrong".  These  findings  should  stand
    and are preserved.

Notice of Decision

To conclude:

The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Herwald).

No anonymity direction is made save in respect of the third appellant.


Signed                                  Date: 6 April 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




