
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20765/2018
                                                HU/20770/2018, HU/20774/2018
                                                               HU/20777/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2019                           |On 25 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                        Mwajuma [R] (first appellant)
                         [M N H] (second appellant)
                          [M A H] (third appellant)
                          [M N] (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, instructed by One Immigration
(Leicester)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the remaking of an appeal against the decision  to  reject  the
    appellants' human rights claims on 21 September  2018.   Their  appeals
    against those decisions were dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in  a
    decision promulgated on 22 May 2019.   For  the  reasons  given  in  my
    decision of 23 August 2019 that decision was set aside  for  it  to  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal.  A copy of my  decision  is  attached  to
    this decision.

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of Tanzania.  She entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2008 with leave to remain as a student, the last being until
    October 2011.  Although she made an  in-time  application  for  further
    leave to remain in that capacity, that was refused and her  appeal  was
    dismissed.  On 10 September 2012 she was warned that she was liable  to
    administrative  removal  and  then  made  a  private  and  family  life
    application which  was  refused  with  no  right  of  appeal.   Further
    submissions were made but were refused as  not  amounting  to  a  fresh
    decision.   That  position  was,  however,  reversed,  the   respondent
    agreeing to reconsider the human rights claim pursuant to a  pre-action
    Protocol letter.

 3. The second to fourth appellants are the children of the first appellant
    and her partner [RH] who is also a citizen of Tanzania.

 4. The second appellant was born in January 2011, the third  appellant  in
    January 2014 and the fourth appellant born in April 2016.

 5. The appellants' case is that the older  child  falls  within  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and that it would not be reasonable to expect him now  to
    go to live in Tanzania.  It is further argued that in  consequence  the
    other appellants should not be expected to leave the United Kingdom.

 6. The first appellant's parents separated when she was young and she  has
    had no contact with her father since she was 10.  He remarried but  she
    has no contact with his new family either.   She  is  not  on  speaking
    terms with her mother as she has had the three children out of wedlock.
     Her uncles and aunts will not assist her either if she were return  as
    she comes from a strict traditional Islamic family which would consider
    it to be a dishonour to have had children  out  of  wedlock  and  which
    would cause them great shame  if  they  were  to  return  in  the  same
    locality.

 7. She does not have a relationship with her partner's  family  and  would
    not be able to rely on them for support nor are his family  wealthy  in
    Tanzania and would not be in a position to support them  even  if  they
    wished to do so.

 8. The respondent's case is that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    older child to leave  the  United  Kingdom;  and,  that  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances, having had regard to paragraph GEN.3.2  such
    that their removal would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.
    The Secretary of State noted that they would be returning  to  Tanzania
    as a unit; that the first appellant  would  be  able  to  support  them
    whilst  they  adjusted  to  a  life  there.   The  Secretary  of  State
    considered that due to their reliance on the appellant  they  would  be
    regularly exposed to the language, tradition and  culture  of  Tanzania
    and have not  fully  integrated  into  British  society.   It  was  not
    considered that the fact that the  children  are  in  education  is  an
    insurmountable obstacle and nor was it  accepted  that  they  would  be
    unable to continue their education in Tanzania.

 9. The Secretary of State considered that the appellants would have family
    members to assist with integration on return and help their children to
    adapt to the culture and traditions  and  language  in  Tanzania.   The
    Secretary of State considered that the appellant had failed to  provide
    documentary evidence to  substantiate  her  claim  that  she  had  been
    disowned by her family  and  that  in  any  event  she  could  use  the
    financial assistance available from voluntary return service.

10. At the time of the last hearing, the first appellant was estranged from
    her partner; they have now reunited.

11. The appellant adopted her witness statements  and  was  cross-examined.
    She confirmed she was living with her partner who is also from Tanzania
    and that they spoke Swahili.  She said that the children did understand
    a little bit of Swahili.  She said that he unable to  support  her  she
    would have to provide for herself and her children which would be  very
    difficult.  She had some support from her community at present but they
    would not be able to support her if she left the country.

12. The first appellant said that her partner is not working but previously
    had worked as a carer.  She said that he had not worked in Tanzania but
    had been a student in business and finance.  She said it would be  hard
    for him to find a job in Tanzania despite holding an  advanced  diploma
    he had obtained in the United Kingdom as the system had now changed  as
    the government wishes to use home graduates.  An advanced diploma would
    be very low for him to get a job.  She confirmed that her  partner  and
    children did have  friends  within  the  Tanzania  community.   In  re-
    examination the first appellant confirmed  that  her  partner  had  not
    worked in Tanzania nor had she.

13. The first appellant said that her  son  did  have  special  friends  at
    school some originally of Pakistani origin and others from Poland.  She
    said that he enjoys school, plays football  and  enjoys  running.   She
    said that he knew little about Tanzania.

14. In response to my questions the first appellant said that she  and  her
    partner spoke English to the children as they had been advised  by  the
    speech and communication team at the school that this was better  given
    the difficulties the son had had.

Submissions

15. Mr Tufan submitted that it would not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children to go to Tanzania.  He submitted that  as  the  parents  spoke
    Swahili and the children understood and spoke a bit of it,  they  would
    be able to attend school and that English is the  medium  in  secondary
    school.  He submitted that, following EV (Philippines) and KO (Nigeria)
    [2018] UKSC 53 the real world situation  in  this  case  was  that  the
    parents would be moved and it will be reasonable to expect the children
    to go with them.

16. Mr Tufan submitted that although there was no convictions, the parents,
    it was relevant in that they had remained without leave.  He  submitted
    that the real issues that were being prayed in aid here were not school
    but simply language and money.

17.  Mr  Bazini  submitted  that,  following  KO  (Nigeria)   as   properly
    understood, that it would  be  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  second
    appellant to go to live in Tanzania.  It  therefore  followed  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the rest of the family or for him to be
    separated from them.   He  submitted  the  second  appellant  had  been
    brought up as an English child.  I declined to take a  judicial  notice
    of the current circumstances in Tanzania.  This is  entirely  different
    from the situation in Sierra Leone when  the  previous  president  took
    notice of the fact that he was in the middle of an Ebola outbreak.   Mr
    Bazini  submitted  that  the  evidence  was   credible   and   it   was
    understandable why the children did not speak Swahili as well as  might
    otherwise be thought, he  submitted  this  was  important  because  the
    primary school  education  is  in  Swahili  not  English  it  would  be
    difficult for the  children  to  adjust.   He  submitted  that  it  was
    reasonable that the mother and father would not have jobs  and  in  any
    event the mother would have to look after the  three  younger  children
    which  would  make  the  situation  extremely  difficult.   Mr   Bazini
    submitted further that once the period of six or seven years  had  been
    reached this was a significant point.

The Law

18. Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides so far as is relevant:
         ...
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

19. Paragraph 276(1) ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules provides:
         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
         ...
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or

20. In considering how section 117B(6) should be applied it is relevant  to
    have regard to  SSHD v AB and AO [2019] EWCA Civ 661 at paragraphs [59]
    to [61] and [73]:


         59.  Accordingly, the position has now been reached in which this
         Court is not only free to depart from the approach taken by Laws LJ
         in MM (Uganda) but indeed is required to do so in order to follow
         the binding decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria). That can
         be done by following the preferred approach of Elias LJ in MA
         (Pakistan), at para. 36, where he said:
             "Looking at section 117B(6) free from authority, I would
             favour the argument of the appellants. The focus on paragraph
             (b) is solely on the child and I see no justification for
             reading the concept of reasonableness so as to include a
             consideration of the conduct and immigration history of the
             parents as part of an overall analysis of the public interest.
             I do not deny that this may result in some cases in
             undeserving applicants being allowed to remain, but that is
             not in my view a reason for distorting the language of the
             section. Moreover, in an appropriate case the Secretary of
             State could render someone liable to deportation, and thereby
             render him ineligible to rely on this provision, by certifying
             that his or her presence would not be conducive to the public
             good."


         60.  The essential submission which Ms Patry makes on behalf of the
         Secretary of State is that the condition for section 117B(6)(b)
         simply did not arise on the facts of the two cases before this
         Court now. She submits that there was no question of either of the
         relevant children concerned being expected to leave the United
         Kingdom. In those circumstances there was no need for the Tribunals
         to ask the question whether it was reasonable to expect them to do
         so.

         61.  In my judgement, this submission must be rejected. It founders
         on the clear wording of the legislation. As Mr Drabble QC submitted
         to this Court on behalf of the Respondent AB, it requires the Court
         to  insert  words  into  the  Act  which  are  simply  not   there.
         Furthermore, as he submitted, it requires the Court to  divide  the
         concept of a "qualifying child" into two types. There is simply  no
         warrant in the legislation itself for doing so.

         ...

         73. Speaking for myself, I would not necessarily endorse everything
         that was said by the UT in its reasoning, in  particular  at  para.
         25, as to the meaning of the concept "to expect".  However,  in  my
         view that does not make any material  difference  to  the  ultimate
         interpretation, which I consider was correctly set out by the UT in
         JG. In my view,  the  concept  of  "to  expect"  something  can  be
         ambiguous. It can be, as the UT  thought  at  para.  25,  simply  a
         prediction of a future event. However, it can have a more normative
         aspect. That is the sense in which Admiral  Nelson  reputedly  used
         the word at Trafalgar, when he said that "England expects every man
         to do his duty." That is not a prediction  but  is  something  less
         than an order. To take another example, if a judge says late in the
         day at a hearing that she expects counsel to have filed and  served
         supplementary skeleton arguments by 9 a.m. the  following  morning,
         so that there is no delay to the start of a hearing an hour  later:
         although she may not be ordering the production  of  that  skeleton
         argument, that is what she considers should happen. That is  not  a
         prediction of a future occurrence. It carries some normative force.

21. Thus, the key question is as is set out in JG (s  117B(6):  "reasonable
    to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072:

         "Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002 requires a court or Tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in
         question would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely
         to be the case, and ask whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect
         the child to do so".

22. Unlike the situation in JG, neither parent has a  right  to  remain  in
    this country.

23. In assessing the best interests of the second appellant and  the  other
    children, I note that I have only  a  bare  assertion  from  the  first
    appellant that she would be unable to  obtain  employment.   This  has,
    after the event, been supplemented by generic material relating to  the
    economic situation in Tanzania. I do  not  consider  that  this  is  of
    capable of bearing any weight as regards the specific circumstances  of
    the appellants. There is simply no  supporting  evidence  to  show  any
    attempt to find employment or that the partner's family would be unable
    to help.

24. Similarly, there is no direct evidence from her partner that  he  would
    be unable to obtain employment.  The evidence that his family would  be
    unable to support or provide any assistance is second hand  although  I
    note that the first appellant says this has been a matter of contention
    between them.  Both the first appellant and her partner  have  obtained
    qualifications in the United Kingdom and both speak English.

25. Whilst I accept given the consistent evidence of  the  first  appellant
    that she has become estranged from her family which makes  sense  given
    that she has had now four children out of wedlock, neither than nor the
    claim that the partner could not obtain  employment  is  sufficient  to
    show that if the family went back as a unit they would not be  able  to
    have some employment or accommodation.

26. I have no reason to doubt the situation would be not as good as  it  is
    here and it is unlikely that the education that  the  children  receive
    would be the same standard as is available in the  United  Kingdom  but
    the evidence of this is simply assertion on the part of the  appellant.
    I accept that the  medium  of  instruction  in  Tanzanian  schools  and
    primary department is Swahili and this would cause difficulty from  the
    appellant's children.   But  they  do  understand  some  Swahili;  both
    parents are Swahili speakers and there appears to be no good reason why
    they would not be able rapidly to acquire  the  language.   They  would
    also have an advantage when it became later on in education in speaking
    English.

27. I do not accept that any consideration of the "real world" scenario can
    be so easily distinguished as Mr Bazini sought to do.

28. I consider that it would be reasonable to expect the older  and  indeed
    the younger children in this case to leave the United  Kingdom  because
    the scenario is in reality no different from that of  those  identified
    in paragraphs 18 and 19 of KO (Nigeria).  The sole difference  is  that
    one child has now been here for seven years.  The real  world  in  this
    case is that neither parent has a right to remain.

29. I remind myself that in NS, one  of  the  cases  considered  within  KO
    (Nigeria) at paragraphs 46 to 51, that the family are expected to leave
    the United Kingdom.  I do not consider that there is any meaningful way
    in which this could be distinguished from the basis of the  conduct  on
    the part of the parents.  Whilst in NS the parent had been involved  in
    the CCL "scam" it is not their misconduct which was the issue but it is
    the fact that they had no right to be here.  Reading paragraph 51  with
    paragraph 18, the background that has  to  be  assessed  here  is  that
    neither parent has a right to remain the same is true of what  is  said
    at paragraph 18 and it is of note that the case referred to, SAB v SSHD
    [2017] CSOH 117, also involved a qualifying child.

30. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude it to be reasonable  in  all
    the circumstances of this case to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.   Accordingly,  the  second  appellant  does  not   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.

31. Moving on then to consider the cases within GEN.3.2 I consider that  in
    light of the findings of fact made above that I am not  satisfied  that
    there would be very insurmountable obstacles such  that  the  first  or
    indeed any of the other appellants could not  integrate  into  life  in
    Tanzania.  I consider also that there are  having  had  regard  to  the
    facts set out in Section 117B any serious compelling reasons  why  they
    should be granted permission to stay.   Drawing  up  a  balance  sheet,
    whilst I accept that it would be in the children's  best  interests  to
    remain in the United Kingdom where they have a degree of  security  and
    good education, as against that must be said the  fact  that  they  are
    dependent on public funds and whilst the family speak English,  equally
    private lives they  have  built  up  have  been  created  whilst  their
    position here was precarious, particularly in the  case  of  the  first
    appellant.  It is difficult to say that it was precarious in respect of
    the other appellants given that they had no choice in the matter.

32. Taking all of these matters into account and viewing the  appeal  as  a
    whole,  I  conclude  that  removing  the  appellants   would   not   be
    disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and I  set
    it aside.

2.   I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

3.   There is no anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date:  20 February 2020

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20765/2018
     hu/20770/2018, hu/20774/2018
     & hu/20777/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 August 2019                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 Mwajuma [R]
                                   [M N H]
                                   [M A H]
                                    [M N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, One Immigration (Leicester)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a mother and children born in 2011, 2014  and  2016.
    The appellants are all citizens of Tanzania.  The appellants'  case  is
    that because the children were born  outside  of  marriage,  the  first
    appellant has fallen out with her family as  results  of  the  and  she
    would be unsupported by them in Tanzania as she has  been  disowned  by
    them. It is said that in consequence there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration on return  there  and  so  she  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi).

 2. It is also the case that the oldest child is a qualifying  child  given
    that the child was in the United Kingdom for more than seven  years  as
    at the date of application as was accepted by the  Secretary  of  State
    when refusing the application for leave.  It is said  that  the  oldest
    child meets the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  (iv).   It  is  also
    argued that it would not be reasonable to expect the family as a  whole
    to return to Tanzania or rather to go to Tanzania for the first time in
    the case of the children because the oldest child is a qualifying child
    within Section 118B to 117B(6). The respondent did not accept that

 3. On appeal the judge found:

      i) he did not believe that the  appellant  had  fallen  out  with  her
         family over the children being born out of wedlock

     ii) having directed himself in line with Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813  he
         was not  satisfied  that  the  first  appellant  faced  significant
         obstacles on return.

    iii) that the first appellant did not satisfy EX.1(a).

     iv) Paragraph 276ADE(1) (iv) did not apply to the  eldest  child;  and,
         having directed himself in line with MA (Pakistan) and KO (Nigeria)
         and taking into account the Immigration Directorate Instructions to
         staff that the appeal fell to be dismissed.

 4. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird.

 5. The errors as pleaded in the grounds appear to fall into four  separate
    categories

      i) That the judge's approach to the fact-finding  was  flawed  in  two
         respects first with respect to the finding that there had  been  no
         falling out of the family  and  second  as  to  the  prevalence  of
         English in Tanzania of which he had taken judicial notice.   It  is
         also said that he did not make proper findings as to the family  as
         a whole.

     ii) the  judge's  approach  to  the  law  was  incorrect  and  confused
         particularly at paragraph 22 where he appeared not to apply the law
         properly as regards paragraph 276ADE(iv) in respect  of  the  child
         and it was also argued that his approach to Article 8  outside  the
         Rules is incorrect first in that he appears to  have  decided  that
         there was nothing to be decided outside the format of the Rules and
         second that he  has  again  confused  the  application  of  Section
         117B(vi).  In essence it is that the judge has not taken a properly
         structured approach to the determination of the appeal;

    iii)  the judge has not applied the law properly.

     iv)  the  judge  failed  in  his  consideration  of   the   Immigration
         Directorate Instructions to make any proper findings or to say what
         weight he attached to the relevant factors in assessing whether  it
         would be reasonable for the eldest child to return to Tanzania.

 6. I will deal with each of those in turn.

 7. In considering the first ground I considered that there is merit in  Mr
    Bazini's submission that  the  judge  has  not  properly  assessed  the
    evidence that there has been first limited contact with the father  and
    second there has been a falling out with the family  in  Tanzania.   In
    spite of Mr Tufan's submissions I conclude that the judge  did  err  in
    concluding at paragraph [18] that he was not  satisfied  the  Appellant
    had fallen out with the family.

 8. What the judge has done here is to misconstrue  the  first  appellant's
    case.  Her case was not that she was at risk from  the  family  to  the
    level that would amount to persecution but simply that she  had  fallen
    out with them; she may have mentioned death threats but that  does  not
    mean that she took them seriously or considered  that  they  were  such
    that she would not be protected from them on return.  There is no basis
    therefore for arguing absent any other factors that  the  evidence  was
    unsupported.  This error is compounded by the judge's approach to  that
    finding at paragraph 31. Even had it been open to  the  judge  to  find
    that there was no support that is not a basis of which it can  then  be
    said that there is support or accommodation available a finding that is
    simply speculative and for  these  reasons  I  find  that  the  judge's
    findings of fact for that reason did involve the making of an error  of
    law.

 9. Turning to the judge's approach to the law the decision is not properly
    constructed.  What the judge  should  have  done  is  to  approach  the
    position under the Immigration Rules  first  and  then,  if  necessary,
    proceed to consider whether even if those specific Rules were  not  met
    nonetheless, this was a case in which applying now paragraph GEN 3.2 of
    Appendix FM that there were reasons why removal  would  nonetheless  be
    disproportionate.

10. The judge appears at paragraph 22  to  have  confused  the  issue  over
    whether the oldest child met the requirements of 276ADE(iv).  In  doing
    so he appears to have  read  into  that  provision  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B with regard to the requirement to speak English and to  be
    financially independent.  That is not a permissible approach.

11. Further, as Mr Bazini submitted, the  judge  appears  to  have  shifted
    focus between the position of the mother,  the  eldest  child  and  the
    other children.  I consider that this was an error but I bear  in  mind
    the submission that this may or may not have been material.   Mr  Tufan
    submits that in this case it was not material given in essence the lack
    of evidence as to the difficulties the family would  find  in  Tanzania
    with regard to education, support or otherwise.  Whilst I take note the
    references to Tanzania being a third world country I do not  find  that
    particularly helpful; nothing specific about the  country  which  flows
    from such an observation.  That said, what the judge does not appear to
    have done in considering the reasonableness is to  undertake  a  proper
    assessment of the best interests of the child which is  of  course  the
    proper starting point in an assessment of this sort.

12. I accept Mr Bazini's submission that in purporting to consider the IDIs
    on family migration set out at paragraph 29 of his decision  the  judge
    does not really make any findings of fact.  He does not  say  which  of
    these are applicable or why nor does he say what weight he attaches  to
    them.   What  findings  that  the  judge  does  make  are   about   the
    availability of accommodation and taking judicial notice  of  the  fact
    that English is widely spoken.  I have already said why the  former  is
    not applicable in terms of the latter it is not a  matter  of  which  a
    judge could take notice as the situation is considerably more  nuanced.



13. Whilst it may well be the case that English is  the  lingua  franca  in
    Tanzania certainly at a business level it does not  necessarily  follow
    that that is the language spoken in schools or in every  day  usage  or
    that there would not be difficulties for somebody  who  did  not  speak
    Kiswahili.

14. The judge also appears to have erred in his approach to the  fact  that
    the child has reached the age of 7 in effect going against  that  point
    when stating at paragraph 30 that the child is  still  very  young  and
    therefore adaptable with the greatest of respect to the judge  that  is
    not the point.

15. Taking all of these points into consideration I consider that the judge
    has as Mr Bazini submitted confused the law and misdirected himself  as
    to the law.  I consider also that he has erred in  his  application  of
    the law and accordingly, while I accept I note that Mr Tufan refers  to
    these as blips there are simply far too many "blips" in this to be able
    to make this decision sustainable and I conclude that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law which
    was capable of affecting the outcome in that the approach to the law is
    wrong in law and there are insufficient findings of fact that  will  be
    capable of showing that irrespective of the  error  of  law,  the  this
    error was not material.

16. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be fixed
    in consultation with Mr Bazini's clerk.

 3. The appeal will be listed for 2 hours.

 4. If any of  the  parties  wish  to  adduce  further  evidence,  oral  or
    otherwise, they must make an application pursuant to rule  15  (2A)  of
    the  Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  at least  21  days
    before the hearing, such application to be accompanied by the  evidence
    upon which it is sought to rely.




No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 19 August 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




