
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/20208/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th March 2018                       |On 27th March 2018                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     Sm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Basith (Solicitor), Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brunnen, promulgated on 23rd June 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 22nd May 2017.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  [  ]
    1984.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  2nd
    August 2016, refusing his application for leave to remain under the 10-
    year parent route in Appendix FM and on Article 8, laying claim to  his
    family and private life rights.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he has a son, [MM] born to
    him in the United Kingdom, as a result of his relationship with a [CB],
    a Portuguese national, whom he married on 27th September 2011,  who  he
    is caring for.  He had entered the UK illegally in 2002 when he was  17
    years of age.  He came seeking a better life.  He already had relatives
    in this country.  In 2009  he  attempted  to  regularise  his  stay  by
    applying for leave to remain but this was refused in 2010.   After  his
    marriage to [CB],  he  applied  for  an  EEA  residence  card  but  his
    application was refused in February 2012.  The Family Court granted him
    a residence order in respect of  his  two  stepchildren,  who  are  the
    children of [CB], from a previous  relationship.   When,  however,  his
    appeal came on  for  hearing  at  this  Tribunal  in  April  2012,  the
    Respondent withdrew her decision, with  a  view  to  reconsidering  the
    Appellant's family position.  Thereafter, on 16th September  2013,  the
    Respondent granted the Appellant leave to remain until 15th March 2016.
     The Appellant was found at the time to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM for leave  to  remain  as  a  parent.   In  December  2013,
    however, the Appellant's wife left him, and she took two of  the  older
    stepchildren with her, but she left the Appellant's own son, [MM], with
    him.  He has no contact now with her since she left.  The Appellant is,
    with sole responsibility, in the care of  his  son  and  is  his  son's
    primary carer.  His sisters in the UK also help  him,  because  he  has
    difficulty coping on his own given that he has to  work,  and  his  son
    accordingly now has moved in with his sister [TY] and her family, while
    the Appellant runs his own takeaway food business.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge noted that the Appellant had lived in the UK for over fifteen
    years, but had returned in 2014 to Bangladesh when his father was  ill,
    and he maintains that contact with his mother  and  tries  to  maintain
    contact with his siblings there (paragraph  17).   The  judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant had strayed away from his Muslim culture  and
    did not accept that he would suffer discrimination as a  single  parent
    if he returned to Bangladesh.  The Appellant's mother  owned  a  family
    home where the Appellant had grown up and he and [MM] could go and live
    there.  It was true he had established a business in this  country  and
    had four employees (paragraph 20), and he maintained that he would have
    to start all over again, and the four employees would lose their  jobs,
    but the judge concluded that the Appellant may  be  able  to  sell  the
    business as a going concern (paragraph 20).  The Appellant  would  have
    made friendships in the UK but there was nothing to suggest that  these
    were particularly close or special (paragraph 21).

 5. The judge had regard to the established case law, and  the  requirement
    to demonstrate that  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles"  under
    paragraph 276ADE, referring to the case of Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ  813
    and Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 30, but the judge held  that  the  Appellant
    would have no real difficulty in reintegrating and that neither he  nor
    [MM] would face discrimination  in  Bangladesh  (paragraph  33).   With
    respect to his child, [MM], the judge held that he would  not  face  so
    great a language barrier as the Appellant claims.   It  was  true  that
    [MM] had a need for speech  therapy,  "but  there  is  no  professional
    evidence to show that this represents a very  significant  obstacle  to
    him (and  therefore  to  the  Appellant),  integrating  in  Bangladesh"
    (paragraph 36).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge  gave  adverse  reasons
    for refusing the appeal.  He had concluded that the  Appellant  "has  a
    close relationship with his sisters in the UK" (paragraph 33).  He  had
    also found that "[MM]  has  a  close  relationship  with  his  cousins"
    (paragraph 33).  He had found that "[MM] has been found to need  speech
    therapy" (paragraph 36).  He wrongly concluded that [MM] would be  able
    to remain in the care of his  father  "whatever  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal, so this aspect of his best interests is not threatened  by  the
    Respondent's decision" (paragraph 46).

 8. On 13th December 2017, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge had found (at paragraph 42) that the Appellant had  been
    deserted by his wife and left caring for a 2 year old child,  but  that
    "they had been taken into the home and family of his  sister  and  have
    lived for three years as an integrated part of the  household,  relying
    heavily on the practical and emotional  support  that  this  remit  had
    provided".  In these circumstances it was arguable that the  judge  did
    not accord adequate weight to this finding when resolving the issue  of
    proportionality in favour of the Respondent.

 9. On 30th January 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that
    the judge did give adequate reasons at paragraphs 31 to 37.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 5th March  2018  Mr  Basith,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted  that  despite  favourable  findings
    made by the judge  throughout  the  determination,  and  especially  at
    paragraph 42, the conclusion that was then reached  by  the  judge  was
    contrary to the weight to these findings.  The Appellant's son also had
    speech therapy needs (paragraph 36).  Moreover, at  paragraph  50,  the
    judge had come quite close to expressly finding that the Appellant's  2
    year old child would not be able to integrate into Bangladeshi society,
    and that when it comes to a consideration of his position  this  "makes
    the case more difficult" because "there is a clear tension between  his
    best  interests  and  the  public  interest  in  immigration   control"
    (paragraph 50).

11. For her part, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that she would  rely  upon
    the Rule 24 response.  The judge had considered all the  evidence.   It
    was  true  that  the  Appellant  had  been  granted  leave  to   remain
    previously, but this  was  done  outside  Article  8,  because  of  the
    children.  At paragraph 33 the judge  considered  that  there  were  no
    "very significant obstacles" given the decision in Kamara  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 813.  At paragraph 33 the judge  factored  into  the  equation  the
    return of the Appellant to Bangladesh in 2014, such that it  could  not
    be said to be strange from the  culture  of  that  country.   Moreover,
    paragraph 276ADE was perfectly adequately dealt with by the  judge,  as
    was the Section 55 consideration under the BCIA 2009  with  respect  to
    the "best interests" of the child.  It was true that the Appellant  had
    integrated into life in this country with his son (paragraph  42),  but
    the child would be looked after by the Appellant's father, and there is
    no reason why this could not be done in Bangladesh.  The  decision  was
    perfectly well-reasoned and there was no error of law.

12. In reply, Mr Basith submitted that the judge's decision  did  not  make
    sense when regard is had to what was  said  at  paragraph  46,  namely,
    that, "I find that it would be in [MM]'s best interests to continue  to
    live in his existing family surroundings" (paragraph 46).

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

14. First, this is a case where the Appellant had already been granted,  by
    the Secretary of State, leave to remain from  16th  September  2013  to
    15th March 2016, expressly on  the  basis  that  he  was  a  parent  of
    children living in the UK, and particularly his own son, [MM].

15. Second, it remains the case, that although in December  2013  his  wife
    left him and took two older children with her, he is still a parent who
    has the care of his son [MM], and indeed is the primary carer.

16.  Third,  it  does  not  end  there,  because,  given  the   Appellant's
    responsibilities with his own takeaway food business, he has  found  it
    necessary for [MM] to live with his own sister.   The  judge  expressly
    found that, the Appellant and his son "have been taken  into  the  home
    and family of  his  sister  and  have  lived  for  three  years  as  an
    integrated part of the household, relying heavily on the practical  and
    emotional support that this arrangement has provided" (paragraph 42).

17. Fourth, the judge has also found that  "it  would  be  in  [MM]'s  best
    interests to continue to live  in  his  existing  family  surroundings"
    (paragraph 46).

18. Finally, it is clear that the judge was driven  to  conclude  precisely
    so, except for the fact that in applying the test  of  proportionality,
    where the judge observed that, "there is a clear  tension  between  his
    best interests (i.e. that of  the  child)  and  a  public  interest  in
    immigration control" he concluded that "it cannot properly be said that
    [MM]'s best interests are such a weighty  factor  as  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in this case".  This is plainly wrong  given  that  the
    judge had already stated in the same paragraph that,  "the  involvement
    of [MM] makes the case more difficult" insofar as the question  of  his
    being "able  to  reintegrate  socially"  in  Bangladesh  was  concerned
    (paragraph 50).

19. In the end the balance of proportionality in this case fell, as it  did
    as far back as September 2013 when leave to remain  was  given  to  the
    Appellant, in favour of the Appellant remaining  in  the  UK  with  his
    child, and this balance was even stronger by the time of this  decision
    because, although the Appellant's wife had by that  stage  departed  in
    December 2013, the child was now integrated and living in the family of
    the Appellant's  sister,  where  the  judge  had  held  that  his  best
    interests would be most properly maintained (paragraph 42).

20. In the case law on this subject, ultimately the question is one of fair
    balance as was recognised in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 where  the  Supreme
    Court stated that "The ultimate question in Article 8 cases is  whether
    a fair balance  has  been  struck  between  the  competing  public  and
    individual interests involved, applying the proportionality test".

21. Given that the judge had already found "that it would be in [MM]'s best
    interests to continue to live in his existing family and  surroundings"
    (paragraph 46), it was simply not the case that [MM] would be cared for
    only by his father, the Appellant, so that wherever the Appellant went,
    [MM] would go with him, on the assumption that this was in [MM]'s "best
    interests", which was an assumption that the judge  had  plainly  found
    against (at paragraph 46).

Remaking the Decision

22. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.

23. I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have set out above.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

25. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th March 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a whole fee award of any fee which  has  been  paid  or  may  be
payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th March 2018
