
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20819/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|CMR at Bradford (via Skype)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2021                     |On 17 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               TAHIRU ABDULAI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Draycott instructed by Legal Rights Partnership.

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing before the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham on
        16 March 2020 the appellant's appeal was dismissed  in  a  decision
        dated 24 April 2020.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant by a judge of the
        Upper Tribunal on 16 September 2020.  The  operative  part  of  the
        grant being in the following terms:


        The appellant is  appealing  against  the  decision  by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Thakar to dismiss his appeal against the decision of
        the respondent to refuse to grant him  leave  to  remain  on  human
        rights grounds.


        First Tier Tribunal judge Thakar failed to treat the appellant as a
        vulnerable witness or apply the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note
        No.2, despite being provided with the report by Dr  Heke  and  this
        being raised by  the  appellant's  counsel  at  the  start  of  the
        hearing. Neither did she consider the judgement in AM (Zimbabwe)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17.


        First-tier Tribunal Judge Thakar failed to refer  to  any  relevant
        legislation or case law in her  decision.  She  also  made  adverse
        credibility  findings  before  establishing  the  necessary   legal
        framework and did not carry out a holistic assessment of the  facts
        of the appellant's case.


        In addition, First-tier Tribunal Judge Thakar  failed  to  raise  a
        number of issues with the appellant which  she  found  to  have  an
        adverse effect on  his  credibility  when  these  points  were  not
        contained in the respondent's reasons for  refusing  the  appellant
        leave and were not  put  to  him  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
        Officer. This amounted to a procedural error of law.


     3. A Rule 24 reply was received from the respondent's  representatives
        dated 14 October 2020, which states that [3] "on the  face  of  the
        determination there is nothing  to  indicate  that  the  judge  was
        specifically  invited  to  treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
        witness".
     4.  Directions  were  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  including  the
        provision of the record of proceedings which  clearly  showed  that
        the Judge was specifically invited to  treat  the  appellant  as  a
        vulnerable witness.
     5. The Judge made adverse credibility findings against  the  appellant
        with no indication of how the appellant's vulnerability as a person
        suffering from a mental health condition had been factored into the
        credibility assessment.
     6. Mr  Draycott  stated  that  a  concession  had  been  made  by  the
        Presenting Officer in relation to the appellant's health issues  to
        which there is no specific reference in the decision.
     7. The starting point is to consider whether the Judges assessment  is
        safe. The appellant is clearly a vulnerable witness  and  both  the
        guidance referred to in the grant and  provided  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal has stressed the importance of such  an  issue  being  taken
        into account by a fact-finding judge. There is no indication on the
        face of the  determination  as  to  how  the  Judge  took  such  an
        important aspect of the appellant's presentation into  account  and
        how it was factored into the decision-making process.
     8. As stated at the CMR, I accept that the determination  is  infected
        by an error of law on  this  basis  material  to  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal. I  find  the  appellant  has  not  had  a  fair
        assessment of the evidence in the appeal. I find that none  of  the
        findings of the Judge can stand as it is not clear they would  have
        been as made by the Judge had the proper approach to the assessment
        of the evidence been undertaken.
     9. The Rule 24 reply accepted, in any event, that the  Judge  had  not
        clearly delineated the considerations undertaken on the appellant's
        medical claim under Article 3 or  Article  8  ECHR,  which  was  an
        important element of the case before the Judge.
    10. Mr Draycott raised at the CMR whether the concession  made  by  the
        Presenting Officer before the Judge in relation to the  appellant's
        mental health still stood, but Mr Diwnycz was in some difficulty as
        there was nothing to indicate that a  formal  concession  had  been
        made on the documents available to him. Further enquiries are to be
        undertaken to ascertain whether this is an  issue.  It  is  also  a
        matter  the  appellant's  representative  can   canvas   with   the
        respondent's  representatives  outside  these  proceedings  in  any
        event.

Decision

    11. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Birmingham to be heard afresh by a judge other than  Judge  Thakar.
        There shall be no preserved findings.

   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 10 March 2021












