
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20894/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2018                           |On 09 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               gagandeep singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Sobowale, Counsel instructed by Bassi
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Phull that was  issued
         on 26 September 2017.

      2. In essence, the grounds of appeal argue that Judge Phull  took  the
         wrong approach to the concept  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  and
         that  as  a  result   her   assessment   of   proportionality   was
         fundamentally flawed.

      3. After hearing from  Ms  Aboni  and  Mr  Sobowale,  I  announced  my
         decision.  I concluded that there is no  legal  error  because  the
         case determined by Judge Phull was not solely about the  assessment
         of insurmountable obstacles.

      4. The facts found by Judge Phull are not disputed, as confirmed by Ms
         Aboni.  The appellant is an  overstayer.   He  enjoys  family  life
         within the meaning of article 8(1) ECHR with  his  British  citizen
         wife.  The appellant's presence will  not  undermine  the  economic
         wellbeing of the UK because his wife earns over the minimum  income
         requirements.  The appellant speaks English.

      5. The respondent justified the decision to refuse leave to remain and
         to expect the appellant to leave the UK because of his  failure  to
         comply with immigration controls.  There can be no doubt  that  the
         appellant has a poor immigration  history,  as  recorded  by  Judge
         Phull. He had overstayed and did not make his  human  rights  claim
         until after he was encountered.  I am  satisfied  Judge  Phull  was
         fully aware of the appellant's poor immigration  history  when  she
         made her decision.

      6. The  issue  for  Judge  Phull  was  to  decide  whether  that  poor
         immigration history was sufficient  to  conclude  that  the  public
         interest outweighed the appellant and his  wife's  right  to  enjoy
         family life.  As is clear from all case law,  Judge  Phull  had  to
         consider all the factors to decide where a fair balance lies.

      7. Judge Phull considered that the public interest  did  not  outweigh
         the family life of the appellant and his wife.  Although  not  part
         of her decision, her conclusion is consistent with the guidance  of
         the Supreme Court in R (Agyarko and Ikuga) v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11,
         paragraph 51, which reminded all who have to assess proportionality
         issues to consider the principle determined  in  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
         [2008] UKHL 40.  The fact the Supreme Court's judgment  in  Agyarko
         is   the   leading   jurisprudence   regarding   the   meaning   of
         "insurmountable obstacles" means  its  reference  to  Chikwamba  is
         particularly illuminating and the factors  Judge  Phull  took  into
         consideration when assessing proportionality cannot be said  to  be
         legally flawed.

      8. The fact is that the author of the grounds (and to the  extent  she
         relied on those grounds, Ms Aboni) has taken too narrow a  view  of
         the meaning of  insurmountable  obstacles  and  the  assessment  of
         proportionality.  Judge Phull did not rely merely on the  fact  the
         appellant's wife is a British citizen. Judge Phull  relied  on  all
         the evidence, including the fact  (and  as  I  have  indicated  her
         findings are unchallenged) that the public interest  would  not  be
         served by expecting the appellant to leave the UK  merely  to  make
         what would be a successful entry clearance application as a spouse.

      9. It is for these reasons that I uphold Judge  Phull's  decision  and
         dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of Judge Phull contains no legal error and is upheld.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date         31 October 2018

         Judge McCarthy
         Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
