
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20155/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2019                 |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    D M C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Peer & Co
(Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The FTT made a direction for anonymity. I continue  this  in  order  to
    protect the identity of the Appellant's children.

The background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Jamaica.   His  date  of  birth  is  15
    February 1977.

 3. On 5 April 2017 the Appellant received a  custodial  sentence  of  four
    years  and  eight  months.   He  pleaded  guilty  to  two  offences  of
    conspiring to supply Class A drugs, possessing criminal property  (cash
    to the value of �24,216.08) and careless driving.   The  offences  date
    back to 14 October 2015.  When sentencing the Appellant, the judge said
    that he had "a considerable awareness of the scale of the operation  in
    which you played a critical part.  This was not street dealing  so  far
    as  your  part  is  concerned".   On  26  September   2018,   following
    conviction, the Secretary of State made a deportation order pursuant to
    Section 5(1) of the 1971 Act.  The Appellant is a foreign  criminal  as
    defined by Section 32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007  ("the  2007  Act")
    and it follows from this pursuant to Section  32(5)  the  Secretary  of
    State must make a deportation order.

 4. The Appellant appealed against deportation on the basis that  it  would
    breach his rights under Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  His appeal was dismissed by the FTT. That  decision  was
    set aside by The Honourable Mrs Justice Thornton DBE sitting as a Judge
    of the Upper Tribunal (UT) and UT Judge McWilliam in their decision  of
    27 June 2019 ( "the error of law decision").

 5. The Appellant came to the UK in 2002.  He  had  been  granted  a  visit
    visa.  He made subsequent applications to remain.  On 9  November  2009
    he was granted discretionary leave to remain until 9 November 2012.  On
    5 December 2013 he was granted discretionary  leave  until  5  December
    2016.

 6. The Appellant has five biological children.  DC is  his  eldest  child;
    his date of birth is 26 July 2002.  DC  is  a  Jamaican  national  with
    leave to remain here in the UK.  He lives with the  Appellant's  sister
    JK.  DC's mother is ST and the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    was that he does not have contact with  her.   The  Appellant's  second
    child is JC.  His date of birth is 31 July 2003.   JC  lives  with  his
    mother, TM, in Harrow.  The Appellant's third child is AC.  Her date of
    birth is 17 June 2006 and she lives in Gloucester with her mother,  SB.
    The Appellant's fourth child is NC.  She was born on 24  January  2011.
    The Appellant's fifth and youngest child is MC.  His date of  birth  is
    10  November  2009.   MC  and  NC  live  with  their  mother,  EC,  the
    Appellant's wife.  EC has two older children, EB (date of birth 28 June
    1999) and RB (date of birth 2 August 2002) who  are  described  as  the
    Appellant's stepchildren.

 7. On 17 December 2014 the Appellant acted as  a  sponsor  for  DC  in  an
    application for DC to join him here in the UK and for him to be granted
    leave in line with the Appellant. The application was  granted.   On  2
    December 2016 the Appellant made an application for ILR for himself and
    his son DC.  DC's application was refused and the Appellant's  was  put
    on hold as a result of his criminality.  DC's appeal was successful. He
    was granted limited leave to remain until 23 November 2020.

The error of law decision

 8. The error of law decision reads as follows:-

         "20. We communicated a brief decision orally to the parties at  the
             hearing.  We found that the Judge  materially  erred  in  this
             case.  He concluded that because DC is not a qualifying  child
             and that therefore he could  not  meet  Exception  2  that  it
             followed   that   there   could   not   be   very   compelling
             circumstances.  We accept that this is an  erroneous  approach
             to the statutory regime for the  reasons  we  will  go  on  to
             explain.  We also find  that  the  decision  that  deportation
             would be unduly harsh in the context  of  DC  is  inadequately
             reasoned in any event.  Furthermore, the  assessment  of  very
             compelling circumstances was flawed for the reasons identified
             by the Secretary of State.  We are not however persuaded  that
             the Judge's reliance on the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Frazer and the weight he  attached  to  it  discloses  a
             discrete error of law.  We reject in its entirety  Mr  Fripp's
             argument as to a jurisdictional error in relation to the grant
             of permission to cross appeal the Secretary of State.   As  we
             understood  Mr  Fripp's  argument  the  error  arises   as   a
             consequence of the permission Judge not  properly  considering
             the full extent of the delay by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
             making his cross appeal.  However,  as  Mr  Fripp  effectively
             conceded during oral submissions, paragraph 3 of  the  judge's
             reasons consider  the  point  and  reach  the  view  that  the
             'explanation is not entirely satisfactory'.   We  consider  Mr
             Fripp's argument to be misconceived.

         21.  We accept Mr Fripp's submission that  in  order  to  establish
             very compelling circumstances it is not  a  prerequisite  that
             the Appellant satisfies either or both  Exceptions  1  and  2.
             The judge erred because throughout his decision he finds  that
             despite that there being 'very compelling  circumstances  over
             and above undue harshness' in respect of DC (see [24]) because
             the Appellant cannot fall into  Exception  2  (see  [26])  the
             public interest requires his deportation.  This, in our  view,
             is a misunderstanding of the law.  In any event, it  does  not
             accord with his findings in respect of NC and MC.  However, we
             reject Mr Fripp's submission that in the light of  this  error
             the appeal should have been allowed under s117C (6).  We  find
             that the assessment of unduly harsh is flawed (as asserted  by
             the Respondent) as is the judge's application of the  test  of
             very compelling circumstances.

         22.  The Appellant could never meet exception 2 in  respect  of  DC
             because he is not a qualifying child.  However,  whether  DC's
             circumstances are capable of reaching the  elevated  threshold
             was a material consideration when  assessing  very  compelling
             circumstances.   The  judge's  decision  that  the  effect  of
             deportation would  be  unduly  harsh  on  DC  is  inadequately
             reasoned.  It is not clear how he reached the conclusion  with
             reference to the application of the correct test (set  out  in
             KO with reference to MK).  In addition, the  test  applied  by
             the judge in respect of s. 117C(6) is flawed  because  he  did
             not take into account the public interest.  He  also  did  not
             make a holistic  assessment  but  considered  very  compelling
             circumstances in respect of each child.  We  acknowledge  that
             the Judge went on to consider proportionality outside  of  the
             Rules  and  in  so  doing  took  account  of  public  interest
             considerations.   However,  this   reveals   another   serious
             misunderstanding of the application of the statutory regime in
             deportation cases.  In NA at para 35 the court of appeal said:

                  "The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) that paras.  398
                  to 399A of the 2012 rules  constituted  a  complete  code.
                  The same is true of the sections 117A to 117D of the  2002
                  Act, read in conjunction with paras. 398 to  399A  of  the
                  2014 rules.  The scheme of the Act and the rules  together
                  provide the following structure  for  deciding  whether  a
                  foreign criminal  can  resist  deportation  on  Article  8
                  grounds."

             The Judge made serious errors when assessing Article  8  under
             the statutory regime.  They are not merely structural  errors.
             They are errors of  substance.   For  the  above  reasons  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  so  seriously  flawed
             that it cannot be maintained.  We set the decision to  dismiss
             the Appellant's appeal aside.

         Remaking

         23.  We canvassed with the parties how the matter  should  proceed.
             We decided in accordance with the Practice  Statement  of  the
             Senior President of Tribunals of 25 September 2012,  that  the
             matter should be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

         24.  There are findings within the  decision  that  have  not  been
             challenged by either party.  The judge found at [21] that  the
             effect of deportation would be unduly harsh in relation to  NC
             and MC.  This has not been  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
             State and, in our view, there is no reason to go behind  these
             findings.  The weight to  attach  to  the  decision  of  Judge
             Frazer will be a matter for the UT when considering the impact
             of deportation on the DC (sic).

         25.  There is a finding in respect of s. 117C(4)  at  [23]  of  the
             judge's decision against which  there  is  no  challenge.   Mr
             Fripp conceded that the Appellant cannot meet the private life
             requirements  at  Section  117C  (4).   We   understand   this
             concession to mean that he cannot meet Section 117C(4)(a), (b)
             and (c).

         26.  We find that the conclusions reached by the judge at  [22]  in
             relation to the  Appellant's  wife,  EC,  can  be  maintained.
             There is no reason advanced before us to interfere with those.
              However, we do not accept  Mr  Fripp's  submission  that  the
             finding is effectively a finding under s. 117C (5).   If  this
             is what the judge intended, then it is inadequately reasoned.

         27.  There was no further evidence produced by  the  Appellant  for
             the purposes of  the  hearing  before  us  despite  directions
             having been issued to  the  parties.   Nevertheless,  we  were
             unable to proceed to remake the case because the Appellant was
             not produced and, in any event, there  was  a  lack  of  court
             time.

         28.  The issue for the UT will be whether s. 117C (6) applies.   In
             making that assessment the  Tribunal  will  make  findings  in
             respect of the impact of deportation  on  DC,  notwithstanding
             that he is not a  qualifying  child  and  consider  any  other
             matters relied on by the Appellant."

The Law

 9. The Immigration Rules set out  how  the  Secretary  of  State  and  her
    officials will exercise the powers conferred by the 2007 Act:-

         "398.    Where a person claims that their deportation would be
         contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
         Rights Convention, and

              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest because they have
              been convicted of an offence for which they have been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

              (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest because they have
              been convicted of an offence for which they have been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
              but at least 12 months; or

              (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest because, in the
              view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
              serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
              particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in
              assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or
              399A applies and, if it does not, the public interest in
              deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
              there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
              described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399.     This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)
         applies if -

              (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
              relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
              the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                     (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to live
                     in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                     and

                     (b)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                     in the UK without the person who is to be deported; or



              (b)     the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship
              with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or
              settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A.    This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)
         applies if -

              (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most
              of his life; and

              (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

              (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his
              integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
              deported".

10. On 28 July 2014 the Immigration Act 2014 ("the  2014  Act")  came  into
    force.  It provided that a new Part  5  should  be  inserted  into  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act").   That
    part provides, so far as material:

         "PART 5A


         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


         117A Application of this Part


         (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -




             (a)      breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                  family life under Article 8, and


             (b)      as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -


             (a)      in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and


             (b)      in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means the
             question of whether an interference with a person's right to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases:


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
             public interest.


         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English -


             (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)      are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -


             (a)      are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)      are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-


             (a)      a private life, or


             (b)      a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                  is established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
             precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the United Kingdom.


         117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                   most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                   Kingdom, and


             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                   integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                   deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
             into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that
             the reason for the decision was the offence or offences for
             which the criminal has been convicted.


         117D Interpretation of this Part


         (1)  In this Part- 'Article 8' means Article 8 of the European
             Convention on Human Rights; "qualifying child" means a person
             who is under the age of 18 and who-


             (a)      is a British citizen, or


             (b)      has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                  period of seven years or more; "qualifying partner" means
                  a partner who-


                  (a)      is a British citizen, or


                  (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                      meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section
                      33(2A) of that Act).


         (2)  In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person-


             (a)      who is not a British citizen,


             (b)      who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
                  offence, and


             (c)      who-


                  (i)      has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                      at least 12 months,


                  (ii)     has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                      serious harm, or


                  (iii)         is a persistent offender.


         (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to an
             order under-


             (a)      section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act
                  1964 (insanity etc),


             (b)      section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act
                  1995 (insanity etc), or


             (c)      Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland)
                  Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted of an
                  offence.


         (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
             a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-


             (a)      do not include a person who has received a suspended
                  sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the
                  sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take
                  effect);


             (b)      do not include a person who has been sentenced to a
                  period of imprisonment of that length of time only by
                  virtue of being sentenced to consecutive sentences
                  amounting in aggregate to that length of time;


             (c)      include a person who is sentenced to detention, or
                  ordered or directed to be detained, in an institution
                  other than a prison (including, in particular, a hospital
                  or an institution for young offenders) for that length of
                  time; and (d) include a person who is sentenced to
                  imprisonment or detention, or ordered or directed to be
                  detained, for an indeterminate period, provided that it
                  may last for at least that length of time.


         (5)  If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to
             whether a person is a British citizen, it is for the person
             asserting that fact to prove it".


Interpretation of the Legislation

11. In NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  662  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  as
    follows:-

         "28. The next question which arises concerns the meaning  of  'very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2'. The newpara.398 uses the same language as
             section 117C(6).  It refers to 'very compelling circumstances,
             over and above those described in paragraphs  399  and  399A.'
             Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the 2014 rules refer  to  the  same
             subject matter as Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C, but they
             do so in greater detail.

         29.  In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia)applies  to  those  provisions.  The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". As we have indicated  above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in  paras.  399  or  399Aof  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe that as  a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2',  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.

         31.  An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention. In  terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and  2willapply  with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case. To  take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement. The circumstances  in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria[2009] INLR 47, and hence highly  relevant  to
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

         ...

         34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian  Republic[2012]  UKSC  25;  [2013]   1   AC   338   at
             [145].Nevertheless, it is a consequence  of  criminal  conduct
             that offenders may be separated from their children  for  many
             years, contrary to the best interests of those  children.  The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace of family life. That is not usually a sufficiently
             compelling circumstance to outweigh the high  public  interest
             in deporting foreign criminals. As  Rafferty  LJ  observed  in
             Secretary  of   State   for   the   Home   Department   v   CT
             (Vietnam)[2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:

                  "Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  Respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation."

         ...

         37.  In relation to a serious offender, it will often  be  sensible
             first to see whether his case involves  circumstances  of  the
             kind described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  both  because  the
             circumstances so described set  out  particularly  significant
             factors bearing upon respect for private  life  (Exception  1)
             and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because that may
             provide a helpful basis on which an  assessment  can  be  made
             whether there are 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'  as  is  required
             under section 117C(6). It will then be necessary  to  look  to
             see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and
             2 are of  such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
             conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by the
             circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy
             the test in section 117C(6)."

12. The Upper Tribunal considered Section 117C(6) in  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly
    harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC)  and  said  as
    follows at paragraph 22:-

         "It is important to keep in mind that the test in  section  117C(6)
         is extremely demanding.  The fact that, at this point,  a  tribunal
         is required to engage in a wide-ranging  proportionality  exercise,
         balancing the weight  that  appropriately  falls  to  be  given  to
         factors on the proposed deportee's side of the balance against  the
         weight of the public interest, does not in  any  sense  permit  the
         tribunal  to  engage  in  the  sort  of  exercise  that  would   be
         appropriate in the case of someone who is not within the  ambit  of
         section 117C.  Not only must regard be had to the factors  set  out
         in section 117B, such as giving little  weight  to  a  relationship
         formed with a qualifying  partner  that  is  established  when  the
         proposed deportee was in the United Kingdom unlawfully, the  public
         interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal is high; and even
         higher for a person sentenced to  imprisonment  of  at  least  four
         years".

13. The Tribunal said that the way in which  a  court  or  Tribunal  should
    approach Section 117C remains as set out in the judgment of Jackson  LJ
    in NA (Pakistan) & Anor v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ  662.   It
    said as follows:-

         "33.  Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient."

14. The Upper Tribunal further considered very compelling circumstances  in
    MS (s. 117C(6): "very  compelling  circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]
    UKUT 122 (IAC) and concluded that when determining Section  117C(6)  of
    the 2002 Act a court or Tribunal must take into account, together  with
    any other relevant public interest considerations, the  seriousness  of
    the particular offence of which the foreign criminal was convicted; not
    merely whether the  foreign  criminal  was  or  was  not  sentenced  to
    imprisonment of more than four years.  Nothing in KO  (Nigeria)  v  The
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  demands  a   contrary
    conclusion.  It also concluded that there was nothing in Hesham  Ali  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  UKSC  60  that
    requires a  court  or  Tribunal  to  assume  the  principle  of  public
    deterrence as an element  of  the  public  interest  in  determining  a
    deportation appeal by reference to Section 117C(6).

15. In Forrester v The Secretary of State [2018] EWCA Civ  2653  the  court
    considered s.117C (6) and said as follows:-

         "20. The real gravamen of this ground of appeal is that  the  judge
             assumed that once something over and above  an  exception  was
             established, this would amount  to  compelling  circumstances.
             But I do not think that this is a sustainable reading  of  the
             judgment as a  whole  and  in  particular,  in  the  light  of
             para.38, reproduced at para. 13 above. In that  paragraph  the
             judge unambiguously  recognised  that  the  question  was  not
             simply whether there were circumstances over and above one  of
             the exceptions; the issue was still whether these  constituted
             very  compelling  circumstances,  sufficiently  compelling  to
             outweigh the very strong presumption in  favour  of  deporting
             someone with a four year sentence. The judge fully appreciated
             that it was not enough to identify factors over and above  the
             exceptions.  It  was  still  necessary  to  ask  whether  they
             amounted to very compelling circumstances.

         21.  Mr. Harland, counsel for the Secretary of State, accepted that
             if paragraphs 38 and 39 were read together, there was  nothing
             wrong with the judge's approach and no material  misdirection.
             That  was  a  realistic  and  fair  concession.  Indeed  in  a
             sufficiently strong case there may be factors  relating  to  a
             particular exception which can amount to  something  over  and
             above  the  exception  constituting  compelling  circumstances
             within the meaning of the statute.  This  point  was  made  by
             Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department[2016]  EWCA  Civ  662  where  he   explained   that
             circumstances over and above the exceptions do not necessarily
             mean that the test can  only  be  satisfied  where  there  are
             circumstances or considerations which are independent  of  the
             exceptions. There may be cases  where  the  circumstances  are
             compelling because the exception is not merely  satisfied  but
             is engaged in a particularly robust way so  as  to  provide  a
             very strong article 8 claim capable on its own of amounting to
             compelling circumstances. Mr Harland's submission was that FTT
             Judge Gibb's decision had already been tainted  by  the  error
             identified by the UT Judge and could not safely be relied upon
             thereafter."

16. In PF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1139 Lord Justice Hickinbottom said the
    following about the  statutory  provision  and  the  Immigration  Rules
    concerning deportation:-

         "36. The statutory provisions in sections 117A-117D are, unlike the
             Immigration Rules (see Ali at  [17]),  law  rather  than  mere
             policy.  However,  both  section   117C   and   the   relevant
             Immigration Rules set out  policy,  in  the  sense  that  they
             provide a general assessment of the  proportionality  exercise
             that has to be performed under article 8(2) where there  is  a
             public  interest  in  deporting   a   foreign   criminal   but
             countervailing article 8 factors. The force of the  assessment
             in section 117C is, of course, the greater because it directly
             reflects the will of Parliament. The statutory provisions thus
             provide a 'particularly strong statement of public policy' (NA
             (Pakistan) at [22]), such that 'great weight' should generally
             be given to it and cases in which that public interest will be
             outweighed,  other  than  those  specified  in  the  statutory
             provisions and Rules themselves, 'are  likely  to  be  a  very
             small minority (particular  in  non-settled  cases)'  (Ali  at
             [38]), i.e. will be rare (NA (Pakistan) at [33]).

         37.   But  the  required,  heavily  structured  analysis  does  not
             eradicate all judgment on the part of the decision-maker  and,
             in its turn, the court or tribunal on any  challenge  to  that
             decision-maker's decision. It is  self-evident  that  relative
             human rights (such as the right  to  respect  for  family  and
             private  life  under  article  8)  can  only   ultimately   be
             considered on the facts of the particular case. The structured
             approach towards the article  8(2)  proportionality  balancing
             exercise required by the 2002 Act and  the  Immigration  Rules
             does not in itself determine the  outcome  of  the  assessment
             required to be made in an individual case.

         38.  Therefore, whether an  exception  in  paragraph  399  or  399A
             applies is dependent upon questions that require case-specific
             evaluation, such as whether in all  of  the  circumstances  it
             would not be reasonable  for  a  child  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom or whether in  all  of  the  circumstances  there  are
             insurmountable obstacles to family  life  outside  the  United
             Kingdom.

         39.  More importantly for the purposes of  this  appeal,  where  an
             offender  has  been  sentenced  to  at   least   four   years'
             imprisonment, or otherwise falls outside the paragraph 399 and
             399A exceptions, by section 117C(6) and paragraph 398  of  the
             Rules, the decision-maker, court or  tribunal  entrusted  with
             the task must still consider and make an assessment of whether
             there are  'very  compelling  circumstances'  that  justify  a
             departure from the general rule that such offenders should  be
             deported in the public interest. That requires  the  decision-
             maker to take into account, not only that  general  assessment
             (and give it the weight appropriate to such an assessment made
             by Parliament), but also the facts and  circumstances  of  the
             particular case which are not - indeed, cannot - be taken into
             account in any general assessment."

17. In respect of unduly harsh and the test to be applied the Supreme Court
    in KO said as follows:-

         "23. On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             'reasonableness' under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word 'unduly' implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. 'Unduly' implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in
             IT   (Jamaica)   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department[2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64)
             can it be equated with a requirement to show 'very  compelling
             reasons'. That would be in effect to replicate the  additional
             test applied by section 117C(6) with respect to  sentences  of
             four years or more."

    In KO at paragraph 22 Lord  Carnwath  (with  whom  the  other  Justices
    agreed) said that on the face of it, Exception 2 in section 117C of the
    2002 Act raises a factual issue seen from the  point  of  view  of  the
    partner or child and he said the above at  paragraph  23.   It  is  now
    clear that a Tribunal or court considering section 117C(5) of the  2002
    Act must focus not on the comparative seriousness  of  the  offence  or
    offences committed by the foreign criminal who  faces  deportation  but
    rather on whether the effects of deportation  on  a  child  or  partner
    would go beyond the degree of  harshness  which  would  necessarily  be
    involved for any child or partner of  a  foreign  criminal  faced  with
    deportation.  The Tribunal must consider whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the child and/or partner to live in the country to where  the
    foreign criminal is to be deported and whether it would be unduly harsh
    for the child and/or partner to remain in the UK without him.

The resumed hearing

18. The matter was adjourned for a resumed hearing.  Directions were issued
    to the  Appellant  in  relation  to  further  evidence,  however  these
    directions were not complied with.  Mr Fripp at the hearing  before  me
    indicated that the Appellant relied on the bundle that was  before  the
    FTT and submitted an additional statement from the DC.   Mr  Tufan  did
    not object to the admission of this witness statement of  24  September
    2019 which had not been served in compliance with the directions of the
    Tribunal.  No further evidence was submitted.  The  Appellant  and  his
    sister, JK, gave oral evidence.

The Evidence

The Appellant's evidence

19. The Appellant's evidence is contained in his undated witness  statement
    (pages 4 to 10 of the Appellant's bundle).  He  gave  evidence  at  the
    hearing and adopted  his  statement.  .  He  was  cross-examined.   His
    evidence can be summarised.

20. Whilst the Appellant was in custody  his  children,  save  JC  and  AC,
    visited him every two to three months.  DC visited him in total on  six
    or seven occasions.  He had regular  telephone  contact  with  all  the
    children.  The Appellant was released from prison on 3 September  2019.
    He is on licence and Home Office bail.  Since his release he  has  been
    living with his mother and stepfather.  He  has  not  returned  to  the
    family home in Bristol because he wanted to  be  out  of  the  area  to
    disassociate himself with criminals.  He regularly sees DC and  he  has
    seen all the other children at various times.

21. The Appellant's youngest children stayed with  him  last  weekend  from
    Friday to Monday.  DC lives with the Appellant's  sister,  JK.   Family
    members had been very much affected by his  imprisonment.   Before  his
    conviction he was a hands-on father who provided for and  looked  after
    his children.  He took MC to play football. MC was picked by a football
    club but was unable to take up the offer  because  of  the  Appellant's
    incarceration.  MC as having some behavioural problems as a  result  of
    his incarceration.  NC used to read to the Appellant at  bed  time  but
    since the Appellant's release she has  not  done  this.   NC  sometimes
    cries at school and her mother has to go into school  to  comfort  her.
    AC sent the Appellant a letter saying that she wanted to live with him.
     DC finds it very difficult to motivate himself.  He spends most of his
    time in his bedroom and has to be physically taken out of his  room  in
    order to go to work  or  to  attend  school.   Before  the  Appellant's
    incarceration the Appellant  would take DC to  play  football  or  they
    would watch  football  together.  DC  used  to  have  friends  and  was
    sociable, but all that has stopped  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's
    incarceration and the prospect of the Appellant's deportation.

22. The thrust of the Appellant's evidence was that  he  feels  guilty  and
    upset at the impact that his behaviour has had  on  his  children.   He
    wants to be there for them, particularly DC,  to  help  him  think  for
    himself, and to help him get out of the house.  He wants to  spend  the
    time  that  he  has  left  with  his  children  to  make  up  for   the
    disappointment they feel as a result of his  criminality.   He  accepts
    that it was difficult because during the time  he  was  in  prison  the
    connection with them was lost and it needs to be made again.  He  would
    not be able to do this  if  he  was  in  Jamaica.   It  would  be  very
    difficult to maintain relationships with  his  children  should  he  be
    deported.  They would not be able to afford to visit him.  He would not
    be able to return for a period of ten years.

23. The Appellant is a hard worker.  He has an interview on 1 October  2019
    with the probation service relating to future employment.

24. The Appellant fears return to Jamaica.  His father was  murdered  there
    in October 2017 and he fears being targeted by gangs.  The Appellant is
    not a threat to society.  He is at low risk of reoffending.   He  is  a
    changed man and describes himself as having  been  rehabilitated.   His
    behaviour in prison was described as excellent and  he  has  fully  co-
    operated with the probation services.

25. It would be unduly harsh for  his  children  to  relocate  to  Jamaica.
    There are so many uncertainties there.  Crime is high and employment is
    scarce.

JK's evidence

26. The Appellant's sister, JK, gave evidence.   She  adopted  her  witness
    statement dated 17 January 2019 (pages 25  to  27  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle) as her evidence-in-chief.  Her evidence can be summarised.

27. She visited the Appellant whilst he was in prison.  DC lives with  her.
    Since the Appellant's release DC has seen his father almost  daily.  DC
    was very much affected by his father's incarceration.  He  became  very
    quiet and withdrawn.  He has lived with JK since August/September 2018.
     He was living with the Appellant and  the  Appellant's  family  before
    this. After the Appellant's incarceration it was difficult  for  EC  to
    cope with another child.  DC's  GCSEs  suffered  as  a  result  of  his
    father's incarceration.  DC has never had  a  mother.   He  lived  with
    godparents in Jamaica.  He came here to be with the Appellant in  2002.
    The Appellant had not met him prior to this.  He found love  here  with
    his father.  It was good for him.  They  did  things  together  like  a
    normal father and son.  Since the Appellant's release  on  3  September
    2019 there has been a change in DC's behaviour and attitude.  He  seems
    much happier and more positive.  He now  comes  out  of  his  room  and
    socialises.  DC needs a father.  He is like a child still and  must  be
    told when to shower, to eat or clean his bedroom.  If the Appellant  is
    deported DC would go back into his shell. He would be  unlikely  to  do
    anything.  JK gave evidence about positive changes she has seen in  all
    the Appellant's children since his release.

DC's evidence

28. There is a letter from DC (at page 126 of the Appellant's  bundle).  He
    expressed his desire for his father to be allowed to remain in  the  UK
    and described how hard it has been for him not  having  him  here.   He
    described what they used to do  together,  namely  that  the  Appellant
    would take him to football games  and  they  watched  each  other  play
    football.  His father was  always  supportive  and  they  had  a  great
    relationship.  DC's more recent statement of 24  September  2019,  says
    that he is now at college and he is working and he has been focusing on
    his future.  His dad has been a very important part of  his  life.   He
    has taught him an important life lesson and helped him choose  his  own
    career path.  Since the Appellant has been in custody he (DC)  has  not
    been doing some of the  things  he  used  to  enjoy,  such  as  playing
    football.  Since  his  father's  release  they  have  spent  more  time
    together as a family.  They all missed him when he was in  prison.   He
    needs his father's guidance.

EC's evidence

29. There is a statement from EC of 16 January 2019.  EC is the Appellant's
    wife.  Her evidence can be summarised.

30. She is struggling with the children emotionally and  financially  since
    her husband has been in prison.  Her life has been  hell.   She  cannot
    manage to financially support the children.  She and the children visit
    the Appellant in prison and that this has taken an  emotional  toll  on
    them.  The children are finding it difficult to cope and  their  grades
    at school have suffered.  DC has become quiet and  withdrawn.   He  has
    gone to live with his aunt in Watford.  The Appellant is a good  father
    and takes his responsibilities  seriously.   He  has  been  a  hands-on
    father and the centre of their family life.  The children miss him  and
    find it hard to cope without him.  The thought of him not being in  the
    UK is something that she would rather not think about because it  would
    be devastating on the children.  The  Appellant's  involvement  in  the
    children's life is vital.  She would not be able to afford to take them
    to Jamaica and they would not see  him  again.   The  family  would  be
    destroyed.  He is a changed man since he has been  in  prison  and  now
    realises the errors and the devastating effect that they  have  had  on
    the family.

31. The Appellant does not have anywhere to go in Jamaica.  All his  family
    are in the UK.  He has nothing to return  to  there.   He  may  have  a
    couple of siblings but he cannot rely on them because they  have  their
    own problems and their own lives.

Other evidence

32. In the Appellant's bundle  there  is  a  letter  from  another  of  the
    Appellant's children at page 124.  It is not clear to  me  which  child
    wrote the letter.  There is a letter from  HM  Prison  Service  to  the
    Appellant of 29 August 2007 from the Offender Management  Unit  at  HMP
    Huntercombe.  The letter indicates that the Appellant at that time  did
    not require a full OASys assessment due to the nature of his offending.
     The letter goes on to say that he has been assessed as  posing  a  low
    risk of harm to all  sections  of  the  community  and  that  in  these
    circumstances he does not need a sentence plan and therefore will  have
    no objectives to complete.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  of  a  more
    recent OASys assessment and that he still continues to  present  a  low
    risk of reoffending.  There was no copy of an assessment in evidence.

33. There are a number of letters from the Custodial Manager, Safer Custody
    and Equalities at HMP Huntercombe to the Appellant thanking him for his
    hard work in his role as a listener  and  equality  rep.   There  is  a
    letter from the library manager at the prison attaching a small  reward
    to the Appellant for his contribution to the library service.

34. There are 140 pages in total in the Appellant's bundle which  contains,
    in addition to witness statements; prison visit logs, evidence  of  the
    Appellant's activities whilst  in  prison  and  evidence  of  his  good
    behaviour there.

Submissions

35. Mr Fripp relied on an eleven- page skeleton argument which  was  passed
    to me moments before the hearing.  In  addition,  both  representatives
    made  oral  submissions.   Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  there   was   no
    independent evidence about DC's behaviour and whether there was a  link
    with the Appellant's incarceration. It may be that  he  was  displaying
    normal teenage behaviour.  He indicated that the Secretary of State was
    prepared to accept that  there  was  subsisting  family  life,  but  he
    referred to the high threshold of unduly harsh with reference to MK and
    the even higher threshold required under Section 117C(6).  He asked  me
    to consider Judge Frazer's determination in the context of that  appeal
    which was against a decision to refuse to grant DC leave on  Article  8
    grounds.

36. Mr Fripp addressed me in the context of his skeleton argument.  In oral
    submissions he said that 117C(4)(a) could not be met, however'

37.  he did not make any further concessions in relation to 117C(4)(b)  and
    (c) but stated that whether or not the Appellant could meet those limbs
    was a moot point and that there would be no point  in  challenging  any
    finding under this provision because he cannot meet  the  provision  in
    its entirety.

38. The Appellant's case is that there are very  compelling  circumstances.
    The Appellant is at low risk of  reoffending  and  if  able  to  remain
    lawfully in the UK he will  have  an  enhanced  opportunity  to  obtain
    employment and support his family.  He relies on the preserved findings
    of the UT.  The Appellant relies on his relationship with  DC  and  the
    findings of FTT Judge Frazer which  represent  a  "starting  point"  on
    relevant issues per Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 702.  He referred me
    to the evidence about DC and the Tribunal's duty under  Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.   He  asked  me  to
    consider the cumulative effect of deportation in  the  context  of  the
    numerous relationships that the Appellant has and that this can  amount
    to very compelling circumstances.   He  brought  my  attention  to  the
    Appellant  not  having  the  finances  in  order  to  obtain  extensive
    evidence, for example that from social  workers  or  other  experts  in
    relation to the children and the effect of  deportation.   However,  he
    asked me  to  accept  that  the  adverse  impact  of  imprisonment  and
    deportation on children.

Findings and reasons

Exception 2

39. I accept that it would be unduly harsh to expect any of the Appellant's
    biological British citizen children to live in  Jamaica.  Similarly,  I
    accept that it would be unduly harsh to expect  his  wife  EC  to  live
    there.  The British citizen children live here  with  their  respective
    mothers. They range in age from 10 to 16. Moreover, it is in all of the
    children's best interests to remain in the UK with  their  father,  the
    Appellant. There is a  preserved  finding  that  deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh in the context of  NC  and  MC  in  the  context  of  both
    scenarios. In addition, there are preserved findings in respect of  EC.
    I accept that, based on the evidence in EC's statement, the  effect  of
    deportation in the context of the Appellant leaving EC in the UK  would
    be unduly harsh.  Thus, in respect of EC, NC and MC the Appellant meets
    Exception 2.

40. I accept that since the Appellant's recent release from custody he  has
    made efforts to see his children.  He does not live with any  of  them.
    He does not live with his wife, EC and their children. JC  and  AC  did
    not visit the Appellant in  custody;  however,  he  has  seen  them  on
    release. I accept that the other  children  visited  him.  Despite  the
    Appellant not living in  the  family  home,  there  was  no  up-to-date
    evidence from EC. Despite this gap in the evidence, Mr  Tufan  did  not
    ask me to revisit the preserved findings about the position at the date
    of the hearing before me. Whilst  I  accept  that  there  may  be  good
    reasons why he has moved himself away from the  family  home  to  avoid
    connections with criminals, I would have expected up to  date  evidence
    from the Appellant's wife. She did  not  attend  the  hearing  to  give
    evidence.

41. The evidence relating to the Appellant's biological children is  scant.
    I find that  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  the  effect  of
    deportation, in the context of the Appellant  leaving  JC,  AC  and  NC
    meets the elevated test for unduly harsh.  Their father has been absent
    from their lives during his extensive prison sentence. He did not  live
    with them prior  to  incarceration.  There  is  no  evidence  from  the
    children's mothers.   I  accept  that  the  option  of  instructing  an
    independent expert may not have been open to the Appellant, but  it  is
    not unreasonable for him to have obtained evidence from the  children's
    mothers, their school or other relatives about the impact  on  them  of
    their father's deportation.  The evidence that is  reasonably  expected
    in order to establish the elevated test is met is wholly absent.

42. There is no up to date evidence about EC's older two children. I accept
    that the Appellant lived  with  them  prior  to  his  incarnation.  The
    Appellant did not give evidence of contact with them since his release.
    I accept that he has had a relationship with them, but the evidence  is
    insufficient to enable me to assess the quality or nature  of  this.  I
    find that he has not established  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with RB and EB at the date of the hearing before me. EB is
    now an adult.

Exception 1

43. The Appellant cannot meet any of the limbs of para 399A. As conceded by
    Mr Fripp, whilst he has been here lawfully for periods of time, he  has
    not been here lawfully most of his life. Whilst Mr Fripp indicated that
    he did not concede that there would not be very  significant  obstacles
    to integration  into  Jamaica,  this  ignores  that  the  FTT  made  an
    unchallenged finding that there were  no  very  significant  obstacles.
    This was preserved. It is not open to the Appellant  to  now  challenge
    this.  There is no good reason to go behind the  preserved  finding  of
    the FTT.  There is no finding by the FTT about the  Appellant's  social
    and  cultural  integration.  This  omission  was  not  the  subject  of
    challenge  of  the  decision  of  the  FTT.   This  explains  the  UT's
    understanding of the case as at [24] of the error of law decision.  The
    Appellant's case was not and is not properly advanced on the basis that
    he can meet any of the requirements of 399A including (b).  It  is  not
    open to Mr Fripp to introduce further challenges to the decision of the
    FTT.  In respect of social and cultural integration, Mr Fripp  did  not
    advance any argument in support of the  Appellant.  The  Appellant  has
    family life here.  He came here as an adult in 2002 aged 25.  There  is
    no evidence before me of lawful employment.  Whilst there is  a  degree
    of social and cultural integration arising from his family  life  here,
    the serious crime that he has  committed  indicates  very  strongly  an
    alienation from important values of our society which has some  bearing
    on social and integration.   In any event, the  Appellant  cannot  meet
    Exception 2 even if he is socially and culturally integrated.

S.117C(6)

44. I now must consider DC. He is not a qualifying child and therefore  the
    Appellant cannot meet Exception 2 based on his  relationship  with  DC.
    Nevertheless, in order to consider the impact of deportation on  DC,  a
    factor that I will consider amongst  others  is  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh within the meaning of Exception 2.  DC  is  a  citizen  of
    Jamaica. He has limited leave here until 23  November  2020.  He  lives
    with his aunt, JK. He is aged 17. On 17 December 2014  he  applied  for
    leave to remain as a dependent on his father. He was granted  leave  on
    this basis until 5  December  2016.  At  the  time  the  Appellant  had
    discretionary leave.  A later application was refused  because  of  the
    Appellant's status and because he was by  that  time  in  prison.  DC's
    mother in Jamaica was not able to care for him because of mental health
    issues. DC appealed. At this time,  he  was  living  with  EC  and  his
    younger siblings. The evidence from EC was that  MC  and  NC  would  be
    devastated if DC was deported, having already been separated from their
    father.  DC was at the time at school about to sit GCSEs.  He had lived
    with his godparents in Jamaica before coming  to  the  UK.   The  judge
    heard evidence that DC wanted to stay  with  EC  and  his  siblings  in
    Bristol and that he wanted to continue at school.  The judge found that
    to return DC to Jamaica " at this pivotal stage  of  his  academic  and
    social life would not be in his best interests in  circumstances  where
    there is some uncertainty about his future care, the  capacity  of  his
    godparents to look after him and the prospect of  whether  he  will  be
    able to continue his education." Judge  Frazer  said  that  there  were
    "serious sand compelling circumstances in this case which  warrant  the
    preservation of the status quo for this young  man"  and  that  removal
    would not be proportionate. Judge  Frazer  allowed  DC's  appeal  under
    Article 8 in a decision promulgated on 25 April 2019. The  argument  by
    the Appellant in respect of Devaseelan is  misconceived.  There  is  no
    reason to interfere with  Judge  Frazer's  findings;  however,  he  was
    determining DC's appeal against removal. I am considering his  father's
    against deportation.

45. I have no doubt whatsoever that DC has been adversely affected  by  the
    incarceration of the Appellant. The evidence before me in  contrast  to
    that before Judge Frazer is that DC moved out of the Appellant's family
    home and now lives with his aunt, JK. He  is  now  at  college,  having
    completed his GCSEs. I accept that the evidence  about  DC  establishes
    that out of all  the  Appellant's  children,  he  has  been  the  worst
    affected by the Appellant's incarnation. He does not have a mother  who
    is able to care for him. However, the situation has moved on  from  the
    time of Judge Frazer's decision because DC has now completed GCSEs,  he
    is aged 17, and he does not live in the Appellant's  family  home.  The
    case was not advanced based on DC's relationship with his aunt  or  his
    relationship with his siblings; however, there is no reason for me  not
    to accept that his aunt is looking after him  and  that  she  genuinely
    cares for him. I accept that DC has siblings here, and that in 2018  he
    was living with his younger  siblings  and  that  he  enjoyed  a  close
    relationship with them. Whilst I take into account his  recent  witness
    statement and accept that he has been with his siblings as a family  on
    occasions since his father's release,  his  father  has  been  released
    relatively recently. There was no up to date evidence before  me  about
    the impact of separation of DC from his younger siblings. I accept that
    DC has had problems as  described  by  the  Appellant  and  JK  and  an
    improvement has been seen since his father's  release.   DC  is  not  a
    qualifying child; however, I accept that because of his vulnerabilities
    it would be unduly harsh, applying the elevated test for his father  to
    be deported leaving him here without a parent. However, I do not accept
    that it would be unduly harsh for him to go to Jamaica with his father.
    They are both citizens of Jamaica.   They  have  both  lived  there.  I
    accept that it would not be in DC's best interests and that such a move
    would be disruptive and unsettling, but  he  would  not  be  without  a
    parent. He would be able to live with his father. There was  no  cogent
    evidence that the Appellant would not  be  able  to  make  a  life  for
    himself and his son in Jamaica despite  obvious  difficulties.  I  take
    into account the evidence before the FTT  that  the  Appellant  visited
    Jamaica in 2015. DC visited Jamaica in 2018. JK's evidence  before  the
    FTT was that during his visit DC stayed in her house in Jamaica. Whilst
    DC's godparents no longer live in Jamaica (the evidence  is  that  they
    moved to the United States) and other family members are  deceased,  it
    can be reasonably inferred from the evidence before the  FTT  that  the
    family has connections there.  From this I infer  the  Appellant  would
    have help getting on his feet.

46. The facts are not the same as those before Judge Frazer. I accept  that
    at that time removal of  DC  was  not  proportionate  for  the  reasons
    identified by the judge.  However, the facts and evidence before me are
    different.    DC would be leaving the UK to return to Jamaica in  order
    to live with his father which is the very reason why he came to the  UK
    in the first place.

47. I remind myself that the test under s.117C (6) is  very  demanding.   I
    remind myself of s.117B and the material factors  therein.  This  is  a
    precarious family life case.  The evidence does not establish that  the
    Appellant is financially  independent,  whatever  his  intentions.   In
    addition, I attach weight to the principle of public deterrence.

48. The best interests of the children carry great weight; nevertheless, it
    is a consequence of criminal conduct that offenders  may  be  separated
    from their children contrary to their  best  interests.  I  accept  the
    evidence is that the Appellant was a model prisoner and that he  is  at
    low risk of re-offending. This is not the same as presenting no risk of
    re-offending or harm. However, I attach some weight to the  Appellant's
    rehabilitation.  The fact remains that he has been convicted of a  very
    serious offence. He has been released a matter of weeks  prior  to  the
    hearing before me and he is on licence. I accept that the Appellant  is
    genuinely remorseful. He is sorry for the impact of  his  behaviour  on
    his family and understandably he wishes to stay here and  be  gainfully
    employed so that he can support them. I accept that he has a reasonable
    likelihood of finding work, which may allow him to  contribute  to  the
    maintenance of his five biological children.  I also  accept  that  the
    Appellant's deportation adversely impacts on several children's  lives.
    I accept that the Appellant meets Exception 2 in relation to  his  wife
    EC and their  younger  children.   I  accept  that  DC  who  is  not  a
    qualifying child will be most affected by  the  Appellant  leaving  him
    here, but he does have the option of  returning  to  Jamaica  with  his
    father. I  appreciate  that  the  Appellant  fears  crime  in  Jamaica;
    however, the evidence before me does not establish that to expect DC to
    return to Jamaica where he lived until 2014 with his  father  would  be
    unduly harsh. It would be upsetting and disruptive, but it would not be
    unduly harsh. Notwithstanding, DC's  vulnerabilities  and  difficulties
    arising at  least  in  part  from  the  Appellant's  incarceration  and
    prospects of deportation, I am not  satisfied  that  his  circumstances
    along with all other factors, in the Appellant's favour, amount to very
    compelling circumstances. Whether or not the Appellant is socially  and
    culturally integrated does not make any difference to  the  outcome  in
    this case because there are no properly identified  circumstances  that
    considered cumulatively are capable of  amounting  to  very  compelling
    circumstances.

49. All  the  factors   relied  on  by  the  Appellant  do  not  amount  to
    circumstances sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  very  strong
    presumption in favour of deporting someone who has  been  sentenced  to
    four years and eight months for drug  offences;  notwithstanding,  that
    the consequences of deportation are likely to  lead  to  the  Appellant
    being  separation from  his  British  citizen  children  and  maybe  DC
    (should he decide to stay) for a long time.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under Article 8

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 2 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

