
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/20442/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 September 2018                     |On 8 October 2018                  |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                      sg
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms L Dickinson, Counsel instructed by Fursdon
Knapper Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/291)

I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellants.    This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   I have anonymised the Appellant and witnesses to protect  her  son  who
    is a minor.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sir Lanka.  Her date of birth is 7th
April 1970.   She made an application for entry clearance to join her
spouse, SM, under the Immigration Rules relating to family reunion. SM has
been granted refugee status here.   The application was refused by the ECO
on 28th July 2016 and maintained by an Entry Clearance Manager on 5th
December 2016.  The Appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal
Judge O'Brien in a decision that was promulgated on 3rd October 2017. I
found a material error of law in Judge O'Brien's decision and set aside his
decision to allow the appeal.  If my decision of 3 July 2018 does not make
it clear, I confirm that the decision of Judge O'Brien to allow the appeal
is set aside. The matter came before me before a re-hearing on 19 September
2018.

3.   The Appellant and SM were married in 1991.   They  have  two  children.
    D, their eldest child was born on 3rd July 1997.  Their youngest child,
    A, was born on 26th May 2002.    SM came to the UK on 3rd May 2009.  He
    was granted leave to remain on protection grounds  on  10th  May  2013,
    having made an application in 2011.  On 4th  June  2010  the  Appellant
    made an application to come to the UK as the spouse of another man,  S.
     S had been granted settlement here.   Her application was granted.  In
    support of that application it is not in  dispute  that  the  Appellant
    used a false document to establish that she was married to SM. She also
    produced a divorce certificate relating to her marriage to  SM.  It  is
    the Appellant's case that this was also false.  The Appellant's case is
    that this was a false document.  The application  was  granted  by  the
    ECO. The Appellant came to the UK with D and A in 2010.   On 1st  March
    2011 she made an application to remain here as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence  at  the  hands  of  her  husband.    This   application   was
    unsuccessful. Following  an  unsuccessful  appeal,  the  Appellant  and
    children were removed to Sri Lanka on 28th October 2011.

4.   The Appellant made an application under 23rd November 2014 to  join  SM
    under the Rules relating to  family  re-union.   This  application  was
    refused on 11th February 2015.    The applications in relation to A and
    D were granted and they are now here in the UK with  their  father  SM.
    They came here in 2015. My understanding is that  they  have  now  been
    granted ILR.  The Appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  and  her
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Solly,  following  a
    hearing on 14 January 2016.  Judge Solly did not accept that there  was
    a genuine and subsisting marriage or that the parties intended to  live
    together.  The Appellant made a second application which was refused on
    28 July 2016 by the ECO and which is the subject of this appeal.

5.   The ECO was not satisfied that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor.   The ECO  was  not
    satisfied that they were still married considering  the  history.   The
    ECO relied on what the Appellant stated in her  application  for  entry
    clearance in 2010 to join S and the divorce certificate  she  submitted
    in support of that application to establish  that  she  was  no  longer
    married to SM.

The error of law

6.   I found an error of law in  the  decision  of  Judge  O'Brien  for  the
    reasons that I gave at paragraph 11 of my error of law decision.   This
    reads as follows: -


         "The Application on domestic violence grounds was an issue that was
         raised by the Respondent and the reasons for refusal decision.  It
         was not a matter on which the Appellant gave evidence.  It was an
         arguably a material issue in assessing the credibility of the
         witnesses and the context of whether the marriage between the
         Appellant and the Sponsor is genuine and subsisting.   It is also a
         material factor in the proportionality assessment it was accepted
         that the Appellant had used deception and submitted false documents
         with an application in the past.  The Judge took this into account
         but did not resolve the issue whether the Appellant had made a
         claim to be the victim of domestic violence at the hands of S and
         if so, the impact of this on the credibility of the witnesses and
         the assessment of proportionality.  There are inevitably strong
         public interest features to the case in light of the deception and
         more so if the extent of it was greater than the Judge
         appreciated".

The evidence

7.   At the resumed hearing the Appellant relied on  two  bundles  (AB1  and
    AB2).  I heard evidence from SM and  D.   The  Respondent  submitted  a
    bundle (RB) which contained written submissions in accordance  with  my
    directions and material relating to the Appellant's claim in 2011  (the
    determination of Immigration Judge CA James and the evidence  that  the
    Appellant  submitted  in  support  of  that  appeal).  Almost  at   the
    conclusion  of  evidence  SM  raised  a  problem  with  interpretation;
    however, the matter was resolved when the question that  he  was  being
    asked was clarified.

SM's evidence

8.   SM's evidence is contained in his witness statements of  1st  September
    2017 and 30 August 2018 which  he  adopted  as  evidence-in-chief.  The
    latter statement he  made  in  response  to  the  Respondent's  written
    submissions. His evidence can be summarised.

9.   The Appellant and SM have been married since 31st May  1991.  They  are
    still married.

10.  The Appellant and the children  came  to  the  UK  as  the  spouse  and
    dependents of S to gain entry to the UK to join SM.   The  family  sold
    their home in Sri Lanka to pay an agent.  They  regret  their  actions.
    They were desperate to be reunited.  They have  lived  apart  since  SM
    fled Sri Lanka on 2nd May 2009.   SM  and  the  Appellant  have  shared
    responsibility for the children whilst they  have  been  living  apart.
    There was a delay of  four  years  in  the  processing  of  his  asylum
    application. He was granted refugee status on 10th May 2013 until  10th
    May 2018.

11.  SM kept in regular contact with his wife and children after he came  to
    the UK.  D arrived in the UK in April 2015.  A  arrived  here  on  29th
    September 2015.  They have been living together in the UK  since  their
    arrival.  SM has remained in regular contact with the Appellant in  Sri
    Lanka.  He sends her money and speaks to her.

12.  SM is unable to return to Sri  Lanka  because  he  will  be  persecuted
    there.  It is very difficult  for  the  family  to  be  separated.   SM
    suffers from post traumatic stress disorder following  his  experiences
    in Sri Lanka.

13.  The Appellant and the children cannot  contemplate  the  future  living
    apart from the Appellant and they desperately seek to be  reunited.   A
    needs the support of both his parents.   SM works four days a week  and
    A is alone when he returns from school.

14.  SM expressed concerns at the hearing about A's welfare in  the  absence
    of his mother. He described him as  angry  and  withdrawn.  The  family
    attempted to move to Bristol because D has started a University  course
    there. They were unable to because of rent arrears. SM did not  support
    the Appellant's appeal in 2011. He was living with friends at the time.



D's evidence

15.  D's evidence is contained in his witness statements  of  1st  September
    2017 and 30th August 2018 which he adopted  as  his  evidence-in-chief.
    His evidence can be summarised.

16.  His parent's marriage has never broken down.  It was falsely stated  in
    the domestic violence claim made by the Appellant.   Since  D  and  his
    brother arrived in the UK his  father  has  continued  to  support  the
    Appellant and contact her on a regular basis. A cannot be  expected  to
    choose between living with his mother or father.  He is now  only  aged
    sixteen and he needs his mother.  He has now been living apart from her
    for a period of four years which has greatly  affected  him.    He  has
    been diagnosed with depression and offered counselling.

17.  A does not speak very much and this has been the  case  for  about  two
    years.  He does not leave home or socialise with friends.  He  used  to
    be outgoing.   His  personality  has  changed.  He  has  strong  temper
    tantrums.

Other evidence

18.  There are documents in support of the appeal in AB1 (pages  27  to  35)
    including correspondence  from  Susie  Dent,  a  member  of  the  START
    Management Team.  She has known SM for five years.   She  supports  the
    marriage between the Appellant and SM to  be  genuine  and  subsisting.
    She  states  that  separation  from  their   wife/mother   has   caused
    considerable problems for the children, particularly A who has not seen
    his mother for nearly three years and continues to be  distressed  with
    sleeping difficulties. The Appellant was A's sole carer for four  years
    whilst in Sri Lanka and has a close relationship with her.   Separation
    is causing considerable anxiety and distress for all family members.

19.  There is correspondence from Rupert Blomfield of 19th July  2017.   His
    evidence summarised is  that  there  has  been  deterioration  in  SM's
    physical and mental health. There are serious concerns about A's mental
    health and wellbeing a result of the continued  separation.  There  are
    several other letters in support of the appeal. There  is  photographic
    evidence and evidence of money transfers.

Submissions

20.  The Respondent submitted written submissions and Mr Bramble  made  oral
    submissions.  The  Respondent  relies  on  evidence  relating  to   the
    Appellant's application in  2010  and  appeal  in  2011.  She  appealed
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  grant  her
    and her children leave to remain on the basis that she was  the  victim
    of domestic violence. Her  appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge  CJ
    James. It  was  the  Appellant's  case  before  Judge  James  that  her
    relationship with her spouse had broken down. The judge heard  evidence
    from the Appellant. The Appellant's case was that her husband had  been
    abusive to her and her children.  The  Appellant's  oral  evidence  was
    that her husband had forced her to sell her property in Sri Lanka.  The
    Appellant contacted the police in December 2010 about  it.  The  police
    arranged accommodation for the Appellant  and  children  following  her
    husband having thrown them out of their home. She sought help from  the
    Social Services and they were rehoused.

21.  Judge James considered evidence from  Oxfordshire  County  Council  and
    accepted that the Appellant probably did go to the police in 2010.  The
    Appellant gave an account of financial abuse which was rejected by  the
    judge. During the appeal the Appellant gave a detailed account  of  the
    abuse she suffered at the hands of her husband and the impact that  had
    on her children. Whilst it was found that the evidence from the  Social
    Services  indicated  that   the   Appellant   made   complaints   about
    difficulties within the marriage, it was not accepted that the marriage
    broken down because of domestic violence.  The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's case was unsupported and that she was not credible

22.  The Respondent submitted the Appellant's witness  statements  on  which
    she relied at the hearing before Judge James and a chronology.  It  was
    her case that in 2005 her marriage to SM broke down and  their  divorce
    was finalised in 2009.

23.  The Respondent's position before me was that the Appellant and SM  were
    divorced in 2009. The decision of Ft-TJ Solly is relied on. Judge Solly
    accepted that SM and the Appellant married in 1991. She found that they
    did not live together save for a short  time  in  2010,  after  arrival
    here. He found that the marriage was not subsisting and  has  not  been
    for many years, they did not intend to live together  in  the  UK  and,
    there was no family life between SM and the  Appellant.  The  Appellant
    and SM conspired to produce false documents in  applications  and  have
    given seriously conflicting evidence which damages credibility.

24.  In respect of the Appellant's marriage to  S,  the  Respondent  submits
    that the Appellant's entry  to  the  UK  was  based  on  this  marriage
    subsisting. Considerable documentation was produced in support  of  the
    domestic violence claim.  The  police,  local  authorities  and  social
    services were involved. There  has  been  considerable  public  express
    expense.

25.  There is still no reason why SM did not claim asylum until 2011,  after
    the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.  There  is  no  good  reason  why
    having been granted asylum on 10 May 2013, no application was made  for
    entry clearance until 10th August 2014. The  Appellant  and  SM  accept
    that they submitted false documents. The credibility of  the  Appellant
    and SM is seriously damaged.

26.  The Appellant has  had  care  of  the  children  since  2005  when  the
    marriage broke down. The Respondent does not accept  that  SM  and  the
    Appellant are married. The Respondent is not  willing  to  accept  that
    relationship subsisting or that it has subsisted since 2005.

27.  The appeal cannot  succeed  under  paragraph  352  of  the  immigration
    rules.

28.  Ms Dickinson submitted that the  Appellant  and  SM  have  been  candid
    about previous applications. It was accepted by the Respondent that the
    Appellant and SM were married in 1991 as  claimed.  Judge  Solly  found
    that the relationship was not genuine and subsisting. She did not  have
    before her the evidence that is now available. She  submitted  that  in
    her  view  the  best  interests  of  A  outweigh  the  public  interest
    maintenance of immigration control.

Conclusions

29.  The starting point is the decision of Judge Solly.  This  is  an  entry
    clearance case and I  must  consider  the  position  the  date  of  the
    decision.  There is a considerable amount of evidence  before  me  that
    was not before Judge  Solly  in  respect  of  the  Appellant  and  SM's
    relationship which arguably casts light on the position at the date  of
    the decision.

30.  I am not impressed by SM's evidence. Considering the  evidence  in  the
    round I find him not credible. There was regrettably no  evidence  from
    the Appellant before me. The  evidence  of  SM  must  be  treated  with
    caution in the  light  of  the  couple's  immigration  history.  It  is
    accepted by  the  Respondent  that  they  were  married  in  1991.  The
    Appellant and SM seek to persuade me that their marriage  continues.  I
    have considered the evidence of D. His evidence  is  that  his  parents
    have always been married. He was born in 1997. He was a minor in  2011.
    He did not refer to the events of 2011 in his  evidence.  Inevitably  I
    conclude that in the light of the  evidence  before  me,  his  evidence
    cannot be relied on.

31.  Ms Dickinson stated in submissions that SM and the Appellant  had  been
    candid about their immigration history. However, SM did  not  make  any
    reference to the 2010 application and 2011 appeal in his first  witness
    statement. I  accept  that  he  addressed  it  in  his  second  witness
    statement, but it is hardly surprising considering  the  error  of  law
    decision.

32.  I accept that at the date of the decision there was  some  relationship
    between the Appellant and  SM.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  evidence
    establishes that at the date of the decision they were  still  married.
    SM sends the Appellant money and they have contact. Both matters I have
    taken into account.

33.  If it is the case that the Appellant and SM are still married  as  they
    claim to be this means that they fabricated the application  for  entry
    clearance in 2010 relying on a false divorce certificate.  If  accepted
    it puts them in a very  bad  light.  I  can  understand  the  level  of
    desperation a spouse and children may feel being separated  from  their
    father who sought refuge in another country. However,  the  Appellant's
    case as advanced by SM, goes far beyond the  use  of  deception  in  an
    application for entry clearance. The Appellant did not come clean  once
    here in the UK. The evidence is that she did not even live with SM here
    in 2010 save for a very short period. She made another application on a
    wholly false basis. She gave evidence before a judge which explained in
    detail that she was the victim of domestic abuse at the  hands  of  her
    husband (S), following a successful application  for  entry  clearance.
    The Appellant gave oral evidence giving a detailed account of the abuse
    and how it impacted on the children,  particularly  A.   Her  case  was
    advanced on the basis that she and SM divorced in 2009 and  that  their
    marriage broke down in 2005. On the Appellant's own case, the degree of
    deception is very significant and serious.   The  Appellant's  case  is
    that it was all done in an  act  of  desperation  to  keep  the  family
    together. However, there is no  satisfactory  or  credible  explanation
    given by SM which would explain why he did not make a claim for  asylum
    until 2011 and why the Appellant and SM did  not  live  together  as  a
    family when they came here. SM has attempted to  explain  this  in  his
    evidence at various stages, but he  has  not  advanced  a  credible  or
    plausible explanation why it was necessary to go to such great  lengths
    to deceive the Home Office.  I do not accept the  Appellant's  case  as
    advanced before me.

34.  The alternative scenario which is more likely, in my view, is that  the
    marriage broke down in 2005 and was dissolved in 2009. This  would  fit
    with the Appellant's chronology which  she  relied  on  in  2011.   The
    Appellant's marriage to SM may or may not have been  genuine,  however,
    that came to an end (I believe that there is evidence that he  returned
    to Sri Lanka).  The Appellant may have  been  the  victim  of  domestic
    abuse here.  She did not come to the UK to be with SM because they were
    married or in a relationship, but SM was no doubt keen for his children
    to be in the UK. Whatever the position with S, I find  that  there  was
    not a genuine or subsisting relationship between the Appellant  and  SM
    at this time.   The Appellant and SM resumed a relationship of  a  kind
    more recently to facilitate  entry  clearance.  They  have  decided  to
    advance a case on the basis that they are still lawfully married in the
    knowledge that if this is not the case then they would be  unlikely  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules. I do not need  to  seek  the  truth
    which would be an impossible task on the evidence in this case. I  must
    decide  whether  the  Appellant  has  established  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that she and SM are married for the purposes of para 352A
    of the Rules. She has not done so by a large margin.

35.  There are further issues which give rise to concerns about  credibility
    and the continuation of the marriage. SM accepted that not only did the
    Appellant rely on a false marriage certificate and divorce  certificate
    in 2010, but that the marriage certificate  now  relied  on  which  was
    submitted with the application for entry clearance  had  been  altered.
    His occupation was changed. His evidence is that this was done so  that
    when his family returned to  Sri  Lanka  in  2010  they  could  receive
    funding. When SM made an application for asylum  in  2011  he  declared
    that he was divorced. His evidence before Judge Solly was that this was
    to protect his family in Sri Lanka. After the grant of asylum in  2013,
    there was  no  application  for  family  reunion  until  2014.  Various
    explanations  have  been  given  for  this  behaviour  which  are   not
    individually implausible; however, when looked at in the round  against
    the background, they further undermine the credibility of the Appellant
    and SM. There are photographs of the Appellant and SM together in 2010,
    but considered in the round they are not sufficient to  establish  that
    SM and the Appellant are still married.

36.  Having considered the evidence before me, I accept that at the date  of
    the decision  there  was  a  relationship  of  sorts  between  and  the
    Appellant and SM. However, the Appellant has  not  established  on  the
    balance of probabilities that she and SM are still lawfully married  or
    that they have a relationship akin to marriage. The Appellant  has  not
    established  that  they  have  been  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship since 2005.  They have a relationship of sorts because the
    Appellant is the mother of their children. He sends her money and  they
    are in contact. It is likely he feels a sense of responsibility towards
    her.  This is not surprising because she remains in Sri  Lanka  without
    her children.  The Appellant is not able to establish  that  she  meets
    the requirements of the Rules. She cannot establish that she  is  still
    married to SM.  She has not established that the  relationship/marriage
    existed before SM left Sri Lanka in 2009. She has not established  that
    there is a genuine and subsisting relationship akin to marriage between
    her and SM.

37.  I go on to consider proportionality under article 8 of 1950  Convention
    on Human Rights on the basis that  the  decision  interferes  with  the
    Appellant's  family  life  with  D  and  A.   The   appeal   turns   on
    proportionality, with particular emphasis on A.  D was an adult at  the
    material time, but the impact of the decision  on  him  is  a  material
    factor to consider.

38.   There  is  considerable  evidence  before  me  about  A.  However,  it
    postdates the date of the decision and is of limited evidential  value.
    He was, at the date of the decision, aged 14. He was already in the  UK
    and had been separated from his  mother  for  10  months.  He  probably
    delayed coming to the UK until September 2015 because he did  not  want
    to leave his mother. There is no  evidence  from  A  about  whether  he
    wishes to stay here or return to be with his mother. The  family  chose
    for him to come here.  There was no guarantee that she would be granted
    entry  clearance  at  that  time.  In  the  light  of  the  Appellant's
    immigration history, this may not have been a sound  decision  for  the
    family to make. It may not have been in A's best interests to leave his
    mother at that stage.

39.  It could be argued that it was the decision of the family in  September
    2015 that A should join his father here in  September  that  interfered
    with A's family life with his  mother.   However,  I  accept  that  the
    decision is a further interference.  A's best interests are to be  with
    both his parents and this can only be achieved if his mother is granted
    entry clearance.  This is a primary factor to  put  into  the  balance.
    Neither D nor A is in any way to blame for  their  parents'  behaviour.
    The issue is whether the  interference  is  proportionate  taking  into
    account A's best interests. I have considered  that  D  would  also  be
    negatively impacted by the decision. He is a young adult  currently  at
    University.

40.  The outcome of a negative decision will be that A is unable to live  in
    the same country as both his parents. However, I find that  his  father
    and mother's marriage broke down in 2005 and he was not living with his
    father from 2005 onwards. He lived with his mother until 2015  when  he
    came here to join his father. If his mother is granted entry clearance,
    I am not satisfied that the relationship between her  and  SM  is  such
    that they will live  together.   They  did  not  do  so  in  2010.  The
    Appellant gave evidence at the hearing in 2011 about A and  the  impact
    of domestic violence on him. I do not know whether  the  Appellant  and
    her children have been victims of domestic abuse or whether this was  a
    complete fabrication.  If the family choses, it is open to A to  return
    to Sri Lanka to be reunited with his mother.  I can understand that  SM
    is keen that the Appellant is here because there are  childcare  issues
    arising from his need to work. It is of course natural  that  he  wants
    his children to be with him in the UK. A's brother is now studying  and
    has left the family home. It  will  cause  A  further  distress  to  be
    separated from his father, but he had not lived with him for many years
    prior to coming to the UK.

41.  A's best interests are a weighty factor in  favour  of  the  Appellant.
    They are a primary consideration; however, they are outweighed  by  the
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration control in the  light
    of the serious and sustained dishonest behaviour of the  Appellant  and
    SM. There are no compelling circumstances so as this appeal  should  be
    allowed outside of the Rules. The maintenance of immigration control is
    in the public interest. The Appellant has gone to considerable  lengths
    to deceive the Home Office and the Tribunal including submitting  false
    documents. SM has been complicit. The level of deceit is such that  the
    scales tip overwhelmingly in favour of the Respondent.

42.  I have considered what the House of Lords said in Huang  and  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department of  [2007]  UK  HL11  when  the  House
    acknowledged the need to give  weight  to  the  established  regime  of
    immigration control and stated as follows: -

         "The Authority will wish to consider and weigh all  that  tells  in
         favour of the refusal of leave which is challenged, with particular
         reference to justification under  Article  8(2).   There  will,  in
         almost any case, be certain general considerations to bear in mind;
         the general administrative desirability of applying known rules  if
         a system of immigration control is  to  be  workable,  predictable,
         consistent and fair as  between  one  applicant  and  another;  the
         damage to good administration and effective control if a system  is
         deceived  by  applicants  internationally  to  be  unduly   porous,
         unpredictable or perfunctory; the need to discourage  non-nationals
         admitted to the country temporarily from believing  that  they  can
         commit serious crimes and yet be allowed to  remain;  the  need  to
         discourage fraud, deception and deliberate breaches of the law; and
         so on"

43.  The appeal is dismissed under article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 6 October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

