
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
HU/20395/2016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 12 February 2018                   |On 14 February 2018           |
|                                      |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                               Mr GURDIP SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Maholtra, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Gibb on 24 October 2017 against the determination
           of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien  who  had  dismissed  the
           appeal of the Appellant who had sought leave to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom on the  basis  of  10  years'  continuous  lawful
           residence and who had also raised Article 8 ECHR grounds outside
           the Immigration  Rules,  because  of  his  relationship  with  a
           British Citizen.  The decision and reasons was promulgated on 31
           August 2017.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of India, born there on 25 May 1967.
            The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  in
           1999 but had not left at the expiration of his visa as  required
           and remained unlawfully.  The lawful long  residence  claim  was
           thus  entirely  spurious.   Judge   O'Brien   found   that   the
           relationship relied on was genuine yet that it had  been  formed
           at  a  time  when  the  Appellant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
           unlawfully  and  that  his  partner  was  well  aware   of   the
           Appellant's lack of status.  The family life they  shared  could
           be lived in India and the partner's medical  condition  did  not
           present insurmountable obstacles as the  necessary  support  and
           treatment was available there.  The Appellant could obtain  work
           in India.  Both he and his partner spoke Punjabi  and  both  had
           family in India. The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had erred in finding that there were  no
           insurmountable  obstacles,  given  the   Appellant's   partner's
           vulnerability and whether or not she  would  be  able  to  enter
           India.   Possibly  the  Chikwamba  principle  should  have  been
           considered if the decision and reasons could be read as  finding
           that the couple could meet  the  Immigration  Rules  apart  from
           overstaying, although that reading was not shared by Judge Gibb.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.


      Submissions


      5.    Ms Maholtra for the Appellant  relied  on  the  permission.   In
           summary counsel submitted that Judge O'Brien had not  taken  the
           Appellant's  partner's  state  of  health  into   account   when
           considering whether or not there were insurmountable  obstacles.
           The partner suffered from bi polar disorder which had  worsened.
           The   condition   was   acute   and   amounted   to   compelling
           circumstances.   The presence of the Appellant  was  needed  for
           the support he provided.  The judge had not  considered  all  of
           the facts, nor the Chikwamba principle.  The  determination  was
           unsafe and should be set aside and remade by another  First-tier
           Tribunal judge.


      6.    Mr Clarke for the Respondent relied on the rule  24  notice  and
           submitted that there was plainly no material error of law.   The
           judge  had  made  sustainable  findings  of  fact,   in   effect
           alternative findings considering the case at its highest.   Even
           then the judge had found that treatment  and  support  would  be
           available in India.  The judge had also found that the Appellant
           would be able to obtain work in India.  The permission to appeal
           application was simply a disagreement with the findings of fact.
            The onwards appeal should be dismissed.


      7.    In reply, Ms Maholtra revisited the whole case.  Although  India
           was a haven for health tourism, the difficulty was  continuation
           of the existing treatment for the partner which  the  judge  had
           not considered.  Then there was the problem of obtaining a  visa
           as the couple  were  not  married.   The  relevant  Home  Office
           Guidance had not been taken into  account  by  the  judge.   The
           judge's findings were inadequate.




      No material error of law finding


      8.    In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal (albeit
           with only partial encouragement) was not based on a full reading
           of the determination, and moreover failed to reflect the absence
           of merit in the whole claim.  As noted above, the 10 year lawful
           continuous residence application  was  entirely  spurious.   The
           Appellant's partner formed the  relationship  knowing  that  the
           Appellant was unlawfully present.  No attempt was made  for  him
           to return to India to seek entry clearance sponsored by her,  as
           so obviously could have been done prior to 9 July 2012 when  the
           Immigration Rules were made far more  demanding,  e.g.,  by  the
           introduction of Appendix FM.   There was no  evidence  that  the
           possibility does not remain: see Appendix FM E-ECP.3.3.


      9.    Judge O'Brien's decision  and  reasons  was  full  and  careful,
           setting out the procedural history, the evidence and submissions
           in detail.  There can be no doubt that the judge was correct  to
           find that the Appellant's partner would be able  to  obtain  the
           necessary treatment and support for  her  conditions  in  India,
           where of course the Appellant's support would  be  available  to
           her, which was advanced as  central  to  her  well  being.   The
           Appellant and his partner were plainly of a shared cultural  and
           social background, Punjabi speaking, with  family  in  India  on
           both sides.


      10.   It was submitted in the grounds for permission  to  appeal  that
           the judge failed to consider the Home Office Guidance on  Family
           Life as a Partner or Parent.  There was no copy of the  Guidance
           current at the date of decision in the appeal file, no  skeleton
           argument had been served at the first instance hearing  and  the
           Judge's record of proceedings makes no  reference  to  any  such
           submission made on the Appellant.  The  judge  can  hardly  have
           been expected to consider the Guidance if he had not been  asked
           to do so.  In any event, as he considered the  Appellant's  case
           at its highest, the Guidance can have made no difference to  the
           outcome.


      11.   It was further submitted that the judge had failed  to  consider
           whether or not the Appellant's partner would be able to obtain a
           visa for India but there was no evidence about  that  contention
           in the appeal file and no suggestion that the argument had  been
           put to the judge.  In any event, if as was submitted before  the
           Upper Tribunal the main problem was that the Appellant  and  his
           partner are not married,  the  solution  lies  in  their  hands.
           There was no evidence that this solution was not available.


      12.   There was no doubt that the Appellant's lack of status meant  he
           failed to meet the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM.   There  were
           also financial issues (see [30] of the decision), such that  the
           Chikwamba principle as discussed in Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ  440
           was inapplicable and required no discussion.


      13.   The tribunal agrees with  Mr  Tarlow's  submissions  as  to  the
           judge's analysis and findings, which were open to the judge, and
           cannot be impugned as superficial, inadequate  or  unreasonable.
           The tribunal concludes that Ms Maholtra's valiant and  heartfelt
           submissions, like the onwards grounds, amount in the end  to  no
           more than disagreement with the judge's decision.  The  tribunal
           finds that there was no material error of law  in  the  decision
           challenged.


      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
      material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated: 12 February 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
