
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20819/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2018                              |On 10 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               Sikhanyiso [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rhind, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  He was born on [ ] 1983.

 2. The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  15
    August 2016 to refuse his application for leave to remain.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 12  September  2017,  Judge  Hussain  (the
    judge)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal.   The  judge  found  the  public   interest   outweighed   the
    appellant's private and family life.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred in dismissing the appeal because:

      a) he accepted that the appellant enjoyed  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with his son.  See [15];

      b) he misdirected himself on the application of EX1(a) and s.117B(6);

      c) at [13] the judge referred  to  Article  8  being  infringed  where
         s.117B(6) criteria was met and referred to the  Home  Office's  own
         guidance which "... expressly states  that  once  a  child  reaches
         seven years' residence in the UK there need to  be  strong  reasons
         for refusing leave".

 5. The grounds claim that the judge's decision "... contains at least  one
    material error of law ...".

 6. Judge Mailer granted leave on 26 February 2018.  It reads inter alia as
    follows:

         "    ... There are pages  missing  from  the  respondent's  refusal
             letter in the bundle produced in the  file.   The  appellant's
             appeal was based on his parental relationship  with  his  son,
             born in the UK on [ ] 2010 and who had  been  in  the  UK  for
             seven years at the date of the hearing.  He was not a  British
             citizen.  His application had been refused  under  EX.1.   The
             judge noted that this is in like terms with s.117B(6)  of  the
             2002 Act.  See [10].

         2.    The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  exercises   parental
             responsibilities towards his son and is a loving father  [12].
             He found under s.117B(6) that the child did not live with  the
             appellant and is not dependent on  him.   He  lives  with  his
             mother permanently save for spending time with  the  appellant
             every second weekend.  If the appellant were removed the child
             would be continued to be cared by his mother (sic).   He  thus
             did not meet the requirements under Section 117B(6)  or  under
             EX.1 [15].

         3.   The grounds contend that at no stage did the SSHD  attempt  to
             invite the judge to  find  that  he  could  not  benefit  from
             EX.1(a) or Article 8 if it was found that he  had  a  parental
             relationship.  The judge erred in dismissing the appeal having
             found that a genuine and subsisting relationship  exists.   It
             had been submitted to  the  judge  that  the  alternative  for
             family life continuing was that his son, as  an  EU  national,
             would be required to relocate with him.  However, it had  been
             submitted that the child's mother would not consent.

         4.   It is arguable that the issue was not whether the son would be
             required to relocate to Zimbabwe but whether it was reasonable
             in the circumstances to expect him to."

 7. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Ms Rhind relied upon the grounds.  The judge did not  engage  with  the
    evidence.

 9. Ms Everett submitted that there was no error.  The judge  did  not  err
    with regard to s.117B(6) because there was never any possibility of the
    child leaving the United Kingdom.



Conclusion on Error of Law

10. The judge did not err in what he had  to  say  regarding  s.117B(6)  in
    terms of Treebhawon (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674  (IAC).   In  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant's family life with  his  son,
    there was no issue that the child would ever leave the  United  Kingdom
    because he lives with his mother.  The appellant only  sees  him  every
    other weekend.  See Treebhawon at [17], the issues in  s.117B  must  be
    relevant.

11. The judge did not err in finding that the appellant did  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules or the requirements of s.117B.  Nevertheless, he  was
    then obliged to continue, as he did, to carry  out  an  analysis  under
    Article 8 as to whether the decision was proportionate.  He  found  the
    appellant enjoys a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  son.
    He found that separating the child from his  father  would  affect  the
    child's emotional wellbeing and was contrary  to  his  best  interests.
    There was considerable evidence  before  the  judge  from  the  child's
    mother.  See [12] of  the  decision.   She  spoke  of  the  appellant's
    "...... close involvement with their son".  There had  been  no  family
    court proceedings.  The appellant and his former partner had come to an
    amicable arrangement regarding visiting contact.   There  was  evidence
    that the appellant attended parent's evenings, his son's birthdays  and
    generally helped out as and when needed.  The judge accepted the former
    partner's evidence as credible  "......  to  show  that  the  appellant
    exercises his parental responsibilities towards his son and is a loving
    father".

12. The judge erred materially because in his Article  8  analysis,  having
    recorded the evidence he had heard which  I  have  set  out  above,  he
    failed to take these  matters  into  account.   It  is  true  that  the
    appellant had flouted immigration law and had remained here  unlawfully
    for many years.   It  also  appears  true  that  he  had  been  working
    unlawfully.  Clearly the appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules or the requirements of s.117B but the judge's analysis should not
    have ended there in a finding that the  public  interest  demanded  his
    removal.  Having recorded the evidence of the appellant's  relationship
    with the child, it was incumbent upon him to take  that  evidence  into
    account in his Article 8 proportionality exercise.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and will be remade
    following a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 27 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

