
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20426/2018
                                                               HU/20428/2018
                                                                         (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 17 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                  jeevan kala gurung (the first appellant)
                     dipak gurung (the second appellant)
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herlihy ("the judge"), promulgated on 27 June  2019,  in
    which she dismissed the appellants' appeals  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of their respective human rights claims (made in the context of
    applications for entry clearance).

 2. The appellants, who are sister and brother in their  mid-thirties,  and
    both citizens of Nepal, made the entry clearance applications in  order
    to join their father ("the sponsor") in the United Kingdom.   He  is  a
    retired Gurkha soldier who had settled in the United Kingdom in 2016.

 3. The appellants' case throughout has been that they are, and always have
    been, materially supported by their father, with the  consequence  that
    they have enjoyed "family life" within  the  meaning  of  Article  8(1)
    ECHR.  In turn, the historic injustice done to former  Gurkha  soldiers
    in the past meant that  a  refusal  of  entry  clearance  breached  the
    appellants' protected rights with reference to Article 8(2).

Procedural issues

 4. Before turning to  the  substance  of  these  appeals,  I  address  the
    procedural issues which have arisen as  a  result  of  the  exceptional
    circumstances brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic.

 5. Before these cases could be listed  for  oral  error  of  law  hearings
    before the Upper Tribunal, emergency measures put in place as a  result
    of the pandemic took effect.  In  light  of  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunal's  Pilot  Practice  Direction  of  23  March  2020   and   the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020, the ability of the Upper Tribunal
    to make decisions without  a  hearing,  pursuant  to  rule  34  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, was highlighted.   This
    course of  action  was  always,  of  course,  subject  to  the  central
    importance of ensuring fairness to both parties.

 6. In the present cases, directions were sent out by the Vice-President on
    1 May 2020.  These stated that a provisional view had been reached that
    the error of law issue could be properly determined without a  hearing.
    The parties were provided with the opportunity to raise any  objections
    to this course of action within a stipulated timeframe.  In the  event,
    whilst the parties have provided helpful  written  submissions  as  the
    merits of the appeals, nothing has been said in respect of  the  method
    of reaching a decision.

 7. In addition to the Pilot Practice Direction, the Presidential  Guidance
    Note, and the need for fairness, I  have  taken  full  account  of  the
    following matters:

      i. the overriding objective;

     ii. the nature and content of the challenge  to  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier   Tribunal   and   the   parties'   respective   written
         submissions;

    iii. the guidance set out by the Supreme Court in Osborn v Parole  Board
         [2013] UKSC 61.

 8. Whilst the appellant's challenge  does  concern  issues  of  procedural
    fairness, these have been clearly addressed in the written submissions.
     The scope of the appeals to the Upper Tribunal is  narrow,  given  the
    restrictive grant of  permission  (see  below).   There  are  no  other
    material matters that have arisen upon my consideration of  the  papers
    which would necessitate an oral hearing.

 9. In all the circumstances, I  have  concluded  that  I  can  fairly  and
    properly decide the error of law  issue  in  these  appeals  without  a
    hearing.




The respondent's refusal notices and review

10. The refusal notices for each of the appellants, both  dated  17  August
    2018, are essentially identical.  They  conclude  that  the  appellants
    were in good health and had close family ties in Nepal.   It  was  said
    that there was nothing preventing their parents from returning to  live
    in Nepal.  It  is  concluded  that  the  appellants  were  not  "wholly
    financially and/or emotionally dependent" on the sponsor.  Dealing with
    Article 8, it is said that there was no  family  life  as  between  the
    appellant and their parents, and that the refusal  of  entry  clearance
    was proportionate.

11. Following the lodgement of appeal notices, the appellants'  cases  were
    reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager on 28 February 2019.   It  is  a
    fairly lengthy document, although much of it is taken up with  somewhat
    generic references  to  case-law  and  the  criteria  set  out  in  the
    respondent's policy (Annex K of IDI Chapter 15).  The following passage
    is found in section C of the review:

         "I note that the appellant has  provided  some  evidence  of  money
         transfer receipts and some WhatsApp messages dating from  September
         2017.  However, this evidence is not sufficient to satisfy me  that
         there is a relationship of dependency between the appellant and his
         sponsor.  I take into account that his sponsor settled in the UK in
         February 2016.  However, I note that his father was aged 69 when he
         settled in the UK.  The appellant has  failed  to  explain  how  he
         supported himself before his parents settled in the UK.  I find  it
         difficult to believe that a  69  years  old  man  would  have  been
         working and supporting the appellant when he was residing in  Nepal
         before February 2016, when his parents were settled in the  UK.   I
         am  satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  there   is   no
         relationship of dependency either financial  or  emotional  between
         him and his father."   (Underlining added)

12. The review maintained the original refusals in full.

The judge's decision

13. At [1.3]-[1.7] the judge sets out in some detail the  reasons  provided
    by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal  notices.   At  [2.2]  the  judge
    summarises  the  contents  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Managers  review,
    including the point underlined in the passage quoted above.   The  oral
    evidence of the sponsor is set out in some detail at [4.1]-[4.6]. [5.2]
    includes an express reference to Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

14. The judge's findings of fact are  set  out  at  [5.6]-[5.8],  with  the
    conclusions drawn therefrom at [5.9]-5.10].  She did  not  accept  that
    the appellants had been financially dependent upon the sponsor prior to
    the latter's settlement in the United Kingdom  in  2016.   One  of  the
    reasons for this finding was that stated by the Entry Clearance Manager
    in their review (see para 11,  above)  She  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellants had been financially dependent upon the  sponsor  after  his
    move to this country.  The judge was unimpressed by the claim that  the
    appellants were themselves unable to find regular employment in  Nepal.
    She was also not satisfied that the  two  appellants  in  fact  resided
    together at the same family home, given that  money  transfer  receipts
    appear to have shown different addresses.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    entire family unit had resided together before the sponsor and his wife
    left Nepal in 2016.  The judge accepted that there had been two  visits
    by the sponsor to Nepal  since  his  departure,  and  that  there  were
    telephone communications.   However,  she  did  not  accept  that  this
    amounted to emotional dependency.

15. On the basis of these primary findings, the judge went on  to  conclude
    that there was no  family  life  as  between  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsor.  In essence, the consequence of this conclusion was  that  the
    respondent's refusals of the human rights  claims  were  proportionate.
    The appeals were duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

16. Four grounds put forward in the application for permission.  First,  it
    was asserted  that  the  judge's  adverse  findings  on  the  issue  of
    financial dependency, both when the sponsor  was  still  in  Nepal  and
    thereafter,  were  flawed   by   reason   of   procedural   unfairness.
    Specifically, it was said that the  sponsor  had  not  been  given  the
    opportunity to address the judge's concerns: he  had  not  been  cross-
    examined on relevant matters; the judge had not raised  the  issues  of
    her own volition; the points were  not  relied  on  by  the  Presenting
    Officer  in  submissions;  and  the  points  were  not  raised  in  the
    respondent's original refusal notices.  As  to  the  law,  reliance  is
    placed upon Browne and Dunn (1893) 6 R 67; Markem  Corp  v  Zipher  Ltd
    [2005] EWCA Civ 267; and MK (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 1548.

17. The second ground asserts that the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  take
    account of the sponsor's exemplary service record in the  British  Army
    when assessing his overall credibility.

18.  The  third  and  fourth  grounds  essentially  argue  that  the  judge
    misapplied the relevant test for the existence of family life,  as  set
    out in Rai, and, having done so, then went on to consider the  evidence
    on an erroneous premise.

19. By a decision dated 2 December  2019,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell
    granted permission on grounds 1 and 2, but refused  it  in  respect  of
    grounds 3 and 4.  Judge Blundell raised the  point  that  although  the
    procedural unfairness challenge was arguable, it may be said  that  the
    sponsor had been given notice that his honesty had been put in question
    by what was said in the Entry Clearance Manager's review.   In  respect
    of this, the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Howlett v Davies [2018]
    1 WLR 948 is cited.

20. There has been no subsequent application by the appellants to  rely  on
    grounds 3  and  4.   I  have  proceeded  to  consider  the  appellants'
    challenge solely on the basis of the first two grounds.

The parties' written submissions

21. Detailed written submissions were provided by Mr  Jesurum  of  Counsel,
    dated 12 May 2020.  The two grounds upon which permission  was  granted
    are taken in reverse order, it being said that the success under ground
    2 would be sufficient for the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be
    set aside.  It is submitted that in addition to the simple fact of  the
    sponsor's long and unblemished service record in  the  Gurkha  Brigade,
    there was supporting evidence (in the form of a Certificate of Service)
    which emphasised his reliability and honesty.  The judge's  failure  to
    specifically take  this  into  account  when  assessing  the  sponsor's
    credibility was a material error of law.

22. As to ground 1, the submissions adopt the following  approach.   First,
    it is said that the "rule" in Browne v Dunn applies in all cases before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In essence, points to be relied on by a fact-
    finder (in this case, the judge) against an individual's evidence  must
    be put to that person at the hearing order that/she has an  opportunity
    to address them.  Second, even if Browne v Dunn does not apply in  such
    proceedings, what is said in MK (Sri Lanka) does.  In  particular,  the
    respondent should be taken as accepting, or  at  least  not  disputing,
    evidence  that  has  not  been  the  subject  of  challenge  in  cross-
    examination.  In the present  cases,  it  is  said  that  the  relevant
    matters held against the sponsor's honesty were not put to him  at  the
    hearing at all.  Third, and in response to the point  raised  by  Judge
    Blundell in his grant of permission, it is said that the passage in the
    Entry Clearance Manager's review quoted above and relied  upon  by  the
    judge at the end of [5.7] did not constitute sufficient notice  to  the
    sponsor of the matters subsequently  relied  upon  by  the  judge  when
    finding several aspects of the evidence to be  essentially  untruthful.
    Fourth, even if the review had provided some  form  of  notice  to  the
    sponsor, the fact that the particular point (or indeed any others) were
    not either raised in cross-examination or in  submissions,  or  by  the
    judge herself, rendered the adverse credibility  findings  procedurally
    unfair.  Fifth, even if the judge  was  entitled  to  take  the  points
    against the sponsor without matters having  been  put  to  him  at  the
    hearing, it is said that she nonetheless mischaracterised the  evidence
    before her (specifically in respect of the sponsor's Army pension as  a
    source of income).  It was an error for the judge  not  to  have  taken
    full account of the evidence when finding against the sponsor.

23. The respondent's written submissions  are  dated  21  May  2020.   They
    assert that the respondent had never accepted the  claim  of  financial
    dependency and that it was wrong to suggest that  this  issue  was  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  No concessions of fact  were  made  by
    the  respondent  at  the  hearing.   Questions  relating  to  financial
    dependency were put to the sponsor.  Finally, it is said that the Entry
    Clearance Manager's review clearly put the sponsor's honesty in  issue.
    Reference is made to Howlett v Davies.

Decision on error of law

24. I have concluded that the judge  did  err  in  law  when  reaching  her
    adverse findings  in  respect  of  the  sponsor's  evidence.   In  this
    respect, grounds 1 and 2 have been made out.

25. There is in my view an interesting point of  general  importance  which
    potentially arises in these appeals, namely whether  what  is  said  in
    Browne v Dunn applies to all appeals before the First-tier Tribunal (or
    indeed the Upper Tribunal when it remakes decisions). At pages 70-71 of
    the law report, Lord Herschell stated:

         "... I cannot help saying that it seemed to  me  to  be  absolutely
         essential to the proper conduct of the case, where it  is  intended
         to suggest that a witness is not speaking the truth on a particular
         point, to direct his attention to the fact by some questions put in
         cross-examination showing that that imputation is  intended  to  be
         made, and not to take his evidence and  pass  it  by  as  a  matter
         altogether unchallenged, and then, when it is impossible for him to
         explain, as perhaps he might have been able to do if such questions
         had been put to  him,  the  circumstances  which  it  is  suggested
         indicate that the story he tells ought not to be believed, to argue
         that he is a witness unworthy of credit.  My Lords, I  have  always
         understood that if you intend to impeach a witness you  are  bound,
         whilst he is in the box, to give him an opportunity of  making  any
         explanation which is open to him; and, as it seemed to me, that  is
         not only a rule of professional practice  in  the  conduct  of  the
         case,  but  is  essential  to  fair  play  and  fair  dealing  with
         witnesses."

26. The implications of a strict application  of  this  principle  in  this
    jurisdiction may well be  considerable.   However,  on  the  particular
    facts of these appeals and for the reasons set out below,  I  need  not
    address what might otherwise be described as the "bigger issue".

27. What I would say, however, is that it must surely be good  practice  on
    the part of any judge to identify the relevant issues in dispute at the
    outset of the hearing (certainly if this has not been done in  advance,
    for example by way of skeleton arguments, but, to avoid any  doubt,  in
    any event).  For these issues  to  be  stated  in  writing  within  the
    decision (perhaps in a designated sub-section or within  a  summary  of
    the representatives' submissions) would in my view be of real utility.

28. For the purposes of the present appeals, I take the starting  point  as
    being the  need  to  ensure  that  a  witness  must  be  given  a  fair
    opportunity to meet points that may ultimately be  held  against  them,
    particularly where their honesty is in question.  It  seems  to  me  as
    though this general principle is uncontroversial.

29. The need to ensure fairness will therefore normally come  down  to  the
    question of whether sufficient notice has been given  to  the  witness.
    At its highest, the appellants' argument is that such notice  can  only
    properly be given if specific questions are put at the  hearing  itself
    (the passage  from  Browne  v  Dunn  cited  above,  refers).   However,
    approaching this issue from further down the ladder,  so  to  speak,  I
    take into account the  conclusions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  its
    judgements in Howlett v Davies and Deepak Fertilisers and Petrochemical
    Ltd v Davy McKee (UK) London Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 1396.  At [39] of  the
    former case, the Court observed as follows:

         "39. It is perhaps  worth  adding  two  comments.  First,  where  a
         witness' honesty is to be challenged, it will  always  be  best  if
         that is explicitly put to the witness. There can then be  no  doubt
         that honesty is in issue. But what ultimately matters is  that  the
         witness has had fair notice of a challenge to his  or  her  honesty
         and an opportunity to deal with it. It may be that in a  particular
         context  a  cross-examination  which  does  not   use   the   words
         "dishonest" or "lying" will give a witness fair warning. That  will
         be a matter for the trial judge to decide. Secondly, the fact  that
         a party has not alleged fraud in his pleading may not preclude  him
         from suggesting to a witness in cross-examination that he is lying.
         That must, in fact, be a common occurrence."

30. At [50] of Deepak Fertilisers and Petrochemical  Ltd,  Latham  LJ  held
    that:

         "Failure to cross-examine  will  not,  however,  always  amount  to
         acceptance of the witness's testimony, if for example  the  witness
         has had notice to the contrary beforehand or the story itself is of
         an incredible or romancing character"

31. On the respondent's case, the requisite  notice  was  provided  to  the
    appellants (and, by extension, the  sponsor)  in  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's review.  In my view, even on  the  basis  that  notice  of  a
    dispute as to the sponsor's credibility was raised in that review,  the
    effect of this was distinctly limited.  First, it related to  one,  and
    only one,  aspect  of  the  assertions  made  in  the  entry  clearance
    application and the subsequent grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: namely that the appellants  had  been  financially  dependent
    upon the sponsor whilst he was last living in Nepal.   This  suggestion
    was deemed by the Entry Clearance Manager to be "difficult to believe".
     No other specific credibility points were taken.  It  is  also  to  be
    recalled that no such  issues  were  raised  in  the  original  refusal
    notices.  The second limitation is this.  The comments contained within
    the review pre-dated the sponsor's evidence  subsequently  provided  in
    his witness statement.  This evidence expressly included the  assertion
    that he had indeed been financially supporting the appellants prior  to
    2016, relying in the main upon his pension from the British  Army  (see
    para 7 at page 6 of the appellants' bundle).  Thus, the aspersions cast
    upon the sponsor's honesty, such as they were, had not occurred  within
    the full evidential picture.

32. Having regard to the above, I conclude that  to  the  extent  that  any
    notice was provided to the sponsor within the review, a  bare  reliance
    upon  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's  comment  was,   without   more,
    insufficient to find against  the  sponsor's  honesty  as  regards  the
    specific issue of the claimed financial support to the appellants  pre-
    2016.  From my reading of  the  judge's  decision  and  her  record  of
    proceedings, I see no reference to the sponsor having  been  questioned
    by anyone as to how he  had  provided  such  support.   Such  questions
    could, and really should, have emanated in the first instance from  the
    Presenting Officer.  In any event, the judge, if she was  at  least  of
    the provisional view that this point might count against the  sponsor's
    credibility, ought to have either clarified matters  with  the  sponsor
    herself, or raised the point with the representatives at the outset  of
    the hearing.  The failure to address the issue at the hearing turns out
    to be significant.  This is because the sponsor had  provided  evidence
    that he had been  in  receipt  of  a  pension  from  the  British  Army
    (evidence that seemed to have been entirely unchallenged) and  that  it
    was this source of income which went  to  support  the  appellants  (in
    combination with what appears to have been  small-scale  earnings  from
    farm-work): it was never a question of the sponsor having to work as  a
    69-year-old in order to provide the support.  This evidence was  simply
    not considered by the judge.  In this way, the failure to put  relevant
    matters to the sponsor at the hearing very probably led the judge  into
    error.  The error can properly be described as procedural unfairness in
    the sense  that  the  sponsor  was  not  afforded  the  opportunity  of
    addressing concerns as to his honesty in the context  of  the  evidence
    that he had put forward (as opposed simply to a  comment  made  by  the
    Entry  Clearance  Manager  soon  after  the   appeals   were   lodged).
    Alternatively, the error could be categorised as a failure by the judge
    to take relevant evidence into account; a failure which  resulted  from
    relevant points not been put to the sponsor  at  the  hearing.   Either
    way, the error, relating as it did to the important issue  of  previous
    financial  support,  was  my  view  clearly  material  to  the  overall
    assessment of whether there was family life.

33. The judge also did not accept that the  sponsor  had  been  financially
    supporting the appellants after his settlement in the United Kingdom in
    2016.  Given that the sponsor  had  specifically  stated  that  he  had
    provided such support (by using part of the public funds  to  which  he
    was entitled, together with his Army pension: see paras 12-13 at page 7
    of the appellants' bundle), the judge must be taken  to  have  rejected
    the credibility of that evidence.  The Entry Clearance Manager's review
    contains no assertion that anything said by the sponsor at  that  stage
    relating to support from the United Kingdom was untrue.  I can  see  no
    reference in the decision or record of proceedings to the  effect  that
    the sponsor's evidence on this point was specifically challenged at the
    hearing.  I conclude that on the specific issue  of  financial  support
    being provided from the United Kingdom, the sponsor was not put on  any
    notice that this aspect of his evidence was thought to  be  untruthful.
    It certainly cannot properly be said that the claim  to  have  provided
    the appellants with some money from  the  public  funds  was  fanciful:
    individuals are  entitled  to  spend  those  funds  as  they  see  fit.
    Further, it cannot be right to  suggest  that  a  single  reference  to
    credibility concerns contained in the review constituted fair notice to
    the sponsor that anything and everything he might subsequently state in
    evidence was to be deemed untruthful.  At the very least, if  this  was
    indeed the respondent's view, it should have been expressly  stated  to
    the judge at the outset of the hearing.  In the  absence  of  any  such
    statement, cross-examination on the point, or closing  submissions,  it
    was incumbent upon the judge, as a matter of  fairness,  to  raise  any
    issues of concern herself.  This did not occur, and I conclude that the
    judge's adverse credibility  finding  this  particular  aspect  of  the
    sponsor's evidence is flawed by reason of procedural unfairness.   This
    error is also material.

34. Similarly, although with less potency,  the  points  held  against  the
    sponsor's evidence  at  [5.7]  concerning  the  residence  of  the  two
    appellants and the issuance of a passport to the  second  appellant  in
    2014 were neither raised in the review, nor addressed at the hearing in
    any form.  Again, the sponsor cannot be said to have been  put  on  any
    fair notice that these aspects of his evidence were  considered  to  be
    untruthful.   It  follows  that  there  was  also  material  procedural
    unfairness here.

35. The errors I have identified above go to  the  core  issue  of  whether
    family life existed as between the appellants  and  the  sponsor.   The
    judge's conclusion that there was no such family life is  substantially
    undermined, as is  the  consequent  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
    refusal of the human rights claims was proportionate.  On  this  basis,
    the judge's decision must be set aside.

36. I turn briefly to ground 2.  It is of course the case that anybody,  no
    matter what their professional or personal background may be, can  give
    truthful or untruthful evidence.  Each case is fact-specific.  What  is
    important is that all relevant evidence  is  taken  into  account  when
    assessing an individual's credibility.  In  the  present  appeals,  the
    sponsor  provided  his   Certificate   of   Service   document.    This
    specifically stated that he had been deemed a "reliable"  and  "honest"
    individual over the course of his significant service for  the  British
    Army.  In my view, this was evidence that should have been specifically
    taken into account by the judge when assessing the  sponsor's  honesty.
    It was all the more important to do so given that a number  of  matters
    going to his credibility had not even been put to him at  the  hearing.
    In all circumstances, I consider that the judge erred in  this  respect
    also.  This is a second basis upon  which  her  decision  must  be  set
    aside.

Disposal

37. In their respective submissions, neither party has addressed the  issue
    of disposal.   I  do  not  propose  this  stage  to  send  out  further
    directions seeking their views.

38. I have  given  careful  consideration  to  para  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statement: a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is  the  exception  to
    the rule that the matter  will  be  retained  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    However, the core issue in these appeals  involves  the  assessment  of
    subjective evidence, in particular the credibility of the  sponsor.   I
    have concluded that the appropriate course of action is to remit  these
    appeals in order that extensive fact-finding can be undertaken  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to the requisite component parts of the  "family
    life" test under Article 8.  There shall be no  preserved  findings  of
    fact.

Anonymity

39. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and I  have
    not been asked to do so.  I make no such direction.



Notice of Decision

40. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

41. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

42. I remit these appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) These appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House
         hearing centre);

      2) These appeals shall be reheard, with no preserved findings of fact;

      3) The remitted appeals shall not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Herlihy;

      4) The First-tier Tribunal shall issue any further directions  to  the
         parties, as appropriate.


Signed:  H Norton-Taylor   Date:  5 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
