
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20346/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a Hearing                    |On 29th September 2020               |
|25th September 2020                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 MARSALA [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. FtT Judge Dunipace dismissed Ms [R]'s appeal against the refusal of
         her  human  rights  claim  for  reasons  set  out  in  a   decision
         promulgated on 1st November 2019. Permission to appeal was  granted
         by FtT judge Ford on 31st March 2020. Directions  for  the  further
         conduct of the appeal were sent  on  7th  July  2020  and,  in  the
         circumstances surrounding COVID 19,  provision  was  made  for  the
         question of whether there was an error of law and if so whether the
         decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be  determined  on
         the papers.

      2. The respondent complied with  directions;  the  appellant  and  her
         legal representatives did not. There was no application  to  extend
         time by the appellant or her legal representatives. The  respondent
         has expressed her consent to the decision on  error  of  law  being
         taken on the papers.

      3. I  am  satisfied  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent together with the papers before me[1] are sufficient  to
         enable me to be able to take a decision  on  whether  there  is  an
         error of law in the decision of the  FtT  and  if  so  whether  the
         decision should be set aside, on the  papers  and  without  hearing
         oral submissions.

    Background

      4. Ms [R], an Albanian citizen, first arrived in the UK as  a  visitor
         on the 16th of June 2015 with a visit visa valid until 14  November
         2015. She left the UK and returned to Albania on the 27th  of  June
         2015. On 21 August 2015 she returned to the UK as a  visitor  along
         with her son, also an Albanian citizen born in April 2003, who  had
         a visit visa valid until the 27th of January 2016 and her daughter,
         an Albanian citizen born in August 2013, who had  a  similar  visit
         visa. Neither she nor her two children left the UK on the expiry of
         the visit visas. On 15 January 2018 she  made  an  application  for
         leave to remain on the basis of family life with her  partner  with
         her son and daughter as her dependants.

      5. That application was refused by the Secretary of State for  reasons
         set out in a decision dated the 19th of September  2018.  Miss  [R]
         exercised her statutory right of appeal. She was informed by letter
         from the first-tier tribunal on 12 October 2018 that  the  relevant
         documents for the two children had been omitted and  that  if  they
         were not submitted by the 19th of October 2018 the  tribunal  would
         deem that there was no valid appeal lodged by them. Those documents
         were not submitted  and  the  only  appeal  before  the  first-tier
         tribunal was that of Ms [R]. It was agreed  before  the  first-tier
         tribunal that although there  was  no  appeal  lodged  by  the  two
         children the appeal should in effect deal with the position  of  Ms
         [R] and  the  two  children  because  the  two  children  were  her
         dependants.

      6. It was agreed  before  the  first  tier  Tribunal  judge  that  the
         appellant and her partner, who has indefinite leave  to  remain  in
         the UK and is Kosovan, that she meets the criteria as laid down  in
         the  immigration  rules  relating  to   suitability,   eligibility,
         relationship, financial  requirements  and  the  sponsor's  English
         language requirement. It was not accepted by  the  respondent  that
         there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  family  relocating  to
         Albania or that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
         appellant's integration into Albania. The  two  children  were  not
         British citizens and have not lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for
         seven years. The older child was a child of her marriage which, the
         appellant states, was a forced marriage and the younger  child  was
         the child of the appellant and her partner as evidenced  by  a  DNA
         report.

    Error of law

      7. Judge Ford, who granted permission to appeal, admirably condensed 6
         pages of grounds of appeal to 2 points: that it was  arguable  that
         the tribunal erred in failing to apply  the  'Chikwamba'  principle
         and not recognising that to  require  the  appellant  and  her  two
         children to return to Albania to make entry clearance  applications
         does not serve the public interest given that the  requirements  of
         appendix FM are otherwise met and secondly  failing  to  adequately
         consider the best interests of the minor children and the impact on
         them of the appellant's removal.

      8. The first tier Tribunal judge does not address, in terms,  the  so-
         called 'Chikwamba' principle. Nevertheless the  judge  specifically
         considers the potential disruption of  family  life  and  that  the
         family as a whole could return to Albania. The  judge  specifically
         considers the employment opportunities available,  the  failure  of
         the appellant's partner to make  any  enquiries  as  to  employment
         opportunities for him specifically  in  Albania  and  considers  in
         particular that he himself  has  visited  and  maintains  links  in
         Albania. The older child's father is in Albania  and  there  is  no
         question but that the appellant's partner would be able  to  return
         or go to Albania. It is not submitted  that  the  family  would  be
         separated for a long period  of  time.  That  the  requirements  of
         appendix FM are met is a matter that is placed in  the  balance  in
         considering whether  the  decision  is  disproportionate.  In  this
         instance the judge weighed the public interest of  the  maintenance
         of immigration control where the  appellant  had  entered  the  UK,
         remained beyond her permitted lawful leave  for  some  considerable
         time before making an application for leave to  remain.  The  judge
         specifically addressed the evidence that was put before him  as  to
         the potential difficulties the appellant might meet in Albania  and
         reached conclusions that were plainly open to him  that  she  would
         not in her particular circumstances have difficulties. The skeleton
         argument  that  was   before   the   first-tier   tribunal   placed
         considerable weight on those issues which have not been pursued  in
         the appeal to the upper tribunal.

      9. The appellant does  not  fulfil  section  117B  of  the  2002  act.
         Although references is made to Chikwamba, the facts  of  this  case
         are not the. It was not submitted that it was not possible for  her
         partner to go to Albania, nor was  it  submitted  that  the  family
         would  be  separated  for  some  considerable  time.  Although  the
         appellant may meet appendix FM, the judge  reached  the  conclusion
         that there were not insurmountable obstacles  to  her  return;  she
         does not meet the relevant immigration Rules.  In  so  far  as  the
         impact upon the children is concerned, the judge  took  account  of
         the requirements of section 55. There does not appear to have  been
         anything in the documents that were before the first-tier  tribunal
         to suggest that an absence for a limited period of  time  would  be
         detrimental to the younger child. There is nothing so far as can be
         seen, in the papers  before  the  first-tier  tribunal  that  would
         indicate whether the older child is suffering from loss of  contact
         with his father and any other family members in Albania. The  judge
         took a decision on the basis of the evidence in front of him  which
         did not indicate that the children would have difficulties  in  re-
         establishing themselves in Albania or that the  family  would  have
         difficulties living together in Albania.  That  the  appellant  may
         succeed in an application for entry clearance was  a  factor  which
         the judge took into account, but it is not, in the circumstances of
         the evidence that was before the first tier Tribunal judge a matter
         that inevitably leads to a conclusion that  the  appeal  should  be
         allowed.

     10. The judge considered the evidence that was  before  him  which  has
         been recorded in the decision the subject of this appeal. It is not
         suggested that there was other evidence which the judge  failed  to
         take into account  or  that  the  judge  has  incorrectly  recorded
         evidence which was before him. It may be  that  another  judge  may
         have placed  differential  weight  on  different  elements  of  the
         evidence, but the decision reached by the judge was a decision that
         was  open  to  him  on  that  evidence.  It  was  not  perverse  or
         unreasonable and is not infected by an error of law.

     11. There is no error of  law  by  the  first-tier  tribunal  judge  in
         dismissing the appellants appeal.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  first-tier
    tribunal dismissing the appeal stands.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 25th September 2020
-----------------------
[1] (a) the respondent's bundle; (b) the bundle filed on behalf of the
appellant received by the Tribunal on 19th July 2018 and skeleton argument
dated 6th August 2019; (c) the decision of FtT Judge Dunipace; (d) the
application for permission to appeal with two sets of grounds; and (e) the
grant of permission to appeal.

