
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20200/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th July 2017                            |On 01 August 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                          (ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                daniel gordon
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Toal, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (brought on behalf of the entry clearance officer), I  shall
    refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant is a national of the United States  of  America  born  on
    6th February 1976. His appeal, against the refusal of entry  clearance,
    was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  I  Burnett  on  human  rights
    grounds on 3rd April 2017.

3.   The Respondent appealed on the ground that the judge erred  in  law  in
    allowing the Appellant's appeal on the basis that there were compelling
    and  exceptional  factors.  The  judge's  findings  were   inadequately
    reasoned and he gave weight  to  immaterial  matters.  It  was  further
    submitted that in assessing proportionality, the judge  relied  heavily
    on the findings of Collins J. in relation to the  Appellant's  previous
    applications, which were very different. The  entry  clearance  officer
    [ECO] had allowed the Appellant to enter the UK  on  several  occasions
    before refusing admission under paragraph 320(2)(c) of the  Immigration
    Rules and the Appellant was midway through his master's degree when the
    point was eventually taken. On this occasion, entry clearance was being
    sought to commence a course despite the Appellant falling foul  of  the
    general grounds for refusal. This difference was a  significant  factor
    and the judge failed to properly  direct  himself  in  accordance  with
    Patel & Ors v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    UKSC 72. The decision to refuse entry clearance could not be considered
    disproportionate on the particular facts of this case and  the  judge's
    finding was irrational.

4.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hutchinson  on  9th
    June 2017 for the following reasons: "It is arguable that the judge has
    erred in law and has misdirected himself by failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons why there are compelling and exceptional factors in this  case.
    It is arguable that the  judge  did  not  adequately  explain  why  the
    Appellant's private life is engaged and relied on  the  findings  of  a
    previous appeal which was a different application. Article 8 cannot  be
    used as a general dispensing power."


Submissions

5.   Mr Melvin submitted that  there  were  no  compelling  and  exceptional
    factors in this case and  he  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    paragraph 57 of Patel:


         "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8."

6.   Mr Melvin made three points: firstly, the decision was  not  adequately
    reasoned; secondly, the judge had misdirected himself  in  relation  to
    Patel; and thirdly, on the facts of the  case,  private  life  was  not
    engaged and therefore it was irrational to conclude that the refusal of
    entry clearance was disproportionate.

7.   Mr Toal submitted two authorities and encouraged me  not  to  interfere
    with the decision on the basis that there was any lack of reasoning. Mr
    Toal first addressed  private  life  and  submitted  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that there was interference  with  the  Appellant's  private
    life was one which was open to the judge on the evidence before him.

8.   Mr Toal submitted that the authorities  referred  to  in  the  skeleton
    argument before the judge showed that the social ties and relationships
    formed during an individual's studies rather, than the  course  itself,
    were what formed part of the individual's private life. The  judge  was
    well aware of this when considering the Appellant's private life and he
    quite  properly  started  with  the  previous  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ievins promulgated on 10th July 2015 (OA/15683/2014).

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ievins  found  that  the  London  School  of
    Economics [LSE] was part of the Appellant's community  and  the  social
    ties he had developed through being accepted on  and  participating  in
    the course there formed an important part  of  his  life.  They  had  a
    significant effect on the direction of his future and the direction  of
    his career. The Appellant had established a private life by  virtue  of
    his having been allowed leave to enter the United Kingdom to study  his
    master of public administration degree at  LSE.  Having  disclosed  his
    criminal conviction, he was allowed to enter on a number of  occasions.
    That allowed his private life to develop.  If the  Appellant  could  no
    longer enter the United Kingdom to continue his studies, there would be
    an interference  by  a  public  authority  with  the  exercise  of  the
    Appellant's rights under Article 8.

10.  The case before Judge Ievins was in relation to the  Appellant  seeking
    leave to enter to complete his master's degree. Mr Toal submitted  that
    there was evidence of social ties and he referred me to the Appellant's
    witness statement dated 23rd March 2015 that was before Judge Ievins in
    which the Appellant stated:


         "12. From the outset of the EMPA Programme, I was not disappointed.
              I immediately encountered  LSE  professors  and  fellow  EMPA
             students with whom I developed close relationships.


         ...


         26.  The relationships that I have developed with the academics and
             fellow students at the LSE and  with  the  institution  itself
             have become a very important part of my life and of the future
             that I am working for.


         27.   My  academic  work  depends  very  much   upon   social   and
             intellectual engagement with my peers and teachers. It does so
             at the level of informing the development of my ideas and  the
             direction that my academic work takes.  Academic work  is  not
             an  isolated  activity  but  takes  place   within   a   dense
             infrastructure of social and academic relationships."

11.  Mr Toal submitted that the following evidence was before Judge  Burnett
    in the Appellant's witness statement dated 31st January 2017:


         "12. When I was engaged on the master's course I  was  particularly
             encouraged by the LSE to pursue a PhD at that institution.


         13.  On the master's course, I wrote a research paper dealing  with
             the effectiveness of  government  policy  in  influencing  the
             adoption of clean energy technology...... I have a unique  and
             particular understanding of the workings  and  functioning  of
             the energy markets.  I have been able to draw on my  practical
             trading experience and apply it to academic  research.....  My
             paper got a very high grade and attracted a lot  of  interest.
             This was a key reason why I  was  encouraged  to  continue  my
             studies in a PhD framework.


         14.  My work was a perfect fit with the LSE which  is  one  of  the
             very few institutions in the entire world that  is  conducting
             research and study into the interaction between economics  and
             interrelated climate change factors.   The  research  proposal
             which I submitted was accepted and the LSE secured funding for
             the research from the Grantham Institute. It is rare  in  fact
             to have  this  interdisciplinary  approach  to  analysing  the
             workings of the energy market.


         ...


         18.   The  PhD  builds  on  my   master's.   I   have   established
             relationships with academics at the LSE.  I know Dr Ben  Groom
             very well from my master's and this is a unique opportunity to
             explore and  pursue  a  topic  that  is  of  intense  personal
             interest to me and which is at the heart of my aspirations  to
             research and develop an academic career.


         19.  It would be impossible to conduct the PhD  course  of  studies
             remotely by Skype or  video-link,  because  the  PhD  involved
             direct one to one contact and group participation.... There is
             a specific class that I need to attend on  29th  August  2017.
             The PhD and research will involve intense discussion, analysis
             and interactive exchange of ideas with reference to  data  and
             economic models. The contact time will be significant  and  it
             is totally impossible to conduct a PhD of this nature in  this
             field on this material remotely."


12.  There was also an e-mail from Mr  B  Groom  which  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant had funding and that the course could be deferred until  next
    year whilst the Appellant  sorted  out  his  visa.  The  Appellant  was
    committed to joining the programme in September 2017.

13.  Mr Toal referred me to paragraph  58  of  the  judge's  decision  which
    states: "It was asserted on the Appellant's behalf that the PhD  course
    in the UK and at LSE was the appropriate course  and  this  course  was
    best  placed  to  offer  the  particular  course.  I  was  referred  to
    correspondence between the LSE and the Appellant about the  course  and
    the nature of  the  course.   This  included  that  the  Appellant  was
    required to attend meetings and seminars in the UK as part of his  PhD.
    The correspondence also referred to the funding that had  been  secured
    by LSE to support the research."

14.  Mr Toal submitted that there was sufficient evidence before  the  judge
    to enable him to conclude that the Appellant  had  established  private
    life in the UK and the refusal of entry clearance interfered with  that
    private life.

15.  Mr Toal submitted that the judge's assessment of proportionality was  a
    balanced one.  The judge acknowledged the matters weighing against  the
    Appellant and appreciated the distinction between the case  before  him
    and that before Judge Ievins. The judge was well aware  that  this  was
    not an application to come to the UK to complete a course  but  was  an
    application to come to the UK to start a course. The  judge  considered
    all factors which weighed in favour of the Appellant and in  favour  of
    the ECO in refusing the application. He gave due weight to the decision
    of Judge Ievins and took this as a starting point.  His  conclusion  at
    paragraph 68 that the Appellant had established private life was  based
    on sound legal principles, which were not challenged by the Respondent,
    and it was adequately reasoned.

16.  In relation to Patel, Mr Toal submitted  that  the  Respondent's  point
    was mistaken.  Patel was a case  where  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules. In  this  case,  the  Immigration  Rules
    required the Appellant's exclusion. The relevant Immigration  Rule  was
    set out at paragraph 50 of the judge's decision:

         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused
             (c)  has been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12
                  months but less than 4 years, unless a period of 10  years
                  has passed since the end of the sentence ...
         Where this paragraph applies, unless refusal would be  contrary  to
         the Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating
         to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that the public interest in maintaining refusal  will
         be outweighed by compelling factors."

17.  This was not a case where the Appellant was seeking to depart from  the
    Immigration Rules, but was advancing his case within the parameters  of
    the Rule. The Appellant's case fell within  the  Rules  and  it  was  a
    question of whether he should be excluded.  The  judge  considered  the
    Appellant's private life and whether the refusal of entry clearance was
    proportionate. The judge properly directed  himself,  attaching  little
    weight to the Appellant's private life at paragraph 80 of the decision.
     However, the judge concluded at paragraph 87:

         "The public interest  in  a  case  is  not  a  fixed  entity,  when
         considering the proportionality of a decision.  The Appellant  will
         be, once again, only attending the UK for relatively short  periods
         for a stated purpose, to engage in his course and his seminars.  He
         has strong links to the LSE.  His wife and  children  live  in  the
         USA.  He has conducted himself admirably since  his  conviction  in
         2003 and he was stated to be at very low risk of  reoffending.   He
         has never committed any crime in the UK."


18.  Mr Toal submitted that, because  the  Appellant  had  been  allowed  to
    enter the UK on numerous occasions despite his  conviction,  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that there was little public interest  in  his
    exclusion. It was argued in a previous appeal that the  Respondent  had
    been mistaken to permit his entry, but this matter was  dealt  with  by
    Collins J. in his decision at paragraph 17:

         "Mr Toal has made the  point  that  there  is  nothing  beyond  the
         assertion made  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the  entries
         permitted were permitted by mistake. It would be, to say the least,
         extraordinary if immigration officers were not aware of the  change
         in the Rule which came into force in December 2012 and over a  year
         earlier. To say that a mistake was made without having any evidence
         from any of the officers, who should be readily  contactable  since
         the stamps in the applicant's passport will identify  the  officers
         in question, is it is submitted wholly  unsatisfactory.   It  seems
         that it is three different officers who  would  have  made,  it  is
         said, the same mistake."

19.  Mr Toal submitted  that  the  judge  took  into  account  all  relevant
    matters in assessing proportionality and his finding  that  there  were
    exceptional and compelling factors was one which was open to him on the
    evidence before him. The decision was not incompatible with  Patel  and
    the judge had given adequate reasons for  what  was  a  reasonable  and
    rational conclusion.

Discussion and Conclusions

20.  Paragraph 320(2)(c) is the applicable Immigration Rule and it is  clear
    from that paragraph that entry  clearance  is  to  be  refused  if  the
    Appellant  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence   and   sentenced   to
    imprisonment of at least twelve months but less than four years, unless
    a period of ten years has passed since the end of that  sentence.   The
    period of ten years had not passed in this case.

21.  However, this paragraph  has  to  be  assessed  in  the  light  of  the
    Appellant's human rights and the direction given within  paragraph  320
    is that "it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the  public
    interest in  maintaining  refusal  will  be  outweighed  by  compelling
    factors".  Accordingly, the approach  taken  by  the  judge,  assessing
    whether the refusal of entry clearance  would  breach  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights, was a proper one and was within the parameters of the
    Immigration Rule.

22.  This was not a case where the Appellant was  seeking  to  persuade  the
    judge to depart from the Immigration Rules  and  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds. This was a  case  where  Article  8  was  in  effect
    incorporated within the Immigration Rule. Accordingly, the decision was
    not contrary to paragraph 57 of Patel.

23.  The next point to deal with is the submission that the judge failed  to
    give adequate reasons for  finding:  firstly,  that  private  life  was
    established and secondly, that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was
    proportionate.

24.  In MM (Tier 1 PSW: Art 9; "private life") Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT  00037,
    the Tribunal held at paragraph 40: "Thus,  social  ties  formed  whilst
    living in a community, working with others or  studying  at  school  or
    other educational institution are aspects of an  individual's  'private
    life' within Art 8."

25.  I am satisfied, after hearing the submissions  of  Mr  Toal,  that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK studying  for  some  period  of  time  and
    during that time he has developed social ties  and  relationships  with
    tutors and fellow students which are capable  of  constituting  private
    life. I am satisfied from the evidence that has been pointed out to  me
    by  Mr  Toal  that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had
    established private life in the UK was a finding which was open to  the
    judge on the material  before  him.  Any  lack  of  reasoning  was  not
    material.

26.   Accordingly,  the  issue  is   whether   the   judge's   findings   on
    proportionality were rational and the reasons  adequate.  In  assessing
    proportionality, the judge recognised that this case was very far  from
    that set out in CDS (PBS: "available": Article 8)  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT
    00305 (IAC) and he acknowledged that little weight should  be  attached
    to the Appellant's private life in accordance with Section 117B of  the
    2002 Act. However, he found that the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    public interest was not considerable, given that the Appellant has been
    permitted to enter the UK on three separate occasions by three separate
    Immigration Officers notwithstanding his conviction which he  disclosed
    from the outset. The Respondent did not rely on paragraph 320(2)(c)  on
    three previous occasions when the Appellant was permitted to enter  the
    UK to study.

27.  The judge took the decision of Judge Ievins as a starting point and  he
    was entitled to rely on the findings of Collins J. that this was one of
    the rare cases in which it was improper  to  refuse  leave  to  remain.
    Notwithstanding favourable decisions in the Appellant's favour this was
    only one of the factors that the judge took into account  in  assessing
    proportionality. The judge quite rightly put this  in  the  balance  in
    reducing the public interest.

28.  The judge took into account all relevant factors in his  assessment  of
    proportionality.  Although little weight  should  be  attached  to  the
    Appellant's  private  life,  the  public  interest  in  excluding   the
    Appellant was  much  reduced  by  the  fact  that  the  Respondent  had
    permitted his  entry  to  the  UK  on  three  separate  occasions.  The
    Appellant had been allowed to continue  his  studies  in  the  UK  and,
    during that time, he had built up social ties  and  relationships  with
    tutors at the LSE. The judge's finding that the Appellant had developed
    strong links with the LSE and the refusal of entry  clearance  amounted
    to a disproportionate interference with his private life was one  which
    was open to the judge on the evidence before him. The  judge's  reasons
    were adequate to demonstrate why he came to the conclusion  that  there
    were  compelling  and  exceptional  factors  outweighing   the   public
    interest.

29.  Accordingly, I find that there is  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal and I dismiss the Respondent's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 1st August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



