

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/20138/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12 October 2018                      |On 18 October 2018                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 JOHN BANGS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K McGuire, Advocate, instructed by McGill & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i)  The  respondent's  decision  dated  26  July  2016,  refusing  the
         appellant's application for leave to remain on family  and  private
         life grounds.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Fox, promulgated on 7 March 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 21 March 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Parkes, dated 6 April 2018.

     vi) The respondent's rule 24 response, dated 8 June 2018, to the  grant
         of permission.

 2. Mr McGuire did not adopt the point suggested in the grant of permission
    (not in the grounds) that the FtT had reversed the burden of proof.

 3. Mr McGuire submitted that the judge had  found,  at  least  implicitly,
    that by the date of the hearing the appellant had lived continuously in
    the UK for 20 years.  Mr Govan said there was no such finding.

 4. Paragraphs 14 - 16 might have been more  explicit.   However,  on  this
    issue I uphold the  submission  for  the  appellant  that  the  obvious
    reading of those paragraphs, and of the decision as a  whole,  is  that
    the judge was satisfied of the appellant's claimed period of residence.

 5. Mr McGuire accepted that the finding did not enable  the  appellant  to
    say that he had met the requirements of the immigration rules,  because
    those apply "at the date of application"; and that the right of  appeal
    is not under the rules, but on human rights grounds only.  However,  he
    said it was relevant that the appellant showed that he could  meet  the
    terms of the rules, designed to be compliant with human rights, at that
    date, and that as there were no considerations on the other  side,  the
    appeal should  have  been  allowed.   He  referred  to  SSHD  v  Patel,
    IA/53456/2013, a decision of a deputy judge promulgated on 12  December
    2014.  He accepted that is not an authority, but adopted  its  line  of
    argument, and submitted that as the appellant has now obtained 20 years
    residence, it would be disproportionate to remove him.

 6. Mr Govan submitted that there were  gaps  in  the  evidence  such  that
    satisfaction of the requirements of the rules was not shown,  and  that
    if he had 20 years  residence,  it  was  proportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to apply again and to show compliance with the rules.

 7. Mr McGuire in response said that the decision left the  appellant  with
    nothing else to prove, and that as the respondent's  decision  proposed
    his removal, that was the matter to be  put  into  the  proportionality
    scales, not just the making of a further application.

 8. I find that on proof of 20 years' residence, there was  no  other  live
    issue in respect of the terms of paragraph 276ADE of the rules.

 9. The appellant has not shown any flaw in the  respondent's  decision  at
    the time it was made.  However, the judge failed to note the  potential
    significance of his finding of 20 years residence, disclosing a  rather
    different situation at the date of the hearing.  Having overlooked that
    point,  I  do  not  think  the  assessment  that   removal   would   be
    proportionate can safely stand.

10. Mr McGuire argued that the decision  should  be  taken  as  posing  the
    outcome as removal.  I am not persuaded on that issue.

11. On a correct  appraisal  the  question  was  not  whether  removal  was
    proportionate, but whether it was proportionate to expect the appellant
    to make the application required under the rules.  Although  there  are
    exceptions, that is a proportionate requirement in most cases.

12. It is no fault of the respondent that  the  appellant  needs  to  apply
    again.  When he made the application leading to these  proceedings,  he
    was not able to satisfy  the  rules.   He  could  not  reasonably  have
    expected any other outcome.

13. The respondent's decision does (rightly)  advise  the  appellant  about
    liability to removal.  However, it also carefully sets out all options,
    including (at page 7 of 8) the making of a further application  if  the
    appellant has new reasons or grounds for wishing to remain in  the  UK.
    That would be a reasonable and proportionate outcome.

14. (It appears on present information that such an  application  has  good
    prospects of success, but that of course will be  decided  on  its  own
    merits, and this decision is not to be taken as an  indication  of  the
    outcome.)

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   However,  the
    decision substituted is again that the appeal, as brought to  the  FtT,
    is dismissed.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            15 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




