
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/20999/2016
      HU/21649/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 November 2018                 |On 27 December 2018                   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                           VICTORIA NIKE OLADIPUPO
                              GBENGA OLU TAIWO
                         (No anonymity orders made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Singer of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born  in  1985  and  1974.   The
    second appellant is the  first  appellant's  dependent  partner.   They
    appealed against a decision of the respondent made on 18 August 2016 to
    refuse their applications made on 17 March 2016 for leave to remain  on
    family and private life grounds.  Following a hearing at Birmingham  on
    25 August  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Boylan-Kemp  MBE
    dismissed their appeals.

 2. The first appellant's claimed immigration history is that she had leave
    as a domestic worker from 13 February 2007 until 26 February 2013.   On
    6 February 2013 she applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  with  the
    assistance of her then  employer.   Her  employer  assisted  the  first
    appellant in completing the form and was to pay the fee.  However,  the
    application was rejected on 26 February 2013 because  the  cheque  sent
    with the application was returned as unpaid by the employer's bank.

 3. However, her claim is that she did not receive the  refusal  letter  in
    respect of the application made on 6 February 2013 until January  2014.
    It was only after she chased up the decision that she  discovered  that
    the application had been  rejected.   Her  position  is  that  had  she
    received the refusal letter then she would have been able to  submit  a
    fresh application which would have succeeded,  meaning  she  would  not
    have become an overstayer and she would not  have  had  to  provide  an
    English language certificate.

 4. They also rely on their family and private life.  They married in  2014
    and have a child born in 2015 who is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria  but  has
    established his life here.

 5. The respondent did not accept that the refusal letter dated 26 February
    2013 was not sent in response to the application  made  on  6  February
    2013.  There was no indication it had been returned as undelivered.

 6. As for family life their child was born when neither appellant had  any
    lawful right to remain in  the  UK  therefore  they  had  no  realistic
    expectation of being allowed to stay.  There was  no  reason  why  they
    could not return to Nigeria as a family unit.

 7. They appealed.

    First tier hearing

 8. At paragraph [14] of her decision the judge accepted  that  the  family
    enjoy family life here and, at [15], have established a  private  life.
    At [16] she accepted that removal would  create  an  interference  with
    their private life which engages Article 8 but she concluded that  such
    interference would be a proportionate interference.


 9. The judge dealt with the issue of the refusal letter dated 26  February
    2013 at [21 ff].  She noted that the respondent provided a copy of  two
    letters dated 3 January 2014 to the appellant stating that a letter was
    sent to her by recorded delivery with a 13 letter/digit reference on 26
    February 2013.  At [23] she found that in the absence of  any  evidence
    to the contrary such as a returned letter or notification from the Post
    Office that the letter was undeliverable, service had been shown.   She
    did not accept that a handwritten log of phone calls  which  the  first
    appellant claimed to have made  to  the  Home  Office  documenting  her
    attempts to find out what was happening  with  her  application  was  a
    contemporaneous note of such.

10. Having found that the  refusal  decision  of  February  2013  had  been
    communicated to the appellants they had as a result become  overstayers
    [24] and thus little weight should be given to their private life.  She
    then concluded that there was no good reason why they could not  return
    to Nigeria as a family unit.

    Error of law hearing

11. The appellants sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  8
    October 2018.  The  grounds  complain  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    approach to the application for ILR in February 2013, in particular  as
    to whether a refusal was received later that month.

12. The grant states:-

           "4    ... The service issue was a factual matter, but it may be
           arguable that the Judge did not make reasoned or evidence based
           findings on the appellants' evidence of non receipt; and did not
           complete the required process of balancing such findings against
           the recorded delivery slip."


13.  At the hearing before me Ms Everett, for the respondent,  agreed  with
    Mr Singer that the judge had materially erred in her  consideration  of
    this matter such that the decision had to be set aside.

14. The reason was that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  a  document,
    which was before her, of the respondent  headed  "GCID  -  Case  Record
    Sheet."  It includes what appears to be an intra-department email  (the
    writer's name is redacted) dated 20 December 2013. It indicates a  lack
    of evidence to support the claim by the  respondent  that  the  refusal
    decision of February 2013 was despatched.

15. It states:

           "I hope you can help applicant called CCC regarding progress  of
           her SET O application submitted 25-02-13, notes on  CID  suggest
           application was rejected as cheque was rejected and there is  an
           RD AU 217828220 GB  on  CID  notes  to  suggest  documents  were
           returned but no evidence on HO track and  trace  or  royal  mail
           track and trace that package was despatched, can this be  looked
           into  and  myself  or  applicant  advised  whether  package  was
           despatched."


16. Ms Everett indicated that having  searched  the  file  she  could  find
    nothing more on this issue.


17. As well as the CID  notes  indicating  that  the  first  appellant,  in
    December 2013, made  enquiry with the respondent as to  the  status  of
    her application, there was also a letter (referred to at  [22]  of  her
    decision) produced on the  day  of  the  hearing  by  the  respondent's
    representative dated 3 January 2014 to the first appellant which states
    "Following your recent enquiry concerning your application for Leave to
    Remain in the United Kingdom on 6 February 2013" and which  enclosed  a
    copy of the refusal.  Such could be taken to  support  her  claim  that
    having heard nothing from the respondent she contacted them  about  the
    status of her application  for  ILR.  Moreover,  having  received  this
    letter in January 2014 the first appellant shortly  afterwards  made  a
    further application for ILR which might suggest that had she been aware
    of the refusal at an earlier stage she would have sought to  regularise
    her stay soon thereafter.

18.  I agreed with parties that the judge in reaching her finding that  the
    February 2013 decision had been sent by the respondent and received  by
    the appellants, failed to have regard  to  relevant  evidence  and  she
    thereby failed to give adequate reasons.

19. Such error was material because it affected the factual matrix  against
    which the judge went on to assess the question of proportionality.

20. By consent the decision was set aside to be remade.  It  was  indicated
    that as over a year had  passed  since  the  First-tier  hearing,  oral
    evidence would wish to be given.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  under  section  12  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Statement
    paragraph 7.2 to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh
    hearing. No findings stand. The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE.

22. No anonymity order made.







Signed:                                            Date: 18 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


