
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20571/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video means)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th February 2021                         |On 9th March 2021             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                               Thomas anderson
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Simak of Counsel, instructed by Solomon
Shepherd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    file contained the documents in paper format.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated on 8 April  2020,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim dated 5 December 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Ghana, born on  10  December  1959,  who
    entered the United Kingdom  on  20  September  2001  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a visitor to 20 February 2002.  Thereafter he has remained
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  made  an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  long  residence  on  22
    September 2010 which was refused on 9 December 2010.   After  this,  no
    applications were made until 31 October 2019 when the Appellant applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of family  life  with  a  partner  and
    private life; the refusal of which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  Appellant
    did not meet any of the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  for  a
    grant of leave to remain and there were no  exceptional  circumstances.
    In  relation  to  family  life,  the  Appellant  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of Appendix FM because he did  not  meet  the  immigration
    status requirement and the exception in paragraph EX.1 was not  met  as
    there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
    outside of the United  Kingdom.   In  relation  to  private  life,  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  as  he
    had not been in the United Kingdom for twenty years and there  were  no
    very significant obstacles to his reintegration  on  return  to  Ghana,
    where he had resided up to the age of 41.

 5. Judge Shore dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  8  April
    2020  on  all  grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found   that   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met, in particular there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to family life being  enjoyed  outside
    of the United Kingdom; it being no more than unpleasant for his partner
    to relocate to a country of which she is a national and where  she  has
    family.  Further, there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration in Ghana.  The First-tier Tribunal found that
    there was a lack of evidence as to any adverse impact on the  Appellant
    or  his  partner;  considered  the  factors  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  found  there  was  no
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right to respect for
    private and family life.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in  failing  to  apply  the
    principles in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2008] UKHL 40.  The Appellant submitted that given the  findings  that
    he satisfied the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  save  for  the
    immigration status requirement, his appeal should have been allowed  on
    this basis alone as  there  is  no  public  interest  in  his  removal.
    Secondly, that the First-tier  tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    finding  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules was  not  met  given  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant's prolonged absence from Ghana and his  family  ties  to  the
    United Kingdom made it impossible for  him  to  reintegrate.   Thirdly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in its  assessment
    of proportionality for the purposes of Article 8, primarily because  of
    the failure to take into account the principles in Chikwamba.  There is
    considerable overlap between the first  and  third  grounds  of  appeal
    which I take together in this decision.

 7. At the oral hearing, Ms Sinak relied on the written grounds  of  appeal
    and made more detailed oral submissions on these  and  to  address  the
    points raised in the grant  of  permission.   She  submitted  that  the
    principles in  Chikwamba  remained  good  law,  having  been  expressly
    approved by the Supreme Court in Agyarko v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  Ms Sinak  sought  to  distinguish  the
    decision in Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba;  Zambrano)  Pakistan
    [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC) on a factual basis that  unlike  this  Appellant,
    the appellant in Younas could not meet the financial requirement in the
    Immigration Rules.  In any  event,  it  was  submitted  that  even  if,
    following  Chikwamba,  there  remained  some  public  interest  in  the
    Appellant's removal, that was inevitably outweighed by the strength  of
    the Appellant's private and family life.

 8. Ms Sinak also sought to rely on the factors  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which  were  said  to  be
    intended to ensure integration in the United Kingdom and to save  costs
    and were in the Appellant's favour as he could surmount the constraints
    contained therein.

 9. It was accepted on behalf of  the  Appellant  that  Chikwamba  was  not
    expressly raised or relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal  but  Ms
    Sinak submitted that it was a glaringly obvious point that should  have
    been considered; not least because that case was raised in the decision
    in Agyarko which itself was relied upon expressly in this  appeal.   It
    was suggested that the First-tier Tribunal would have found  a  way  to
    allow the Appellant's appeal if the principles in  Chikwamba  had  been
    considered.  This is so because it will  only  be  in  relatively  rare
    cases that a person  will  be  required  to  leave  if  they  meet  the
    requirements of the rules  for  entry  clearance  and  it  is  for  the
    Respondent to show that this is one of those rare cases; as overstaying
    per se is insufficient for the Respondent to refuse leave.

10. As to the second ground of appeal, Ms Sinak relied on the  same  points
    in relation to the statute  as  in  the  first  ground  of  appeal  and
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the decisions
    in Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ
    813 and R (on the application of MC) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department  [2016]  CSOH  7  as  to  the  requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  Specifically on the  facts  in
    this appeal, the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the Appellant's
    ties to the United Kingdom and Ms Sinak went so far as to  submit  that
    because of his family life in the United Kingdom with his wife and  her
    (adult) children, he would be unable to  integrate  at  all  in  Ghana,
    including because his intention  would  be  to  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  This was then refined to the  Appellant  not  being  able  to
    reintegrate in Ghana within a reasonable time for this reason.

11. Ms Sinak accepted that the case of MC was not specifically relied  upon
    or raised before the First-tier Tribunal, but submitted that it  was  a
    Robinson obvious point which should have been considered because it  is
    a well-known authority and obvious to her.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Lindsay  resisted  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  Firstly, the Appellant did  not  rely  on  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba before the First-tier Tribunal, it was not a Robinson obvious
    point and for that reason alone there can be no error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision not to consider it.   Secondly,  in  any
    event, the appeal was bound to fail even if the principles in Chikwamba
    were applied.  Mr Lindsay relied on the decision  of  Younas  as  clear
    authority for the application of the principles and  contained  general
    propositions of law as opposed  to  any  factual  comparison  which  is
    unhelpful, and in any event  indistinguishable  on  the  facts  as  the
    appellant in that case was found to meet the requirements of the  rules
    for entry clearance and the decision assumed a  successful  application
    for entry clearance.

13. Mr Lindsay submitted that Chikwamba does not set out  a  general  legal
    test about whether return would be proportionate or  whether  requiring
    return would as a result be common or uncommon.  The case was  about  a
    blanket policy at the time requiring an application to return  to  make
    an application for  entry  clearance  and  required  a  fact  sensitive
    assessment, which in that case involved minor children  and  relatively
    extreme facts and poor conditions on return to  Zimbabwe.   Since  that
    case, the factors in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 have been introduced and will also apply.  On the facts
    of this case, there would still be a very pressing public  interest  in
    the Appellant's removal given that he has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully for 18 years.  It was submitted that  this  is  not  a  very
    clear case where the principle applies at all and the facts are nowhere
    near those in Chikwamba.

14. The Upper Tribunal in Younas also  suggested  that  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights may not even be engaged in  a  case
    in which there would only be temporary separate between family members.
     In the present  appeal,  little  weight  is  to  be  attached  to  the
    Appellant's private and family life established in the  United  Kingdom
    whilst here unlawfully and there was  simply  no  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of any significant impediment to his return,  or  a
    return of  the  couple  together  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance.

15. As to the second ground of appeal, Mr Linsday submitted that the First-
    tier Tribunal adequately dealt with the question of whether there  were
    very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  Further,  this  is  another
    point in which the Appellant seeks  to  advance  arguments  not  raised
    before the First-tier Tribunal, including the assertion of family  life
    with  his  adult  step-children  which  was   expressly   not   claimed
    previously.  Again, there is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    not considering matters not raised before it and which the evidence did
    not in any event support.

16. In reply Ms Sinak submitted that there was an inconsistency between the
    Supreme Court's decision in Agyarko and the Upper Tribunal decision  in
    Younas, to the extent that if necessary, it would be submitted that the
    latter was wrongly decided but no detailed  submissions  were  made  on
    this point.

Findings and reasons

 1. There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on
    any of the grounds relied upon by the Appellant.  First,  none  of  the
    points now raised were expressly raised or relied upon by the Appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal and none are Robinson obvious.  As such,
    it can not be an error of law for a First-tier Tribunal to fail to have
    regard to something not relied upon by a party before it.  Secondly, in
    any event, even if the First-tier Tribunal had taken into  account  the
    points now raised, the outcome of the appeal would inevitably have been
    the same and any error would not be material.

 2. In relation to the principle in Chikwamba, whilst it is the  case  that
    this still applies,  it  is  not  the  case  that  it  establishes  any
    threshold that only in rare cases will an entry  clearance  application
    be required and even less the case that it places  the  burden  on  the
    Respondent to establish that a particular case is such a  rare  one  in
    which an application for entry clearance is required.  The  submissions
    from Ms Sinak on the applications of the principles put  the  case  far
    too high and fail to take into account the subsequent case law that has
    given clear guidance on the context of that case and the extent of  the
    principle; as well as the requirement for a  Tribunal  to  continue  to
    apply the factors in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 3. First, as noted in R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation
    - proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC),  that  it  would  be
    comparatively rarely, certainly family cases involving  children,  that
    an Article 8 case  should  be  dismissed  on  the  basis  it  would  be
    proportionate and more appropriate for an individual to apply for leave
    from abroad, in all cases it will be for the individual to place before
    the Secretary of State (or  in  this  case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal)
    evidence   that    such    temporary    separation    will    interfere
    disproportionately with protected rights.

 4. In the present appeal there are no minor  children  and  there  was  no
    evidence at all before the First-tier Tribunal as to any adverse impact
    of temporary separation of the Appellant and his wife and in this case,
    the First-tier Tribunal did not in any event find that it would be more
    appropriate for the Appellant  to  apply  for  leave  from  abroad  but
    instead undertook the  broader  Article  8  proportionality  assessment
    required.

 5. Secondly, as confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Kaur  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1423 (at paragraphs 43 to
    45), the facts in Chikwamba were striking and the  application  of  the
    principle does not trump all public interest  matters,  including,  for
    example a poor immigration history.  Even in cases where  an  applicant
    was certain to be granted leave to enter,  there  might  be  no  public
    interest in removing the  applicant.   What  is  required  is  a  fact-
    specific assessment in each case, the principle will only  apply  in  a
    very clear case and even then, will not necessarily result in  a  grant
    of leave to remain.

 6. Thirdly, in Younas, the Upper Tribunal found, so  far  as  relevant  to
    this appeal:


         "An appellant in an Article 8 human rights appeal who  argues  that
         there is no public interest in removal because after leaving the UK
         he or she will be granted  entry  clearance  must,  in  all  cases,
         address the relevant considerations in Part 5A of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") including  section
         117B(1),  which  stipulates  that  "the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls  is  in  the  public  interest".  Reliance  on
         Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 does not obviate  the  need  to  do
         this."

 7. In the present appeal, the following factors from section 117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are relevant.  First,  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  There is a significant  public  interest  in  this  case  in
    circumstances where the Appellant has, save for  a  very  short  period
    with entry clearance as a visitor, remained unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over 18 years.  Further, in that period,  he  only  made  a
    single attempt to regularise his status in 2010 before the most  recent
    application, the refusal of which is the subject of this appeal.

 8. Secondly, little weight is to be attached to  the  Appellant's  private
    and family life in  the  United  Kingdom  which  has  been  established
    entirely whilst he has been here unlawfully.

 9. Thirdly, the fact that the Appellant speaks English and is not  reliant
    on state funds (being financially supported by his wife)  are  at  best
    neutral factors in  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise;  neither
    strengthening the public interest nor strengthening the  weight  to  be
    attached to the Appellant's private and family life.

10. Taking into account these factors, particularly  the  Appellant's  very
    poor immigration history and the lack of evidence  as  to  any  adverse
    impact of  a  temporary  separation  from  his  partner  (or  temporary
    relocation with her pending an entry clearance application); this is  a
    case in which there is a strong public interest in removal which is not
    outweighed by the Appellant's private and family life  (to  which  only
    little weight must be attached).  In these circumstances, even  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal had applied the principles in Chikwamba, the appeal
    would still inevitably be dismissed.

11. In  relation  to  the  assessment  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules; again, even if the First-tier Tribunal had expressly
    considered the authorities now relied upon  (which  were  not  Robinson
    obvious) the outcome also would inevitably be the same.

12. There was little if any evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  as  to
    any obstacles that the Appellant may face to reintegration on return to
    Ghana.  This is a country of which he is a national, where he has spent
    the majority of his life and he would have retained knowledge of  life,
    language and culture there.  In addition, he has extended family  there
    and the support of his partner.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the
    Appellant  had  simply  not  established  that  he  would   face   very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration.

13. The argument on behalf of  the  Appellant  before  me  focused  on  the
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal to take into account the Appellant's
    ties in the United Kingdom when assessing  obstacles  to  reintegration
    further to the decision in MC.   However,  that  decision  was  in  the
    context of an application for Judicial Review of a decision made  under
    the earlier version of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules (which
    referred to a person having lost all ties to the country to which  they
    would be returned rather than  facing  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration).   It  is  not  a  reported  decision  and   offers   no
    authoritative guidance on the application of the current provisions.

14. Although reading parts of the decision in MC isolation,  there  appears
    to be an acceptance that the solidity of a person's ties in the  United
    Kingdom is relevant to assessing obstacles to reintegration on  return;
    when read as a whole the  decision  simply  reaffirms  the  need  in  a
    proportionality balancing exercise for the purposes of Article 8 of the
    European Convention  on  Human  Rights  to  consider  and  balance  the
    respective ties in each country.

15. The decision is not authority for the proposition that the strength  of
    a person's ties in the United Kingdom must be considered for  a  lawful
    assessment solely under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (in its current form) and far less is it an authority  that  such
    ties of themselves can be  sufficient  to  establish  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration on return.  The submission on behalf of  the
    Appellant that he would not be able to  reintegrate  at  all  (or  even
    within a reasonable time) solely because of the strength of his ties in
    the  United  Kingdom  was  without  any  foundation  whatsoever.    The
    Appellant did not identify any specific obstacles to  reintegration  on
    return based on his likely circumstances in Ghana, let alone  any  very
    significant ones and in the  absence  of  such  evidence,  it  can  not
    rationally  be  suggested  that  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom   could
    themselves create such  an  obstacle  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  mere  fact  that  the
    Appellant would return to Ghana with the intention of returning to  the
    United Kingdom as quickly as possible could not in law or  fact  amount
    to  an  obstacle  to  reintegration  to  establish  that  he  met   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

16. Overall, the First-tier Tribunal undertook a  full  assessment  of  the
    somewhat limited evidence before it and came to clear, cogent and  well
    reasoned conclusions that were the only ones  rationally  and  lawfully
    open to it on the evidence.  There is no arguable error of law in  that
    final proportionality balancing exercise for the purposes of Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights and no error of law  in  not
    considering points not relied upon before it.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                               Date     2nd March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

