

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20485/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2020                              |On 15 December 2020           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               BOUREME TEMBELY
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 6 October 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal has been granted by another judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal.
     3. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 reply dated 6  November  2020
        confirms she does not oppose the application and invites the  Upper
        Tribunal to determine the appeal by way of remitting  the  case  to
        the First-tier Tribunal.
     4. Having considered the judgment of  the  High  Court  in  The  Joint
        Council for The Welfare of Immigrants (Applicant) v  The  President
        of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) (Respondent) and  The  Lord  Chancellor
        (Interested Party) [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), in which  neither  the
        Pilot  Practice  Direction  issued  by  the  Senior  President   of
        Tribunals on 19 March 2020 nor Rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 were declared  unlawful,  consideration
        can still be given to the appropriate venue for the next hearing of
        this matter in light of the overriding objectives.
     5. Paragraph 4 of the Practice Direction reads as follows:  "Decisions
        on the papers without a hearing:  Where   a   Chamber's   procedure
        rules  allow decisions  to be  made  without  a hearing,  decisions
         should usually  be  made  in  this   way,  provided  this  is   in
        accordance  with  the  overriding  objective,  the   parties'  ECHR
        rights   and   the  Chamber's  procedure  rules  about  notice  and
        consent."
     6. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     7. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     8. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:


        34.-
        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.
        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.
        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.
        (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
        to-


        (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b) or 8(2);
        (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
        (c)  determine an application  for  permission  to  bring  judicial
             review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
        (d)  make a consent order disposing  of  proceedings,  pursuant  to
             rule 39, without a hearing.


     9. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to exercise the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to be determined on the papers as opposed to directing  an
        oral hearing. Nothing on the facts or in law makes consideration of
        the  issues  on  the  papers  not  in  accordance  with  overriding
        objectives at this stage, a breach  of  the  parties'  ECHR  rights
        and/or UTIAC's procedure rules about notice and consent.
    10. The outcome is, in any event, that sought by the appellant.



Error of law


    11. In light of the appellant having established, as  accepted  by  the
        respondent, that the Judge failed to  consider  and  undertake  the
        assessment of section 55 of the UKBA 2009, to consider section 117B
        of the Nationality, Immigration Asylum Act 2002, failed to consider
        the  appellant's  private  life  claim,  made  adverse  credibility
        findings without cogent reasons, and failed to assess the  evidence
        against relevant guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal and  Court
        of Appeal, I find the Judge erred in law in a  manner  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal and set the decision aside.
    12. In light of the fact-finding required and the nature of  the  flaws
        revealed in the application for permission to appeal, I find it  in
        the interests of justice and in accordance  with  the  Presidential
        guidance to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at
        Hatton Cross to be  heard  afresh  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
        Raymond.


Decision

    13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
        tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross to be heard afresh by a judge
        other than Judge Raymond, de novo.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 December 2020












