
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20305/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th July 2021                   |On 15th July 2021                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BEN KEITH


                                   Between

                                SUNDAR LIMBU
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, of Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
                    Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpretation:  Ms D Gurung in the Nepali language


                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 27th February  1979.  He
       applied to come to the UK as the adult  dependent  relative  of  his
       father Mr Dambar Bahadur Limbu, a former Gurkha soldier, on 1st June
       2018. On 29th August 2018 the application for  entry  clearance  was
       refused. He lodged an appeal, which was dismissed  on  human  rights
       grounds in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace  promulgated
       on 18th September 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       F Appleyard on the 20th January 2020 and I found that the First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set  out  in  my  decision
       dated 13th October 2020 appended as Annex A to this decision.

    3. It was decided in my decision on the error of law that the  remaking
       hearing would need to consist of evidence about the appellant's work
       history and support  from  his  father  and  submissions  from  both
       parties as to  whether  the  appellant  has  family  life  with  his
       parents. I preserved the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the
       appellant lives in the family home in Nepal, and that the  appellant
       and his parents love, respect and miss each  other  but  that  these
       factors alone do not suffice to meet the test of  showing  emotional
       ties over and above the norm, and thus family life in Article 8 ECHR
       terms.

    4. The hearing to remake the appeal  on  17th  March  2021  had  to  be
       adjourned due to the lack of an interpreter. However, it provided an
       opportunity to narrow the issues between the parties. Mr Clarke, for
       the respondent made a concession that if the appellant  is  able  to
       show, on the balance of probabilities, that  he  has  the  financial
       dependency on his parents/sponsors in the UK that he claims then the
       respondent concedes that in the context of  the  preserved  findings
       (that the appellant has a loving relationship with his sponsors  and
       lives in the family home in Nepal) that there  is  an  Article  8(1)
       ECHR family life relationship.

    5. Unfortunately, due to multiple technical  problems  with  Skype  for
       Business the hearing on 19th May 2021 also had to be  adjourned.  It
       was agreed that the hearing should be  heard  via  a  face  to  face
       hearing at the first available date.

    6. The matter comes before us now to remake the appeal.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    7. The relevant evidence of Mr Dambar Bhadur Limbu, sponsor and  father
       of the appellant, from his witness statement and oral evidence,  is,
       in summary, as follows.

    8. He was a Gurkha soldier in the British army for  16  years  with  an
       exemplary record who was assessed by his  commanding  officer  as  a
       "thoroughly dependable man". After he retired from the British  army
       in 1986, when the appellant, was seven years old, he built  a  small
       house in Dharan, Nepal. His children grew up in this house.  As  his
       army  pension  was  insufficient  to  keep  his  children  he   took
       employment in Brunei in the Gurkha Reserve Unit  in  as  a  security
       guard until 2007, when he returned home and applied to settle in the
       UK. He came to the UK on 21st September 2007. At that  time  he  was
       not allowed to bring the  appellant  to  the  UK  as  his  dependent
       because the appellant was over the age of 18 years.

    9. The appellant obtained his school leaving  certificate  examinations
       in Nepal, but he has never worked in  Nepal  as  he  does  not  good
       qualifications and there is high unemployment in that  country.  The
       appellant remained in the family home in  Nepal  until  August  2000
       when he attempted to make an independent life for himself  by  going
       to work in Dubai as a domestic worker. The  appellant  stayed  there
       until September 2006 but could not sustain this independent life  as
       he suffered abuse from his  employer  and  developed  problems  with
       weight loss, type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol, and  was  forced,
       for health reasons, to return to Nepal to the family home.

   10. Since the appellant returned to Nepal he has  lived  in  the  family
       home relying on money for all of his needs from  his  father's  army
       pension which he is able to withdraw using  pre-signed  cheques  and
       more recently using an ATM card, and other money  which  his  father
       has sent to him from the  UK  using  money  transfer  agencies.  The
       appellant continues to be unable to obtain work due to his  lack  of
       qualifications, high unemployment in Nepal and his  health  problems
       which include back pain for which he takes medication.

   11. In addition, the appellant has provided a  short  witness  statement
       which says that he is entirely reliant on funds from his father, the
       sponsor for all of basic living needs  such  as  food,  electricity,
       water, phone bills and medication. He has used  cheques  his  father
       has left in Nepal to access his  funds,  but  in  January  2020  his
       father left an ATM card which he now primarily uses to access funds.
       He attaches a copy of  himself  holding  a  VISA  ATM  card  in  his
       father's name, and also of a cheque book in his father's  name  with
       signed blank cheques.

   12. Ms Everett stating having  reviewed  the  documentary  evidence  and
       heard from the sponsor that she was  not  resisting  the  appeal  in
       light of the facts preserved from the First-tier Tribunal  decision;
       the concession of Mr Clarke; and given she had no  reason  to  doubt
       the credibility of the sponsor.

   13. In these circumstances it was not necessary to hear from Mr Jesurum.
       We informed the parties that we would be allowing the appeal. We did
       not give an oral judgement but said we  would  put  our  reasons  in
       writing.




         Conclusions - Remaking

   14. In view of the historic injustice against the  Gurkhas  once  it  is
       determined that there is Article 8  ECHR  family  life  between  the
       appellant and his parents that will normally be determinative of the
       appeal.

   15. To establish family life between an adult child and his parents will
       need evidence of more than normal love and affection  and  emotional
       ties, but there is no test of exceptionality. The conclusions of the
       Court of Appeal in Rai, derived from  Kugathas  and  the  Strasbourg
       cases, are that what is needed is a fact sensitive analysis  looking
       for real or effective or committed support in the personal sense and
       not evidence of dependency as, applying the conclusions of the Court
       of Appeal in Patel and others v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (Mumbai)
       [2010]  EWCA  Civ  17,   family  life  "falls  well  short  of  what
       constitutes dependency" and " a  good  many  adult  children...  may
       still have family life with parents who are now settled here".

   16. As recorded at the start of the decision, we have retained  findings
       from the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant  and  his  parents
       love, respect and miss each other and the  appellant  lives  in  the
       family home. It is  accepted  for  the  respondent  today  that  the
       evidence that the sponsor provides all of the appellant's  financial
       support is credible. In these circumstances we conclude  that  there
       is family life between the appellant and his sponsor,  and  that  in
       all of the circumstances of this case the appeal therefore falls  to
       be allowed.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal.

   3. We re-make the appeal by allowing if on Article 8  ECHR  human  rights
      grounds.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                   Date:   6th July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Annex A: Error of Law Decision


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 27th  February  1979.  He
       applied to come to the UK as the  adult  dependent  relative  of  his
       father Mr Dambar Bahadur Limbu, a former Gurkha soldier, on 1st  June
       2018. On 29th August 2018 the application  for  entry  clearance  was
       refused. He lodged an appeal, which was  dismissed  on  human  rights
       grounds in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mace  promulgated
       on 18th September 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       F Appleyard on the 20th January 2020 on all grounds  but  principally
       on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred in law in the approach to the historic injustice to Gurkhas and
       the case law relating to Gurkha family reunion,  and  in  failing  to
       correctly assess the Article 8 ECHR  appeal  with  reference  to  the
       relevant and correct facts .

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. The hearing was held at a remote Skype for
       Business hearing in light of the need to reduce the  transmission  of
       the Covid-19 virus, and in light of this being found to be acceptable
       by both parties, and being a means  by  which  the  appeal  could  be
       fairly and justly determined. There were  no  significant  issues  of
       connectivity or audibility with the hearing.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In grounds of appeal and in further submissions provided to the Upper
       Tribunal, drafted by Mr A Malik and Mr R Jesurum for  the  appellant,
       and in oral  submissions  from  Mr  Jesurum  it  is  argued  for  the
       appellant, in summary, as follows.

    5. The appellant's father, who was a Gurkha soldier in the British  army
       for 16 years with  an  exemplary  record  who  was  assessed  by  his
       commanding  officer  as  a  "thoroughly  dependable  man",  was  only
       permitted the opportunity to settle in  the  UK  in  2007  after  the
       unequal provisions were corrected to permit  Gurkha  soldiers  to  do
       this. By this time the appellant was an adult. The appellant's mother
       joined his  father  in  2015.  The  appellant  argues  he  should  be
       permitted to join his parents as he would have done so if his  father
       had been allowed to make his application when he was a minor  and  in
       light of the continuing  Article  8  ECHR  family  life  relationship
       between them.

    6. Firstly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  by
       not having regard to the correct test to determine whether there  was
       family life between the appellant and his parents at paragraphs 22 to
       26 of the decision. It is argued that wrongly it  was  required  that
       the appellant be dependent  by  reason  of   some  necessity  on  his
       father, rather than investigating whether the appellant   had  family
       life with his father and mother  because  of  real  or  effective  or
       committed support over and above normal emotional ties, as would have
       been established if properly applying the test set out in  Rai v  ECO
       Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320. It is argued that  this  test,  from  Lord
       Justice Sedley's judgment in Kugathas, was the one which the Court of
       Appeal focused on in Rai rather than Lady Justice Arden's  judgement.
       It is argued that in the judgement of the  European  Court  of  Human
       Rights in AA v UK that family life with a young adult was to be found
       where that young adult had not founded a family of their own.  It  is
       argued that there was inadequate consideration given  by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to the generally very low threshold for  engagement  of
       Article 8(1) ECHR. It is argued that it is clear from  the  case  law
       relating to the other limb of Article  8  ECHR,  which  protects  the
       right to respect to the home, that  this  even  applies  to  entirely
       unnecessary holiday homes, see Demades v Turkey [2003] ECtHR 6219/90,
       and that other qualified rights, for instance Articles 9,10,11 and 12
       ECHR, give  the  right  to  individual  choice  and  do  not  require
       necessity.

    7. Secondly, it is argued that there was  a  failure  to  have  accurate
       regard to  the  evidence  in  the  case,  and  by  having  regard  to
       irrelevant considerations. It is argued that there was a  failure  to
       have regard to the full evidence  with  respect  to  the  appellant's
       work in the UAE, which he did for six years, but  which  ended  as  a
       failed attempt at the appellant achieving independence  in  September
       2006, prior to his father being granted indefinite leave to enter the
       UK in April 2007, due his being ill-treated, losing weight and  being
       diagnosed with cholesterol  problems  and  diabetes.  It  is  further
       argued that in any case as Article 8 ECHR  protects  choice  then  it
       does not matter why the appellant returned from the UAE. It is argued
       that it was not fair to have regard to the inconsistent  age  on  the
       card from the Institute of Health Sciences as this was not put to the
       witnesses; and that it was irrelevant to take into account the income
       of the sponsors in the UK. It is argued that there was  an  incorrect
       factual consideration with respect to the issue  of  the  appellant's
       father's pension, which was drawn by his mother until 2015  when  she
       travelled to the UK and then was drawn by the  appellant  after  that
       time. It is also argued that there was a failure to  have  regard  to
       the evidence of the appellant's mother in the decision,  particularly
       as this explained that the appellant did not work due to his lack  of
       qualifications and the high rates of  unemployment  in  Nepal  rather
       than any issues with the appellant's  health.  The  evidence  of  the
       father ought to have considered in light of  the  assessment  of  his
       commanding officer that he was a "highly dependable  man",  and  that
       ought  to  have  ben  placed  in  the  balance  when  assessing   his
       credibility as a witness.

    8. Thirdly, it is argued that ultimately the decision errs  in  law  for
       failure to give proper reasons to explain to the appellant why he had
       lost his appeal.  This appellant had returned home in 2006  from  the
       UAE, he has remained in the family home and is financially  supported
       by his parents because of the lack of work in Nepal (not for  reasons
       of his ill health). The fact that he receives financial  support  and
       lives in the family home out of love and affection due to family ties
       suffices to show that Article 8(1) is  made  out,  and  the  decision
       fails to give proper reasons for the fact the appeal is dismissed.

    9. Mr Melvin, in his written  and  oral  submissions  and  defended  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal. He argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge directed herself properly with  respect  to  the  test
       being simply whether there is family  life  and  that  there  was  no
       element of exceptionality. The conclusion that there  was  no  family
       life was based on the following findings: that there  was  no  reason
       why the appellant did not travel to the UK with his mother  in  2015;
       that he had spent six years working in the UAE prior  to  his  father
       leaving for the UK; that it was not clear  under  what  circumstances
       the appellant returned to Nepal; there was no credible  evidence  why
       the appellant was not working in Nepal; there was  no  evidence  that
       there were more than normal emotional ties between the appellant  and
       his parents as the father's evidence was vague; that there  had  only
       been one visit by the appellant's parents to  Nepal  in  the  last  4
       years; the First-tier Tribunal did not find that the full picture had
       been given and  there  was  insufficient  evidence  relating  to  the
       financial  remittances.  It  is  argued  that  this  was  a  holistic
       consideration of the facts of the case and a rational conclusion that
       there was not anything more than  normal  love  and  affection  which
       justified a finding of family life.

   10. I reserved my determination at the end of the  hearing.  I  discussed
       however the various possible outcomes of this  hearing.  If  I  found
       that there was an error in the definition of family  life  but  found
       that on a proper application of the definition it could be  made  out
       on the basis of findings made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
       agreed that I could go on to remake the appeal by allowing it without
       a further hearing. If I found that there was no legal  error  clearly
       no remaking would be needed  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
       dismissing the appeal would be upheld. If, on the other hand, I found
       that a wrong definition of family life  had  been  applied  but  that
       there needed to be further fact finding due to problems with that  as
       well a further remaking hearing would need to take place in the Upper
       Tribunal.

         Conclusions - Error of Law

   11. There is a correct legal direction at paragraph 22 of the decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal  that  in  view  of  the  historic  injustice
       against the Gurkhas that once it is determined that there is  Article
       8 ECHR family life between the appellant and his  parents  that  will
       normally be determinative of the appeal. This is clearly the position
       returned to at the end of the conclusions of the First-tier  Tribunal
       at paragraph 26 of the decision too.  It  is  correctly  recorded  at
       paragraph 23 that to establish  family  life  between  an  adult  and
       parents will need more than normal love and affection  and  emotional
       ties, and that there is no test of exceptionality.

   12. At paragraph 22 of the decision it is also said  however  that  there
       must be an element of dependency, this, the appellant contends is not
       a lawful direction. I find that this  direction  was  not  consistent
       with the conclusions of the Court of Appeal in Rai which  find,  from
       Kugathas and the  Strasbourg  cases,  that  what  is  needed  a  fact
       sensitive analysis looking for real or effective or committed support
       in the personal sense and not evidence of dependency as, applying the
       conclusions of the Court of  Appeal  in  Patel  and  others  v  Entry
       Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ  17   family  life  "falls
       well short of what constitutes dependency" and " a  good  many  adult
       children... may still have family  life  with  parents  who  are  now
       settled here".

   13. The next question  is  therefore  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       despite an inaccurate direction on the issue of  dependency,  a  fact
       sensitive analysis looking for real or effective or committed support
       in the personal sense is conducted  to  see  if  family  life  exists
       between the appellant and his father. This is of course challenged in
       the grounds by saying some of the consideration was inaccurate;  some
       evidence was ignored; some issues were unfairly  dealt  with  without
       notice to  the  sponsors  who  gave  evidence;  and  some  irrelevant
       considerations were brought into the balance.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal accepts at paragraph 9 of the  decision  that
       the appellant is the biological son of  his  parents,  the  sponsors,
       despite confusing evidence from the Kindred Roll,  in  light  of  DNA
       evidence which is highly supportive of this fact.

   15. I find that the reasoning with respect to doubting the  history  with
       respect to the work the appellant did between 2000 and  2006  in  the
       UAE as a domestic servant in a private household at paragraphs 10  to
       16 of the decision lacks logic and clarity in the  reasoning.  It  is
       not clear why it was not believed that this was a failed attempt  for
       the appellant to be able to obtain financial independence or  why  it
       is not believed that it ended because he was exploited  (causing  him
       to lose weight and have high cholesterol, diabetes  and  back  pain),
       particularly as there was evidence of  this  work,  evidence  of  his
       diabetes and cholesterol problems and a reasonable  explanation  from
       the Nepali notary as to why this was not  included  in  the  original
       affidavit due to a misunderstanding. It is also not  clear  what  the
       relevance of any of this is in any case as it appears to be  accepted
       that whatever happened in the UAE that it ended in 2006 prior to  the
       appellant's father coming to the  UK.  The  faults  in  the  analysis
       aside, I find that it was lawfully open to the First-tier Tribunal to
       have regard to the uncontested  history  that  the  appellant  had  a
       period of independence of 6 years prior to  his  father  leaving  the
       family home as part of the fact sensitive analysis at paragraph 25 of
       the decision when considering whether family life is to be found,  as
       the past may be telling of the current situation.

   16. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  accept  that  the
       appellant had more than normal  emotional  ties  on  his  parents  or
       support from them at paragraphs 19 and 25 of  the  decision,  despite
       frequent visits by the appellant's father over the  whole  period  he
       has been in the UK (although there has only  been  one  in  the  four
       years since the appellant's mother joined his father in the  UK)  and
       regular  contact  by  phone  and  a  finding  that  a  loving  family
       relationship existing. The conclusion that there  was  no  more  than
       normal emotional ties was reached on the  basis  of  the  appellant's
       father's lack of detailed knowledge as to what he had been doing with
       himself  in  Nepal  with   respect   to   work,   daily   activities,
       relationships as set out at paragraph 19 of the decision. I find  the
       ultimate conclusion at paragraph 25 that "there is  love,  affection,
       and respect between them and they  no  doubt  miss  each  other,  the
       evidence does not support a level of emotional support over and above
       normal emotional ties" is one  which  is  sufficiently  reasoned  and
       rationally open to the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence.

   17. With respect to more practical support  it  is  insufficiently  clear
       what is accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.  Paragraphs  17  and  18
       sets out the detail of the evidence but do not actually state what is
       accepted and what is not accepted. At paragraph  25  it  is  accepted
       that: "There  is  evidence  of  remittance  of  funds  and  that  the
       appellant lives in the house that his  family  lived  in",  and  that
       there is "some extend to financial dependence".  It  is  not  clearly
       reasoned but I find that the implication at paragraph 25 is that  the
       evidence of the sponsor is not  fully  accepted  and  so  it  is  not
       accepted that the appellant  is  not  working  and  earning  to  some
       degree, as it is not believed that his ill-health means that he could
       not work and in the context of it not being believed that he left the
       UAE for the reasons given. I have already found legal  error  in  the
       reasoning with respect to the UAE in paragraph 15 above; and  I  also
       find that the First-tier Tribunal has failed  to  take  into  account
       relevant evidence before it that the appellant was not working due to
       high unemployment in Nepal and his lack of qualifications and not due
       to his health issues as identified by Mr Jesurum; and to consider the
       positive assessment of the  sponsor's  character  by  his  commanding
       officer when considering the credibility of his evidence on the issue
       of financial support.

   18. I conclude that there is a material error of law  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal because ultimately an inaccurate test was applied to whether
       family life exists in this case, and because faulty fact  finding  as
       detailed above means  that  it  is  not  possible  to  say  that  the
       appellant could not have succeeded if the fact sensitive analysis had
       been conducted accurately and lawfully. I preserve the findings  with
       respect to the level  of  emotional  ties  at  paragraph  25  of  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal as cited at paragraph  16  above,
       and also the finding that the appellant lives in the family  home  in
       paragraph 25 of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  these
       findings are reasoned, lawfully and clearly made. The appeal needs to
       be remade with fact finding as to the appellant's history up  to  the
       current time of work and  receipt  of  remittances/financial  support
       from his father to conclude whether this  combined  with  the  normal
       loving ties with his parents and the fact he lives in the family home
       amounts to family life sufficient to meet the requirements of Article
       8(1) ECHR.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal  and  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  bar   those
      identified at paragraph 18 of this decision with respect to  emotional
      ties and the family home.

   3. I adjourn the re-making of the appeal  and  find  that  it  should  be
      remade in the Upper Tribunal given the limited extent of  fact-finding
      required.


   Directions

        i) The remaking hearing will consist of evidence in chief and cross
           examination on the issues of the  appellant's  work  history  to
           date and the history of remissions/  financial  support  by  his
           father  and  submissions  from  both  parties  on  whether   the
           appellant has family life with his parents in a remote Skype for
           Business hearing.

       ii) Any further documentary evidence relied upon should be filed and
           served ten days prior to the remaking hearing.

      iii) If an  interpreter  is  required  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  be
           notified when the notice of hearing is sent out.

       iv) The time estimate is 3 hours.






Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                   Date:  19th October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



