
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/20017/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2018                     |On 6 April 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                SHEROZE KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright (counsel) instructed by Nasim & Co,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     I have considered whether any parties require the protection  of
    an anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

    2.     The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  brings  this
    appeal but to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Greasley,  promulgated
    on 4 January 2018 which allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse to grant the appellant leave to  remain
    in the UK,

    Background

    3.     The Appellant was born on 14 November 1990 and is a national  of
    Pakistan. The appellant entered the UK on 28 July  2010  as  a  tier  4
    student. The respondent extended leave to remain until 30 October 2013.
    The appellant was then granted an extension of stay as a spouse until 5
    June 2016.  On 6 June 2016 the appellant submitted an  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK as the  spouse  of  a  British  citizen.  The
    respondent refused that application on 3 August 2016.  The  appellant's
    wife and daughter are British citizens.

    The Judge's Decision

    4.     The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23  January
    2018 Resident Judge Zucker gave permission to appeal stating

         "3.      It is arguable that in refusing the application the  Judge
         failed to recognise that the criterion which determines whether  an
         adjournment should be granted is whether a party has an opportunity
         to present their case -  "fairness".   At  paragraph  9  the  Judge
         appears to have recognised the need to be fair to the appellant but
         arguably has failed to recognise the need to be fair to both sides.

         4. In granting permission, I am heavily influenced by what  appears
         at paragraph 9 of the decision and there having been a "last-minute
         change to the list". The  Upper  Tribunal  may  well  require  some
         evidence of what is meant by "last-minute" because ordinarily it is
         incumbent upon a party properly to prepare and all the more so  the
         Respondent in cases in which there is  a  strong  public  interest.
         There is otherwise no merit in the grounds. Permission therefore is
         NOT granted to argue proportionality."

    The Hearing

    5.(a)  Mr Bramble for the respondent produced  a  post  hearing  minute
    prepared by the Home Office Presenting Officer who conducted the appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal, together with a brief  email  dated  12
    December  2017.  He  told  me  that  the  email  indicated   that   the
    respondent's generic bundle (typically produced in ETS cases) was  sent
    to the Tribunal on 12 December 2017,  but was not  received  by  either
    the Tribunal or the appellant's representative.

    (b)    Mr Bramble drew my attention to the preliminary issues listed by
    the Home Office Presenting Officer in his post hearing minute, and told
    me that those issues indicate that the  standard  Home  Office  generic
    bundle was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  the  Judge's
    decision not  to  adjourn  on  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's
    application deprived the respondent of a fair hearing. He  referred  me
    to [9] of the decision and told me that the Judge makes no mention of a
    missing bundle or of need for further time to prepare.

    (c)    Mr Bramble referred me to  the  respondent's  bundle  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal. He  told  me  that  if  the  Judge  had
    adjourned to allow production of  the  generic  ETS  bundle,  then  the
    respondent's complete case would have been before  the  Judge.  Because
    the Judge refused the application to adjourn, an  incomplete  case  was
    presented by the respondent.

    6.(a)  For the appellant Mr Plowright adopted the terms of the rule  24
    response.  He  invited  me  to  consider  the  Home  Office  presenting
    officer's post hearing minute carefully and to look at the reasons  for
    the adjournment request. He emphasised that the need to produce further
    evidence was not argued to support an application to adjourn. All  that
    the said to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  that  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer did not have the skill and experience to present  an
    argument on an ETS case. It was only after the Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer's application had been  refused,  and  after  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had a further 15 minutes to prepare the  case,  that
    the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  noticed  that  the  ETS  generic
    materials were not before the First-tier Tribunal.

    (b)    Mr Plowright reminded me that the respondent's decision was made
    in 2016, so that the respondent has almost 18 months to prepare for the
    hearing. He told me that the respondent was now  trying  to  shift  the
    burden for preparation  of  one  party's  argument  to  the  Judge.  He
    reminded me that the test is whether or not the adjournment should have
    been granted in fairness to both parties. He urged me to read  [9]  and
    [10] of the decision. He asked me to dismiss the appeal and  allow  the
    decision to stand.

    Analysis

    7.     Permission to appeal was granted on limited  grounds.  The  only
    issues  before  me  relates  to  the  Judge's  decision  to  refuse  an
    application to adjourn. [9] of the decision says

         "At the commencement of the appeal hearing, Mr Stevenson,  for  the
         respondent, asked for an adjournment. He indicated that  there  had
         been a change to the list at the last moment and  he  had  not  had
         time properly to discuss with the caseworker the implications of an
         ETS refusal. He wished to be in a position to do  so.  Mr  Coleman,
         for the respondent, vigorously opposed the application stating that
         this was not a proper basis upon which  to  adjourn  and  that  the
         matter should proceed.  I  declined  the  application  to  adjourn,
         basing my reasoning upon my general obligation to ensure a fair and
         timely disposal of the appeal hearing, and also  having  regard  to
         the Upper Tribunal decision of Nwaigwe in relation to  fairness  to
         the appellant."

    8.     The Home Office presenting officer's post decision  minute  says
    this under the hearing of preliminary issues

           . Adjournment request made by myself. Cite very late list change
             around 16:00 hours of previous  day.  Case  has  ETS  elements
             which I have not been instructed on  and  do  not  know  which
             lines to take.  Instructed  by  SCW  to  request  adjournment.
             Assurances made that if  adjourned  would  be  represented  by
             appropriate HOPO next time around.

           . Rep opposed adjournment on grounds that  overriding  objective
             of tribunal not served and is for  the  respondent  to  assure
             cases are appropriately staffed.

           . IJ agrees with with Rep - adjournment request refused.

           . Had around 15 minutes to prep case morning before hearing.

           . Home Office bundle did not contain generic ETS/TOEIC evidence.

    9.     The rule 24 response for the appellant was prepared  by  counsel
    who represented the  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    author of that response insists that the request to  adjourn  was  made
    because the Home Office representative had no experience with cases  of
    this sort. No application was made to produce further evidence.

    10.    At [24] of the decision the Judge finds that the respondent does
    not produce evidence  to  support  the  assertion  that  the  appellant
    dishonestly obtained an English language test  certificate.  The  Judge
    concludes [24] by saying that the respondent has had ample opportunity

         "... To obtain and serve supporting generic evidence in relation to
         the allegations of forgery but has failed to do so."

    11.    What was  before  the  Judge  was  an  inexperienced  presenting
    officer who confessed that he was out of his depth and did not know how
    to properly represent the respondent.

    12.    The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the  Tribunal  to
    adjourn a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives under  the
    Rules which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when  exercising
    any power under the Rules. It follows that they are the  issues  to  be
    considered on  an  adjournment  application  as  well.  The  overriding
    objective is to deal with cases fairly and justly.  This is defined  as
    including

         (a)      dealing with the case in ways which are  proportionate  to
         the importance of the case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  the
         anticipated costs and the resources  of  the  parties  and  of  the
         Tribunal;

         (b)      avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility  in
         the proceedings;

         (c)      ensuring, so far as is practicable, that the  parties  are
         able to participate fully in the proceedings;

         (d)      using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively;

         (e)       avoiding  delay  so  far  as   compatible   with   proper
         consideration of the issues.

    13.    In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it
    was held that "If a  Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment
    request, such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
    several respects: these include a failure  to  take  into  account  all
    material  considerations;  permitting  immaterial   considerations   to
    intrude; denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply
    the correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
    the question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of
    his  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   Where  an  adjournment  refusal  is
    challenged on fairness grounds, it is important to recognise  that  the
    question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that of  fairness:
    was there any deprivation of the  affected  party's  right  to  a  fair
    hearing?"

    14.    The decision against which the appellant appealed  was  dated  3
    August 2016. The notice of appeal was lodged on 26 August 2016.  Notice
    of hearing was sent to both parties  on  27  July  2017.  The  Tribunal
    reminded both parties that the hearing was fixed for 27  December  2017
    by letter dated 14 December 2017.

    15.    The respondent had exactly the same notice of the hearing as the
    appellant. The respondent has significant resources.  The  sole  ground
    for seeking an adjournment was that the presenting officer representing
    the respondent before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  inexperienced  and
    inadequately  trained.  The  respondent  has  a  number  of  presenting
    officers. The respondent chose to  send  that  particular  Home  Office
    presenting officer to the First-tier Tribunal.

    16.    At [10] of the decision the Judge notes that both the  appellant
    and the respondent were represented, and that  the  appellant  and  his
    wife were present and ready to give evidence. The Judge's  decision  to
    refuse the application demonstrates fairness to  both  parties  and  is
    entirely in accordance with both the procedure rules and  the  guidance
    given in the case of Nwaigwe. If the last seven words  of  [9]  of  the
    decision had not been used by the  Judge,  then  permission  to  appeal
    would not have been granted. A fair reading of the  decision  indicates
    that those last seven words are unnecessary and make no  difference  to
    the Judge's decision. It is clear from the decision as a whole that the
    test applied by the Judge was fairness to both parties.

    17.    The decision promulgated on 4 January 2018 does not  contain  an
    error of law. What is argued before me is not what  was  argued  before
    the First-tier Tribunal when the Presenting  Officer  there  sought  an
    adjournment. The Judge correctly took guidance from both the  procedure
    rules and the case  of  Nwaigwe  before  refusing  the  application  to
    adjourn. It was the Respondent who selected her representative  from  a
    number of available presenting officers.

    18.    In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85
    (IAC) the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not normally  set
    aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal where  there  has  been  no
    misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and
    the relevant Country Guidance has been taken into account,  unless  the
    conclusions the Judge draws from the primary data were  not  reasonably
    open to him.

    19.    In this case, there is no misdirection in law & the fact-finding
    exercise is beyond  criticism.   The  decision  is  not  tainted  by  a
    material error of law.

    CONCLUSION

    20.    No errors of law have been  established.  The  Judge's  decision
    stands.

    DECISION

    21.    The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    stands.


Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 5 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

