
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20215/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th July 2019                     |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                             BISHNU PRASAD KAFLE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. By a decision promulgated on 1 May 2019, First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Cary dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the
         respondent refusing his human rights claim. The  judge  found  that
         the  appellant's  ETS  language  test  was  "bogus"  and  had  been
         submitted by the appellant to obtain an immigration advantage, that
         he obtained the result dishonestly and  that  his  marriage  to  Ms
         Apreti, who has leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  2  (General)
         Migrant, was not such as to render the decision to refuse his human
         rights claim disproportionate.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds pleaded, namely:

          i) the First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
             recognise that an  ETS  score  considered  'questionable'  was
             unlikely to meet the evidential threshold;

         ii) the First-tier Tribunal judge made a material error of fact in
             categorising the appellant's test score as 'invalid' as oppose
             to 'questionable;

        iii) the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in  placing  weight
             on the extracts from the interview  transcript  cited  in  the
             reasons for refusal letter, in the absence of  the  transcript
             when the transcript had been requested by the appellant;

         iv) In the context of a 'questionable' ETS score, the judge  erred
             in law in failing to consider and make findings in respect  of
             factors set out in [69] of SM and Qadir;

          v) The findings on Article 8 have been infected by the inaccurate
             findings on ETS but in any event the First-tier Tribunal judge
             failed to undertake a balancing exercise as required.

      3. There was no Rule 24 response by the SSHD.

      4. Mr Karim did not make submissions on the 5th ground upon  which  he
         was granted permission to appeal, save  to  say  that  he  was  not
         abandoning the ground; his strongest submissions were  on  the  ETS
         issue which, if the appellant were successful on those grounds  and
         in the appeal generally on those issues, would result in him  being
         in the position he was before the s10 notice was  served  and  thus
         that impacted upon his Article 8 claim overall.

      5. Mr Tarlow referred me to [12] of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
         which reads as follows:

             "The appellant was reminded  that  in  his  interview  he  had
             accepted that he had used deception. He disputed that. He said
             the Home Office were either lying or alternatively had made  a
             mistake in their recollection of what he had  said.  He  could
             remember being asked about the test and he had told them  that
             as it was a long time ago there were  "things"  he  could  not
             remember. He said he had told the Home Office that he had used
             the same agency as he  had  used  in  Nepal  to  organise  his
             studies in the United Kingdom ..."

      6. I drew Mr Tarlow's attention to the fact  that  this  part  of  the
         decision was a record of the appellant's evidence and  was  not  an
         admission of  deception  but  a  refusal  to  accept  that  he  had
         exercised deception. Mr Tarlow made no other submissions other than
         to say that the grounds were no more than a disagreement  with  the
         outcome of the appeal.

         Error of law

      7. The reasons  for  refusal  of  the  appellant's  claim  dated  24th
         September 2018 refers to an interview undertaken by the  respondent
         because  his  result  had  been  withdrawn  by  ETS  and   declared
         questionable because "widespread fraud was known to  have  occurred
         at the  test  centre  in  question."  Verbatim  extracts  from  the
         interview are  not  quoted  in  the  refusal  letter.  Despite  the
         appellant requesting a copy of the interview record, the respondent
         has not provided it.  When  this,  together  with  the  appellant's
         evidence regarding his attendance at the test, is considered in the
         context of the mis-categorisation of the  test  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge as 'invalid' the judge has erred in law.  The  judge
         placed weight on an inaccurately recorded  fact,  failed  to  weigh
         into his consideration the lack of a transcript of  evidence  which
         the respondent had failed to provide and of which not even extracts
         were provided, and failed to have regard to other evidence relating
         to the appellant personally and his language  skills.  It  is  also
         notable that in [50] of the decision, the judge says

             "... Although the burden of proof is  on  the  respondent  the
             appellant has  produced  little  evidence  to  contradict  the
             respondent's assessment ..."

         The judge  has  in  effect  reversed  the  burden  of  proof  on  a
         'questionable' test result.

      8. I am satisfied the judge erred  in  law  in  his  findings  on  the
         appellant's test  result.  This  impacted  significantly  upon  the
         findings with regard to the Article 8 decision given that if he  is
         ultimately successful he would  no  longer  be  subject  to  a  s10
         Immigration Act 1999 decision.

      9. I set aside the decision to be remade.

         Remaking the decision

     10. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, s.12(2) of
         the TCEA 2007 requires me to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal with directions or remake it for ourselves. In this  case,
         the fundamental factual matrix is disputed, and I am satisfied  the
         nature and extent of judicial fact finding necessary is such  that,
         having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 of the Practice
         Direction, it is appropriate to remit the case  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did the making of
    an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision  and  remit  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Taylor House) to be re-heard, no findings preserved.

    To be heard by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cary;  no
    interpreter required.


     Date 9th July 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
