
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21199/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 8 January 2020                          |on 29 January 2020              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                SEHRISH AZIZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi instructed by Optimus Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills Senior Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated  on  the  4  July  2019,  following  a
       hearing at Birmingham, in which the Judge dismissed  the  appellant's
       appeal on all grounds.

Background

    2. The appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on the 20 December
       1991 who appealed against the decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer
       (ECO) dated 24 September  2018  refusing  an  application  for  entry
       clearance as the spouse of  a  Mr  Ashiq  Hussain  who  is  also  the
       appellant's sponsor.

    3. Having considered the documentary and oral evidence  the  Judge  sets
       out findings of fact from [38] of the decision under appeal.

    4. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
       another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal, the operative part of which
       is in the following terms:

           "It is arguable that the Judge gave an  appearance  of  bias  by
           raising his voice when speaking to the sponsor by depriving  him
           to give instructions to the appellant's representative after  he
           had concluded his evidence. Permission to  appeal  is  therefore
           granted. However,  the  evidence  produced  in  support  of  the
           grounds is currently limited and the granting of  permission  to
           appeal does not imply that the complaints made against the Judge
           have been factually substantiated.  Moreover,  the  granting  of
           permission does not  include  the  right  to  raise  the  matter
           contained  within  the  penultimate  paragraph  of  the  witness
           statement made by Aaliyah Hussain. This matter is not raised  in
           the grounds of application and should not have been included  in
           the witness statement."

Error of law

    5. The appellant makes a number of serious allegations against the Judge
       claiming she did not receive a fair hearing and that  the  Judge  was
       biased, rude, unprofessional, shouted at the  sponsor  several  times
       and  prevented  the  sponsor  from   giving   instructions   to   his
       representative  during  the  submissions  of  the   respondent.   The
       appellant also asserts the Judge engaged in  gathering  evidence  for
       the respondent during the hearing and went out of his way to find for
       the respondent.

    6. The grounds raise a number of challenges to the impugned decision and
       state that an official complaint has been filed separately, but  that
       is not a matter for this Tribunal.

    7. In accordance with normal practice a copy of the allegations was sent
       to the Judge whose response has been disclosed to the parties by  way
       of a Notice dated 25 October 2019. A further copy was provided to  Mr
       Mills at the start of the hearing as he did not have the respondent's
       copy on his file.

    8. At [9 - 10] the Judge, in the section of  the  decision  headed  "The
       proceedings", writes:

           "9.    During preliminary matters Mr Ali used his smartphone  to
                view the website of the sponsor's employer as a result of Mr
                Smith's  reliance  upon  the  printout.  He  was  unable  to
                initially locate the website but then  amended  the  website
                address to omit "ltd" despite its inclusion in the footer of
                the employer's letter.

           10.    Due to this anomaly I also took the opportunity  to  look
                at the employer's website using my smartphone and  Mr  Smith
                was invited to do the same. I noted that a Google search for
                the  employer's  company  name  provided  a  link   to   the
                employer's website which was actually a  link  to  Companies
                House website for the  employers  company  registration.  Mr
                Smith and Mr Ali were invited  to  address  these  anomalies
                during the course of the hearing."

    9. Mr Smith was the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing before
       the First-Tier Tribunal and Mr Ali the appellant's representative. At
       [6] the Judge records that Mr Smith filed and served  a  printout  of
       his unsuccessful attempts to find the website ("printout")  for  Easy
       Global  Services  Limited  ("sponsors   employer").   No   procedural
       unfairness is pleaded in the Judge admitting this evidence on the day
       and it is not suggested or shown that Mr Ali thought it necessary  to
       make an adjournment application  to  enable  him  to  obtain  further
       evidence dealing with this point. Indeed at [8] the Judge records  Mr
       Ali filed 9 photographs relating to the sponsors employer's  business
       premises.

   10. A useful schedule has been  prepared  by  Mr  Azmi  which  he  claims
       supports the alleged lack of clarity in relation to  this  and  other
       issues.  The schedule is in the following terms:


       |Appellant          |IJ Fox comments    |Determination     |Mr Smith  |
|                   |                   |                  |notes     |
|                   |Para|              |Para |             |          |


Grounds |IJ used mobile first |5 |Mr Ali used phone first.
Mr Smith used. I then used |9 |Mr Ali used first.
IJ did.
Then Mr Smith |IJ, Rep, Appellant and himself | |Grounds |Sponsor stated
website updated Ramadan |13 |Sponsor not state website updated in Ramadan.
Stated 'Possibly Ramadan' |27 |May or June during Ramadan | | | | |14 |Only
re-exam theme related to website |29 |No re-exam | | | | |15 |A lot of work
centred on telephone contact with clients.
 |50 |Footfall was the key element of trading attributes. | | | | |17 |Mr
Ali chose not to make submissions about report |35 + 43 |Content of report
inconsistent with response claimed. | |  |Dealing  with  the  allegation  of
       procedural unfairness in the Judge using his smart phone,  which  the
       appellant/sponsor assert is the basis for the  conclusion  the  Judge
       engaged in gathering evidence for the respondent,  no  unfairness  is
       made out. In EG (post-hearing internet research) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT
   11. 00015 the Tribunal said that it is most unwise for a judge to conduct
       post-hearing research, on the internet or otherwise, into the factual
       issues which have to be decided in a case. To  derive  evidence  from
       post-hearing research on the internet and to base conclusions on that
       evidence without giving the parties the opportunity to comment on  it
       is wrong.

   12. The Judge did not undertake post-hearing Internet research. In  light
       of the late filing of the report  by  Mr  Smith  in  support  of  his
       contention that he had been unable to find  the  sponsors  employer's
       website both the Judge and Advocates use their smart phones in court,
       and in the presence and knowledge of each other, to see  whether  the
       web address referred to could be accessed. The decision records  that
       it could not save through the link to Companies House which,  as  the
       employers business is a registered company, is as expected. There  is
       no record of any objection having been raised at the  hearing  by  Mr
       Ali or Mr Smith to the Judge making such an enquiry.  The  Judge  was
       endeavouring to obtain best available evidence and if his search  had
       found a link to the employers website the appellant/sponsor would  no
       doubt not have raised this complaint.

   13. The value of the appellants claims based upon the schedule that there
       may be a difference between the Judge's comments and the  content  of
       the determination has to be considered in the context in  which  such
       comments arose. The determination is  the  document  under  challenge
       dated 4 July 2019 following a hearing on 2  July  2019.  The  Judge's
       comments were sought on 14 October 2019 and received  on  21  October
       2019. Time  had  therefore  passed  between  the  production  of  the
       determination and the opportunity being given to the Judge to comment
       upon the allegations made.

   14. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Response opposing the application.

Discussion

   15. It is not disputed that this appellant, as with any person  appearing
       before a court or tribunal has a right to a fair hearing. There are a
       number of authorities both in the Upper Tribunal and Court of  Appeal
       in which there have been detailed discussion of  the  development  of
       concepts of factual and actual  bias.  Actual  bias  can  occur,  for
       example, in a judge adjudicating in a case in which he or she has  an
       interest. This is not said to be a relevant factor in this appeal and
       the appellant's challenge is, in reality, a claim that she was denied
       a fair hearing as a result of the apparent bias of the Judge.

   16. In Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67 at [103] the House of  Lords  found
       "the question is whether the fair-minded observer, having  considered
       the facts, would conclude that there was a real possibility that  the
       tribunal was bias.

   17. The Court of Appeal in Re Medicament [2001] 1 WLR  700  provided  the
       following guidance to decision-makers where such allegation arises in
       the  following  terms:  "The  Court  must  first  ascertain  all  the
       circumstances which have a bearing on the suggestions that the  Judge
       was bias. It must then ask itself whether circumstances would lead to
       a fair minded and informed observer to conclude that there was a real
       possibility that the Tribunal was bias.  The  material  circumstances
       will include any explanation given by the Judge under  review  as  to
       his knowledge or appreciation of those circumstances".

   18. It is not disputed that justice  must  not  only  be  done  but  must
       manifestly be seen to be done in any case, but it is  also  important
       to bear in mind that bias means a prejudice against one party or  its
       case for reasons unconnected with the legal or factual merits of  the
       case.

   19. The respondent's Rule 24 Response refers to the case law relating  to
       who the duly informed hypothetical  reasonable  observer  is,  making
       reference to the decision in Resolution Chemicals ltd v H Lunbeck A/S
       [2013] EWCA Civ 1515 In which the  following  points  were  distilled
       from the case law by Sir Terence Etherton:

        i. The fair-minded and informed observer is not unduly sensitive or
           suspicious, but  neither  is  he  or  she  complacent:  Lawal  v
           Northern Spirit Ltd [2003] UKHL 35 at [14]

       ii. The facts and context are critical, with  each  turning  on  "an
           intense focus on the essential  facts  of  the  case":  Helow  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 62

      iii. If the  test  of  apparent  bias  is  satisfied,  the  judge  is
           automatically   disqualified   from   hearing   the   case   and
           considerations of inconvenience, cost and delay are  irrelevant:
           Man O'War Station Ltd v Auckland City Council  [2002]  UKPC  28,
           para 11.

   20. As also noted in Helow the fair-minded and informed observer  is  not
       to be confused with the person raising the complaint of apparent bias
       and that the test ensures that there is this measure  of  detachment.
       In Resolution Chemicals Sir Terence Etherton also found if the  legal
       test is not satisfied any objection to the judge must  fail  even  if
       that leaves the applicant dissatisfied and bearing a sense of justice
       will not or may not be done.

   21. The Secretary of State's  written  submissions,  relied  upon  by  Mr
       Mills, are in the following terms:

           "Would a duly informed  hypothetical  reasonable  observer  find
           that the FtTJ's determination discloses an absence  of  judicial
           impartiality or real possibility of such?

           11.    The Respondent submits that the  findings  made  by  FtTJ
                paragraphs 38 - 55 were carefully considered on the evidence
                before him MK (duty to give reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT
                641. That the evidence on which these findings were based at
                paragraphs 20 - 30 are  not  disputed  and  neither  was  it
                raised in the GOA that the Sponsor was stopped from being re-
                examined by the representative, or that  the  Representative
                was stopped from making submissions.

           Would the circumstances lead a fair minded and informed observer
           to conclude that there was a real possibility that the Judge was
           biased?

           12.     It  is  contended  that  the   FtTJ   directed   himself
                appropriately  during  the  hearing.  It  is  evident   from
                paragraph 9 - 10, absent of evidence to the  contrary,  that
                both parties  were  given  an  opportunity  to  address  the
                anomaly's in the evidence. While  the  order  in  which  the
                parties looked up the evidence may be disputed, both parties
                were also given an opportunity  to  cross  examine  and  re-
                examine the Sponsors evidence.

           13.    It is respectively submitted that the FtTJ  was  entitled
                to choose  how  to  conduct  their  hearing,  even  if  this
                involved asking questions as a form of clarification. It  is
                also noted that it is not the Appellant's position that  the
                representative was stopped  from  re-examining  the  witness
                before proceeding to submissions.

           14.    It is also evident, that the Court was entitled  to  stop
                the Sponsor from interrupting the Respondent's  submissions,
                provided it gave the Appellant a right of reply which it did
                [11].

           15.    It is noted, that the  two  witness  statements  provided
                dated 30 July 2019 in support of the Appellant's appeal,  do
                not aver to the Sponsor and the Representative being  unable
                to put the Appellant's case.

           16.    Therefore, on  the  evidence  available,  the  Respondent
                contends that on the balance of probabilities, the FtTJ  was
                unbiased and directed himself appropriately."

   22. Many Judges differ in their approach to how they  manage  proceedings
       in the courts and tribunals and adopting a robust approach  does  not
       establish bias, per se, provided the parties receive a  fair  hearing
       to which they are entitled.

   23. The appellant had the benefit of Mr Ali, an experienced  practitioner
       in this field, representing her supported by the sponsor. It is clear
       that Mr Ali was able to engage fully with the appeal process  by  the
       provision of additional documents, ability to call witnesses  and  to
       examine and re-examine as required, and to make  submissions  on  the
       appellant's behalf. What is conspicuous by its absence in relation to
       the evidence relied upon by the appellant and sponsor in  support  of
       the allegation of  bias  is  anything  from  Mr  Ali  to  support  or
       substantiate this claim. There is no witness statement,  Mr  Ali  was
       not called to give evidence, and there is nothing from him  asserting
       any difficulty in properly representing the appellant or claiming the
       appellant did not receive a fair hearing before the Judge.

   24. The Judge in his response to the grounds of challenge records that Mr
       Ali did not object to the respondent's  reliance  on  the  enrichment
       activity report at the hearing and that he  was  free  to  raise  any
       concerns about the evidence relied  upon  by  the  respondent  during
       preliminary issues or throughout the hearing. The  Judge  records  Mr
       Ali chose not to  make  submissions  about  the  report  despite  the
       subsequent protestations and that the report  demonstrated  that  the
       employer was on notice of the respondent's intentions to make contact
       that this was frustrated for unknown reasons.

   25. The sponsor claims he was nervous, that his voice was soft  and  that
       the Judge instead of asking politely shouted at the sponsor to  speak
       up meaning the sponsor was intimidated by the Judge.

   26. The respondent's written submissions referred to [11] of the decision
       under challenge in which the Judge writes:

           "11.   During Mr Smith's  submissions  the  sponsors  sought  to
                confer with Mr Ali. Before Mr Ali began his  submissions  he
                was given time to take instructions. The sponsor relied upon
                a business card to address Mr Smith's  submissions.  However
                Mr Ali declined  the  opportunity  to  file  and  serve  the
                business card and  relied  upon  the  existing  evidence  to
                advance the appeal."

   27. The Judge in his response to the grounds of challenge also writes:

           "7.    It is my role to ensure that I  am  aware  of  everything
                that takes place  during  the  hearing.  During  Mr  Smith's
                submissions I was distracted by the  sponsor's  conversation
                with Mr Ali. It  is  inappropriate  for  Mr  Ali  to  decide
                whether this caused me to be distracted or not. I said  that
                there will be an  opportunity  at  the  end  of  Mr  Smith's
                submissions to confer I granted an  adjournment  on  my  own
                initiative for Mr Ali to  take  instructions.  When  Mr  Ali
                returned I sought expressed assurances that he was ready  to
                proceed and that the  sponsor  had  addressed  all  matters.
                Naturally I did not pursue this in detail as I respect legal
                privilege. Mr Ali now states that his failure to  raise  the
                sponsor's concerns caused detriment to the  sponsor  despite
                numerous  opportunities  to  bring  any   concerns   to   my
                attention.

           8.     If the sponsor was unable to recall an instruction that I
                prevented him from providing as claimed, Mr Ali was free  to
                ask for more time to confer with the sponsor or to apply for
                the matter to be put back.  Alternatively  Mr  Ali  had  the
                opportunity to bring these allegations to my  attention  and
                request that I recuse myself."

   28. It is not made out the Judge prevented  the  sponsor  being  able  to
       discuss matters further with Mr Ali during the hearing or that Mr Ali
       was denied the opportunity to raise any matters of concern  with  the
       Judge. It is not made out the Judge's language, demeanour, or  manner
       in  which  the  hearing  was  conducted,  when  considering  all  the
       available material, would have given rise to concern in the mind of a
       fair minded and informed observer that there was a  real  possibility
       that the Judge was bias.

   29. The statements relied upon by the appellant in support of  the  claim
       have been considered. The first is from the sponsor dated 24 December
       2019 which seeks to  provide  further  evidence  in  support  of  the
       appellant's  claim,  highlighting   issues   of   concern   but   not
       establishing bias. So far as that statement provides information that
       was not before the Judge it does not establish legal error.

   30. The second statement is written by the sponsors  employer,  Mr  Nagi,
       commenting upon issues raised in the appeal. The statement  seeks  to
       provide information that was not available before the Judge  who  had
       concerns about the sponsor's claim to be employed by this  gentleman.
       At [38] the Judge finds the sponsor had no  meaningful  knowledge  of
       his employers  business  or  trading  activities  and  in  subsequent
       paragraphs examines the evidence that had been provided in support of
       the sponsors employment  and  ability  to  meet  the  minimum  income
       requirement in Appendix FM. The Judge specifically notes despite  the
       appellant being aware of  the  concerns  expressed  by  the  ECO  the
       sponsor's employer did not attend the hearing and was  therefore  not
       available for the purposes of cross-examination  and  re-examination.
       The statement provides evidence that could have  been  given  at  the
       hearing had Mr Nagi attended which was not available  the  Judge  and
       which does not establish an error of law on the basis of a mistake of
       fact as per E&R and does not establish legal error.

   31. In addition to the Judge, the sponsor, and Mr  Ali,  the  only  other
       person present at the hearing who has provided further evidence is Mr
       Smith the Home Office Presenting Officer who in an email sent  to  Mr
       Mills on 7 January 2020, which was disclosed to the Tribunal  and  Mr
       Azmi, writes

           "I have read the GOA & have refreshed my memory  by  reading  my
           SAT minute which was produced within 24 hours of the hearing.

           I recall IJ  Fox  &  Mr  Ali  not  seeing  eye  to  eye  on  the
           preliminary issue when we all searched for the  website  on  our
           respective phones and IJ Fox pointing out, very reasonably, that
           the webpage  found  by  the  appellant  was  in  an  alternative
           address.

           I do not recall any shouting by anyone at the hearing  or  there
           being anything of particular note which made  the  appeal  stand
           out from any other in terms of proper procedures. In such  cases
           I try to make reference in the SAT  minute  in  case  there  are
           subsequent issues, such as this one.

           I can recall no barriers to the appellant's case being fully set
           out and my recollection is that Mr  Ali  did  so  in  his  usual
           detailed and very professional manner.

           I am happy for this email to be served on the Upper Tribunal."

   32. The  burden  of  proving  the  allegation  of  bias  falls  upon  the
       appellant. Having undertaken a careful examination of  the  decision,
       pleadings, basis of claim of bias and/or other issues in the  grounds
       of appeal, evidence, and submissions made, I find that the  appellant
       and sponsor whilst they may not be satisfied with the  Judge  or  the
       outcome of the appeal have failed to establish that the appellant did
       not receive a fair hearing and failed to establish they are  able  to
       satisfy the legal test set out above to establish bias in the mind of
       the Judge, actual or inferred.

   33. As noted above further information has been provided which whilst not
       establishing legal error sufficient to  warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal
       interfering any further in relation to this decision, might support a
       fresh application by the appellant for leave to enter under  Appendix
       FM. That is a matter on which advice can  be  taken  although  it  is
       important that if such an application is made all  relevant  evidence
       that is  available  is  provided  to  enable  the  considering  Entry
       Clearance Officer to have a clear understanding of the relevant facts
       of  the  appellant  and  sponsor's   circumstances;   including   the
       opportunity to discuss the matter with Mr Nagi if relevant.

Decision

   34. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   35. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 January 2020

