
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21496/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th April 2021                 |On 10 May 2021                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           TERRANCE MARK ROBINSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright (direct access)


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on  22  September
      1976.  His  appeal  against  deportation  was  allowed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hosie on 3 March 2020  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
      Secretary of State appealed.

   2. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on  the  grounds
      that the judge failed to make a clear finding as to whether the effect
      of the Appellant's removal on his partner would be  unduly  harsh.  It
      was further arguable that the judge erred in  placing  weight  on  the
      alleged lack of reasoning for the present decision to deport.

   3. In his Rule 24 response, the  Appellant  submitted  the  decision  was
      fully reasoned and the judge was clearly aware of  the  background  to
      the case. The judge considered whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
      the Appellant's partner to remain in the UK without the  Appellant  at
      [44], [45]  and  [58].  The  judge  took  into  account  all  relevant
      circumstances and her findings were open to her on the evidence before
      her.

   4. The Appellant's immigration history and the procedural history of this
      case are set out at [1] to [6]  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. In summary, the Appellant came to the UK  in  1999  and  was
      granted indefinite leave to  remain  in  2001.  He  was  convicted  of
      wounding with intent  to  cause  grievous  bodily  harm  in  2004  and
      sentenced to four years imprisonment. His appeal  against  deportation
      was allowed and  he  was  granted  discretionary  leave.  He  made  an
      application for further leave to remain on Article 8 grounds which was
      refused and a decision to  deport  was  made.  His  subsequent  appeal
      against deportation was allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  set
      aside by the Upper Tribunal, on appeal by the Respondent, and the case
      remitted for re-hearing with a preserved  finding  that  it  would  be
      unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner to return to Jamaica with the
      Appellant.

   5. In her decision of 30 March  2020,  Judge  Hosie  made  the  following
      relevant findings:

         "40.     In terms of the Home Office letter 29 September  2012  the
             Appellant remains potentially liable to  deportation.  It  was
             argued on the Appellant's behalf and found by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal that the effect of  the  2012  letter  was  that  the
             Respondent no  longer  considered  it  to  be  in  the  public
             interest to deport the Appellant. What was not made  clear  by
             the Respondent was why it is now in  the  public  interest  to
             deport the Appellant in light of the length  of  time  he  has
             lived in the UK, his relationship and  the  fact  he  has  not
             offended since 2003. What  has  not  been  considered  by  the
             Respondent and forms the subject of  criticism  by  the  Upper
             Tribunal  are  the  three  separate  elements  of  the  public
             interest.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  so  criticised  for
             failing to properly address the public interest."

         ...

         "44.     In relation to the impact on the Appellant's partner under
             Article 8 ECHR should the Appellant be deported and Ms Wallace
             remain in the UK, I note that they intend to  start  a  family
             and have had a specialist referral  in  relation  to  assisted
             conception. Ms Wallace's life is tied to the UK where  she  is
             the appointee for her disabled sister. The  Appellant  assists
             with this care and supports his partner as  a  carer  for  her
             sister. The level of care  provided  is  24/7  and  given  the
             profound disability of Ms Wallace's sister  it  would  not  be
             easy for her to spend any extended time away from her visiting
             the  Appellant  in  Jamaica  in   order   to   sustain   their
             relationship. In relation to this backdrop, I find  it  to  be
             significant that there are preserved  findings  regarding  the
             genuineness and subsistence of the  relationship  between  the
             Appellant and his partner and that family  life  between  them
             exists. The  viability  of  sustaining  this  family  life  in
             separate countries is affected by  the  Appellant's  partner's
             role as the primary carer for her disabled sister in the UK."

         ...

         "64.     Beyond those considerations, I have taken into account the
             fact that the Appellant has been living in the UK  for  almost
             twenty years and that he is  in  a  longstanding  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with Ms Wallace with whom he lives. He
             supports Ms Wallace in her role as a  primary  carer  for  her
             disabled sister who requires on  going  24/7  care  due  to  a
             lifelong condition. The Appellant  has  committed  no  offence
             since 2003 and he has been rehabilitated. The Appellant and Ms
             Wallace have developed their relationship in the UK  and  have
             taken steps to start a family together in the UK on the  basis
             of notice given  by  the  Respondent  in  2012  that,  without
             further reoffending, the Appellant would not be  deported.  Ms
             Wallace would be unable to spend extended time in Jamaica with
             the  Appellant  if  he  were   deported   given   her   caring
             responsibility towards her sister in the UK.  The  Appellant's
             chances of being granted visit visas are  low.  There  are  no
             ongoing risks to members of the public or to children  and  it
             has not been suggested otherwise. The previous Tribunals  have
             already found it would be unduly harsh and that there would be
             a breach of Article 8 ECHR were the Appellant  to  be  removed
             from the  UK  and  this  decision  was  not  appealed  by  the
             Respondent. The Respondent indicated in 2012 that  they  would
             not pursue further deportation action in respect of  the  2004
             conviction and has given no  clear  reasons  as  to  why  this
             position has now changed."

Submissions

   6. Mr Melvin relied on the skeleton argument dated  9  October  2020  and
      submitted the judge had failed to make a  finding  that  it  would  be
      unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner to remain in the  UK  without
      the  Appellant.  Further,  she  erred  in  law  by  relying   on   the
      Respondent's letter of 29 September  2012  ['the  2012  letter']  when
      considering very compelling  circumstances  and  her  decision  lacked
      reasons. There had been a change in circumstances and the 2012  letter
      had  no  relevance  to  the  Article  8  assessment.  The  judge   had
      misdirected herself in law and failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  on
      material matters.

   7. Mr Plowright relied on his skeleton argument dated 29 May 2019 and the
      Rule 24 response. He submitted there were two issues: undue  harshness
      and very compelling circumstances. The judge made it  clear  from  the
      outset that she had appreciated and identified these two  issues.  She
      considered the issue of undue harshness on a number of  occasions.  It
      was apparent from the uncontested facts that  the  relationship  would
      come to an end if the Appellant was deported. The Appellant's  partner
      had to care for her sister and therefore she would be unable to  visit
      the Appellant in Jamaica. It  was  unlikely  the  Appellant  would  be
      granted a visit visa. The judge gave sufficient  reasons  at  [44]  to
      show that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  Appellant's  partner  to
      remain in the UK without the Appellant.

   8. Mr Plowright accepted that, following MA (Pakistan)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
      1252, the decision to refuse the Appellant's human  rights  claim  and
      deport him to Jamaica ['the 2018 refusal letter'] was not unlawful and
      there was no legitimate expectation  arising  from  the  2012  letter.
      There had been a change to the legal  landscape  and  the  Appellant's
      circumstances since then. However, the judge was entitled to  consider
      the effect  of  the  2012  letter  on  the  Appellant's  actions.  The
      Appellant was granted leave to  remain  in  2012  and  the  Respondent
      indicated that deportation action would not be taken in the absence of
      further criminality.

   9. The 2012 letter was relevant to whether  there  were  very  compelling
      circumstances over and above the immigration rules with respect to its
      impact on family life  taken  cumulatively  with  all  other  relevant
      factors. The Appellant had been living in the UK since 1999 and it was
      15 years since his conviction. His family  circumstances  had  changed
      and he was able to develop his family life in the UK in the absence of
      a deportation order.

  10. Mr Plowright submitted the judge was aware of the  factual  background
      and she took into account all relevant matters. Her finding  that  the
      2018 refusal letter  was  unlawful  would  only  be  material  if  her
      findings were irrational. The judge's findings at [64]  were  open  to
      her on the evidence before her  and  she  gave  adequate  reasons  for
      coming to those conclusions. The judge's decision making  process  was
      correct notwithstanding she  was  not  made  aware  of  MA  (Pakistan)
      [2019]. The judge had looked at the individual  circumstances  of  the
      Appellant's case.

  11. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge had placed undue  emphasis  on  the
      2012 letter and had not considered the case in the alternative.  There
      was no finding that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to
      return to Jamaica without his partner. Although the Appellant had  not
      reoffended, it was  clear  from  the  2018  refusal  letter  that  the
      Appellant's asylum claim and absconding in 2009 did not form  part  of
      the judge's decision. It was in the  public  interest  to  deport  the
      Appellant.

Conclusions and reasons

  12. There are two issues in this appeal:

          a. Whether the judge has found that it would be unduly harsh  for
             the Appellant's partner  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
             Appellant; and

          b. Whether the judge  erroneously  took  into  account  the  2012
             letter in assessing very compelling circumstances.

  13. I find that the judge  could  have  been  clearer  in  expressing  the
      conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant's  partner
      to remain in the UK without the Appellant, but  I  am  satisfied  that
      [44] read in the context of the decision as a whole is  sufficient  to
      support such a finding. Any lack of  clarity  in  expression  was  not
      material. There was no material error of law in relation to the  first
      issue.

  14. The judge's attention was not drawn to MA (Pakistan)  [2019]  and  she
      erroneously concluded that  the  2018  refusal  letter  was  unlawful.
      However, for the reasons given below this error was  not  material  to
      the judge's finding that there were very compelling  circumstances  in
      this case.

  15. At [59] the judge stated: "Arguably the decision to deport is unlawful
      and the Respondent is barred from proceeding on this  basis,  applying
      the Court of appeal (sic) decision in TB (Jamaica). To the extent that
      the Respondent is not barred and the deportation order is not unlawful
      I have considered the relevant legal tests together  with  the  public
      interest considerations based on the evidence before me."

  16. I am satisfied the judge considered whether there were very compelling
      circumstances without taking into account her erroneous  finding  that
      the decision to deport was unlawful. The 2012 letter was  relevant  to
      the Appellant establishing family in the UK at  a  time  when  he  had
      lawful leave and was not subject to a deportation order.

  17. The judge properly directed herself on the weight to  be  attached  to
      the public interest and she considered all relevant matters  at  [64].
      Her conclusion that there were very compelling circumstances was  open
      to her on the evidence before her and she gave  adequate  reasons  for
      coming to that conclusion. There was  no  material  error  of  law  in
      relation to the second issue.

  18. I find that there was no material error of law in the  decision  of  3
      March 2020 and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.





Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed


J Frances

Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
Date:  29April 2021



