
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21724/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester CJC             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 9 April 2018                     |On:  17 April 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 LUQMAN [L]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:            Mr Reyaz, Rasools Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Farrelly promulgated on 22 May 2017, in which his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights  claim  dated  13
    September 2016, was dismissed.



Background

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, entered the UK as  a  student  in
    2011 with leave valid until 16 January 2016.  The  Respondent  contends
    that his leave was curtailed effective from 22 November  2014,  and  he
    thereafter overstayed.


 3. The appellant married Mrs [L] ('the sponsor'),  a  British  Citizen  in
    January 2016.  She has two adult children from a previous relationship,
    the younger of which, [J], then aged 19, continued to reside  with  his
    mother as at the date of hearing.   The appellant sought to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of his relationship with the sponsor.

Appeal proceedings

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the sponsor could return to Pakistan
    with the appellant or alternatively she could support  his  application
    for entry clearance, and in the circumstances the  appellant's  removal
    would not constitute a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

 5. In grounds of appeal it was argued on behalf of the appellant that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law, inter alia, in:  (i)  making  factual
    mistakes on material matters;  (ii)  failing  to  apply  the  principle
    derived from Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 as approved of in  Agyarko
    v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.  When granting permission to  appeal  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain  considered  both  these  grounds  to   be
    arguable.


Hearing

 6. Mr Reyaz relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal.   He  placed  particular
    emphasis on the mistake of fact regarding [J]'s age.  He  was  born  in
    1997 and not 1987 as set out at [2].


 7.  Mr  Bates  acknowledged  that  the   decision   contains   unfortunate
    typographical errors  but  invited  me  to  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would have inevitably reached the same decision, even if aware
    of [J]'s true age and circumstances.


 8. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision,  which
    I now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

[J]

 9. In my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal made  a  number  of  concerning
    obvious errors in its decision: the recording of the sponsor's name and
    [J]'s date of birth at [2] are both incorrect;  the  recording  of  the
    date that the sponsor was discharged from  hospital  at  [10]  is  also
    incorrect; the reference to "robust working" at [13] must  also  be  an
    error; the First-tier Tribunal states at  [27]  that  "she"  has  close
    family "there", when the sponsor's close family are all in the UK;  the
    reference to Qatar at [28] is also erroneous.


10. The most important error by some distance is the failure to  get  [J]'s
    age correct.  At the relevant time, he was 19 and not 29.  In addition,
    the First-tier Tribunal states that the children  are  adults  "leading
    independent lives" at [27] but offers  no  reasons  for  this  finding.
    Such a  finding  is  inconsistent  with  the  letter  written  by  [J],
    available to the First-tier Tribunal in the appellant's  bundle.   This
    states that he continued to live with his mother at home and they  have
    become particularly  close  and  reliant  upon  each  other  after  her
    hospitalisation in 2014 as a result of an overdose.


11. There was evidence to support particular mutual dependence between  [J]
    and the sponsor, as well as between the sponsor and her mother  in  the
    form of letters.  These supported the appellant's claim that  when  all
    the circumstances are viewed cumulatively they could not  enjoy  family
    life in Pakistan, because there would be  insurmountable  obstacles  in
    place, preventing the sponsor from doing so.  This is an argument  with
    prima facie merit in the circumstances of this case.  The  sponsor  has
    never been to Pakistan and does not speak the language.  She  has  been
    an independent working mother in the UK for an extended period of time,
    and is likely to face cultural, linguistic and religious  obstacles  in
    adapting to  life  in  Pakistan  and  finding  employment  in  a  field
    commensurate with her skills and experience.  She has  had  significant
    health problems in the recent past and is particularly close to [J] and
    her mother, who have assisted her to overcome difficulties.  The First-
    tier Tribunal has erred in law in leaving  the  latter  factor  out  of
    account in assessing proportionality for the purposes of Article 8.

Chikwamba

12. Mr Bates submitted that even if there are insurmountable  obstacles  in
    this particular case, there would only be a  temporary  separation,  as
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant  could  make  an
    application for entry clearance.  This is a case in which the appellant
    is likely to meet all the requirements of the Immigration Rules  if  he
    returned to Pakistan to apply for entry clearance: the relationship was
    accepted to be genuine and subsisting and  the  financial  requirements
    can be met because of the sponsor's stable employment.  In Agyarko  the
    Supreme Court summarised the impact of Chikwamba in this way:


           "If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing  in  the
           UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to  be  granted  leave  to
           enter, at least if an application were made from outside the UK,
           then there might be no public interest in his  or  her  removal.
           This point is illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v SSHD."


13. In these circumstances,  and  notwithstanding  any  difference  in  the
    factual scenario in Chikwamba, the First-tier Tribunal was  obliged  to
    identify why the public interest supported removal in  this  particular
    case.  The First-tier Tribunal  referred  to  the  circumstances  under
    which the relationship developed.  The appellant was undoubtedly in the
    UK unlawfully at the time (whether  or  not  he  was  served  with  his
    curtailment decision, his student visa had  expired  or  was  about  to
    expire) but the First-tier Tribunal had to consider  and  identify  the
    public interest applicable even where the appellant was residing in the
    UK unlawfully and  why  this  outweighed  the  interference  with  this
    particular family life on a temporary basis.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in failing to do so.


Disposal

14. For these reasons, I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    discloses errors of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal,
    and I set it aside.


15. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant
    Senior President's Practice Statement, the fundamental  error  of  fact
    identified, and the nature and extent of the factual findings  required
    in remaking the decision, and conclude that it is  necessary  for  this
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
    afresh by a judge other than Judge Farrelly.

Decision


16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.


17. The appeal shall be remade by  First-tier  Tribunal     on  a  de  novo
    basis.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 16 April 2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
