
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21075/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2021                      |                                     |
|Extempore                            |On 08 October 2021                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Rehman, Counsel instructed by Kenton Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against a decision by the Secretary of State made 3
October 2018 to refuse her further leave to remain and to refuse her human
rights claim.  Her appeal against that decision was allowed by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Munonyedi for the reasons set out in her decision of 5
December 2019.  For the reasons set out in Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul's
decision of 22 March 2021, a copy of which will be attached to this
decision, that decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.
Directions were also given as to the type of evidence that would be useful
for the Tribunal in remaking the decision.

There is no need to go to the background of this case as it is already set
out in the error of law decision at paragraphs 1 to 4 but the core issue is
that the Secretary of State refused to give the appellant further leave to
remain as the spouse of a British Citizen because she had been unable to
complete an English language test which was required as one of the
conditions of her being granted further leave to remain.

The relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules is E-LTRP.4.2. which
provides:
         E-LTRP.4.2. The applicant is exempt from the English language
         requirement in paragraph E-LTRP.4.1. or E-LTRP.4.1A. if at the date
         of application-

         (a) the applicant is aged 65 or over;

         (b) the applicant has a disability (physical or mental condition)
         which prevents the applicant from meeting the requirement; or

         (c) there are exceptional circumstances which prevent the applicant
         from being able to meet the requirement.

The appellant's case is that, owing to a combination of health issues, she
is unable to concentrate, is unable to read and has difficulty in hearing.
She has a number of health conditions which prevent her from both learning
and also in taking a test in English.  We have today been assisted by the
provision, albeit belatedly, of a letter from the appellant's doctor and
the provision of a skeleton argument from Mr Rehman attaching both the
guidance for the Home Office which is relevant and also two examples of the
type of test that the appellant would need to pass in order to reach the
CEFR level A2 required by the Immigration Rules.

As there was no dispute as to the facts it was not necessary for us to hear
evidence from the appellant but we thank her for taking the trouble to
attend as it is evident from the medical evidence that she does suffer from
a number of disabilities which make it difficult for her to travel, not the
least of which is restricted vision and hearing.

We remind ourselves that there are two possibilities here regarding whether
the appellant should be exempted from the requirements of the Immigration
Rules.  Those are either that she suffers from a physical or mental
disability or second, that there are exceptional circumstances.  We accept
that there is some guidance provided by the respondent as to both of these
conditions but we consider that in general, insofar as exceptional
circumstances is applicable, those circumstances relate not so much to
physical conditions or mental conditions but to difficulties inherent in
for example being unable to travel to a place to take a test.

We remind ourselves also that the relevant guidance refers not just to
being able to learn English but also to being able to take the test.  In
particular, the guidance says, is the person suffering from a long-term or
ongoing illness or disability which may last for years that severely
restricts their ability to learn English or to take the test, second, is
suffering from a serious or life threatening illness such as cancer.  Also,
the guidance says that consideration must be given to whether the person's
condition would prevent them from learning English or taking a secure
language test, for example if they are deaf, unable to speak or have a
speech impediment or undergoing treatment for cancer.

In this case, we have considered the report from the appellant's doctor, Dr
Farooq, which is dated 15 July 2021.  It builds to a significant extent on
the detailed extracts from the appellant's medical notes which we have been
provided with.  Whilst those are in some respects helpful, in others they
are not because they are raw data on which doctors rely to explain to their
patients and to others the nature of the conditions and how that impacts on
their abilities.

We have had the advantage of reading much of that material and we consider
that there is nothing in it which is inconsistent with the letter from Dr
Farooq.

We consider that there are certain passages in that letter which are of
particular importance:

"[NF] has been suffering from multiple ailments since her early childhood
in Pakistan.  Records show that she arrived in the UK in April 2013.  A
letter dated 10 June 2013 written by Dr Rashmi Sawhney indicates that she
has clinically evident unilateral proptosis with poor visual acuity."

The letter then goes on to note that she has been seen by the GP over 50
times as consequence of low mood, total body pain, headache, dizziness and
abdominal pain.  It also notes that she has been reviewed by various
ophthalmologists and maxilla facial surgeons and has undergone a number of
operations in an attempt to ameliorate some of the difficulties she has
faced as a result of the strokes in the sense that she has suffered
paralysis to part of her face but more importantly, and sadly, it records
that

         [The appellant's] health has unfortunately continued to deteriorate
         in recent years, ... [S]he has been suffering from chronic
         headaches which have become worse over the last 5-6.

         [The appellant's] chronic ill health and continuing deterioration
         has meant that she has had to give up working as a cleaner and if
         she tries to read with her right eye she suffers with migraines
         associated with dizziness and nausea and she sometimes loses vision
         in her right eye for a few minutes at a time, rendering her
         completely blind.  She has also had two fainting episodes in the
         last six months.  She has also become progressively deaf in the
         left ear and thus struggles with day-to-day living and
         communication.  This recent deterioration and her CT brain scan
         findings have warranted a referral for the specialist neurology
         service for further evaluation.

Importantly, the letter concludes:

"I am of the medical opinion that [NF]'s physical and mental health would
deteriorate further if she was required to do any tasks that warrant
focussing or concentrating for several minutes at a time and with this in
mind I do not believe she is in a position to be able to undertake any
studies or work that would require her to be able to read with her one
remaining eye."

Mr Melvin has helpfully indicated that the Secretary of State does not take
issue with the diagnosis, the prognosis or the conclusions about the
appellant's ability to concentrate or read for any length of time.

We consider that at this point it is sensible to note what would be
required in the taking of the CEFR A2 test.  We have been helpfully taken
through the sample papers by Mr Rehman and we note that whilst the speaking
and listening test is primarily oral, at several times there are points at
which the candidate is asked to listen to passages and to make notes.  At
other points they are told that they are going to, for example, talk about
hobbies, have 30 seconds to write some notes to help and then to talk for
two minutes on that.

Given the unchallenged evidence of Dr Farooq, we consider that the
appellant's conditions, either singly or together, would make it difficult
if not impossible for her to concentrate for the necessary time to
undertake this test.  We also accept that even beyond that she would have
difficulty in taking notes and of course in reading what she had written,
in making notes in order to assist her with the task. We consider that
realistically there is no basis on which the appellant currently or indeed
in the foreseeable future, given that these conditions are chronic, would
be able to undertake the test, and for these reasons we conclude that the
appellant ought to be exempted, and accordingly she meets the requirements
of the Immigration Rules.

Having concluded that the appellant meets the requirements of the
Immigration Rules, we consider, following TZ (Pakistan) & Anor v SSHD
[2018] EWCA Civ 1109, that there is no public interest in her removal from
the United Kingdom and accordingly her appeal must be allowed on human
rights grounds and we do so.

In summary, we consider that although the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law we should remake the
decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside.

We remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 30 July 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21075/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Rahman of Counsel, instructed by Kenton
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Munonyedi promulgated on 5 December 2019
    allowing Ms N F's appeal against the decision to refuse her further
    leave to remain and to refuse her human rights claim.  That decision
    was made on 3 October 2018.

 1. It is, I consider, necessary in this  case  to  set  out  some  of  the
    background to the respondent's position.  The respondent, although born
    in Pakistan, was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom to join  her
    husband. Her entry was as a spouse with a  valid  visa  valid  from  20
    February 2013 to 20 May 2015.  The respondent  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on 17 April 2015 but that was refused on 10 March  2016
    with a grant of leave to remain to expire on 9 March 2018.  The  reason
    for that was that she had been unable to show that she met the  English
    language requirements or the knowledge of life in  the  UK  test.   The
    reason that the respondent is not able, she says, to learn  English  or
    to pass the knowledge of life in the UK test, is because of her health.
     It is not in dispute that she has had a stroke in the  past  and  that
    her condition has deteriorated.  She has lost the sight in one eye  and
    is partially sighted in the other  and  she  has  hearing  difficulties
    also.  In fairness it needs to be said that this  does  not  appear  to
    have prevented her taking employment and it is to her credit  that  she
    had been able to do so.

 2. The most recent application was made on 9 February 2018 for her  to  be
    granted leave to remain on a human rights basis.   The  refusal  letter
    from the Secretary of State, dated 3 October 2018 is, with respect, not
    particularly helpful.  It is only when one reads the decision of  Judge
    Munonyedi that it becomes apparent that the sole reason for refusal was
    that  the  respondent  had  not  met  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    ELTRP.4.1, which relates to the having passed a  test  in  the  English
    language.  That, and there is no disputing it, is the  sole  reason  of
    which further leave to remain was refused.

 3. The appeal against the decision was first heard by Judge  Munonyedi  on
    10 May 2019.  On that occasion she heard evidence from  the  respondent
    and she also had the benefit of hearing submissions  by  Mr  Rahman  of
    Counsel and from Mr Nath, Presenting Officer.  The judge found that  it
    would be a disproportionate interference with the respondent's right to
    family and private life to require her to leave the United Kingdom, the
    judge finding that the interference with the right to private life  was
    disproportionate.  The notice of decision however states the respondent
    has succeeded in her protection claim  as  removal  of  the  respondent
    would breach the Refugee Convention.  That was clearly an error and the
    Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  that  basis  seeking
    also to aver that the decision was  wrong  for  a  failure  to  provide
    proper reasoning as to how  the  respondent  was  unable  to  take  the
    required English language test.

 4. The application for permission was brought to the  attention  of  Judge
    Appleyard who, rather than granting permission, gave an order directing
    that the judge should reconsider her decision  and  he  said  that  the
    second ground of appeal, to which I had referred was not arguable,  but
    although it was clear that the judge intended to allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds only, he was unable, in light of  Katsonga  ("Slip
    Rule"; FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC) to change the  basis
    of that decision.  That is no longer good law - see Devani [2020]  EWCA
    Civ 61.  The matter was however sent back  to  Judge  Munonyedi  to  be
    determined on the papers on the basis of the evidence which  is  before
    her.   That  then  occurred  and  she  produced  a   further   decision
    promulgated on 5 December 2019.

 5. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on four grounds:

          i) the judge had given inadequate reasons for  finding  that  the
             respondent had a physical disability which prevented her  from
             taking a test.  In particular, it was  noted  that  there  had
             been no medical evidence in front of the judge  and  that  the
             judge did not have any medical expertise to make the  findings
             at paragraph 32;

         ii) the judge had failed to explain why,  if  the  respondent  was
             able to maintain her job her disability  she  cannot  complete
             the English language test;

        iii) there was a procedural irregularity in that the hearing should
             have  been  adjourned  to  allow  for  the  requisite  medical
             information to be obtained; and,

         iv) the judge had misdirected herself in law with  regard  to  the
             public interest considerations set out in Section 117  of  the
             2002 Act.

 6. On 27 April 2020 Tribunal Judge  Buchanan  granted  permission  on  all
    grounds.  It is apparent that in doing so he had considered the set  of
    grounds that the Secretary of State had made initially, in May 2019 and
    which had been considered by Judge Appleyard rather  than  the  grounds
    which had been drafted as a  challenged  to  Judge  Mononyedi's  second
    decision.  This was noted by the Upper Tribunal and on  25  June  2020,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara made directions, to which the Secretary  of
    State made further submissions, recognising  that  Judge  Buchanan  was
    referring  to  the  earlier  grounds  of  appeal  but  submitting  that
    nonetheless permission had been granted without restriction.

 7. Further directions were issued by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on  10
    August 2020 but these were superseded by directions from Upper Tribunal
    Judge Sheridan on 23 November 2020 directing an oral  hearing  to  take
    place remotely.

 8. In considering the position before me, I conclude that I  must  proceed
    on the basis that permission  has  been  granted  on  all  the  grounds
    referred to in the second application by the Secretary of  State,  that
    is the one containing four discrete grounds.

 9. As a preliminary observation, the decision is poorly  structured.  What
    the judge should have done was consider first whether the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules, which would have included a reference  to  an
    exemption were met, and only then to consider if they were not, whether
    there were other  compassionate  or  other  reasons  why  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove the respondent from the United Kingdom.   In
    this decision, these issues are blurred.

10. Dealing first with ground (i), I  consider  that  despite  Mr  Rahman's
    submissions, there are significant defects in  the  reasoning  in  this
    case.  The judge was not in a position to reach  a  medical  diagnosis,
    nor was she in a position to make findings as to  whether  or  not  the
    respondent was able to pass an English language  test.   She  makes  no
    reference to any standards which were applied and at best the  evidence
    before her showed that the respondent had difficulty with sight and  in
    concentration.  The applicable guidance states that the exemption  from
    having to take the English language test is such that it would apply if
    the applicant's  physical  and  mental  condition  prevents  them  from
    learning English or taking the approved language test at  the  required
    level.  That, the judge refers to at paragraph 22, but it is not at all
    clear on what basis she has reached a conclusion  that  this  exemption
    was met.  Nor indeed is there  any  clear  basis  in  which  the  judge
    reached her decision.

11. It is of note that in this case, as the judge noted  at  paragraph  23,
    there was no medical evidence  submitted  with  the  application.   The
    conclusion, with regards to the disability, was reached therefore  only
    on the basis of what the respondent said and what the  judge  observed.
    That is an inadequate evidential basis for the conclusion  reached  and
    for that reason I consider that ground (i) is made out.

12. With respect to ground (ii) which is linked, I consider it is  relevant
    that the judge did not appear to take into consideration  in  assessing
    whether the respondent would be able to take an English language  test,
    with or without any adaptations as necessary, that the  respondent  was
    able to hold down a job.  Not  all  disabilities  prevent  people  from
    learning English and there are means by which people can learn  through
    adaptive technology, which would allow them to  pass  a  test  but  the
    judge did not consider this.

13. Indeed, there is no real focus of what would be required to learn, what
    standard would need to be reached, how the test would  be  administered
    and why the respondent's disabilities would prevent her from  preparing
    for the test or taking it.  And on that basis, ground (ii) is made out.



14. In the circumstances it is unnecessary to address ground (iii)  in  any
    detail.  Indeed, it makes little sense at  all  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to suggest that the hearing should have been adjourned to  permit
    the production of medical evidence.   It  was  for  the  respondent  to
    produce evidence on that.  There was no indication that any application
    for an adjournment was made and in the circumstances I do not  consider
    that there was any procedural irregularity.

15. With regard to ground (iv), I consider that this is not relevant, given
    the findings I have  already  made.   The  judge's  assessment  of  the
    factual situation and whether or not an exemption applied, which  would
    have then meant that the Immigration  Rules  were  met,  is  clearly  a
    material matter and affected any consideration within Article 8 and  to
    that extent whether or not the judge had  misdirected  herself  is  not
    relevant.

16. For these reasons, I consider  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and  I  set  it  aside.
    With respect to remaking I  consider  that  it  is  necessary  to  hear
    evidence from the respondent and that it would be necessary to do so at
    a hearing.   It  will  also  be  necessary,  I  consider,  to  have  an
    interpreter  present  given  that  her  level  of  spoken  English   is
    relatively low.  Consideration will also have to be  given,  given  the
    nature of her disability as to how and where this  appeal  should  take
    place.

17. Subject to anything that the parties may wish to say in representations
    at a later date, I am of the view  that  a  face  to  face  hearing  is
    necessary. Where, as here, the  respondent's  vision  and  hearing  are
    impaired, and she is to give evidence, a remote hearing  would  not  be
    appropriate.

18. The Tribunal is likely to be assisted by a letter from a doctor  or  an
    ophthalmologist explaining what  difficulties  the  respondent  has  in
    reading, in concentrating and, importantly,  which  would  prevent  her
    from studying a course leading to an A1 or A2 qualification in English.
     The Tribunal would also be assisted by details of what such  a  course
    involves and whether it would require reading or writing or whether  it
    would just be spoken English; and, whether there  are  any  courses  in
    English available for those who are partially sighted and/or  who  have
    hearing difficulties.

19. The hearing will need to  focus  on  how  the  respondent's  disability
    prevents her, from acquiring the skills to prepare  for  and  take  the
    relevant A1 or A2 test.

20. Finally, I do not understand how the respondent's  Counsel  could  have
    been left in the position of appearing in front of me  to  represent  a
    vulnerable disabled respondent who cannot see well,  cannot  hear  well
    and does not speak English without  having  a  proper  set  of  papers,
    including two vital documents, that is, the grant of permission to  the
    Secretary of State and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    was under appeal.
