
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21489/2016
                                                               HU/21490/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field house                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 March 2018                     |On 28 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                  DEWNI [S]
                                 DULITHA [S]
                       (anonymity directionS NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr T Lay of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka born on 10 July 1992  and  4
       April 1994 respectively. They are  siblings.  They  appealed  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal against the decisions of the respondent dated  12
       August 2016 to refuse their applications for entry clearance pursuant
       to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

    2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox dismissed the appellants appeals  in  a
       decision promulgated on 19  March  2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
       granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan  on  19  March  2018  who
       stated that it is arguable that the Judge erred by  failing  to  take
       into account the positive credibility findings of a previous Judge in
       respect of the  appellants'  sponsor's  asylum  claim  and  therefore
       possibly erred in the Article 8 assessment.

    3. Thus, the appeal came before me.

       First-tier Tribunal's decision

    4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal,  concluding
       that the appellants have failed to satisfy the burden  upon  them  to
       the relevant standard that  the  respondent's  decision  will  breach
       their rights under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights. There is no reliable evidence to demonstrate family life  for
       the purpose of Article 8. There is no evidence of family life between
       the appellant's and their parents beyond normal emotional ties  along
       with an effective in France of imputed political opinion.

    5. The medical evidence provided has been considered in accordance  with
       JL (medical reports - ability) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC)  and  no
       weight can be placed upon it because there are absences  of  relevant
       evidence in the reports. In the sponsor's medical  report  which  was
       drafted on 13 November 2014, there is no  reference  to  the  alleged
       trauma experienced by the appellants following the  sponsor's  arrest
       in 2006 despite the appellants assertion that they began  counselling
       in 2011 due to the adverse interest from the authorities which  began
       in 2006. There is no reference of the  potential  mental  anguish  in
       either medical report that may potentially flow from a  parent  whose
       circumstances caused the appellants to require mental health services
       from 2011. Nor is there any reference to  the  historic  and  ongoing
       mental health consequences to the appellants.

    6. The medical reports dated 20 August 2017 were compiled on the express
       instructions of the appellants. There is no reference  of  the  first
       appellant's current dilemma which specifically arose in January  2017
       which is seven months before the report was written.  The  report  is
       focused exclusively upon the first appellant's  separation  which  is
       inconsistent with the remaining evidence that the  first  appellant's
       needs have evolved since January  2017.  The  report  concludes  that
       there is no evidence of active suicidal ideation and that  the  first
       appellant is in receipt of adequate medical care.

    7. In the report there appears to  be  no  meaningful  analysis  of  the
       subjective account provided by the first appellant. The author of the
       report relies exclusively upon one  remote  meeting  with  the  first
       appellant despite the  sponsor's  oral  evidence  that  he  exerts  a
       positive influence above the appellant's  behaviour  to  control  the
       potential for self-harm. It is reasonable to expect the author of the
       report to be made aware of the coping  mechanisms  available  to  the
       first appellant and how this is  applied  as  part  of  the  expert's
       overall assessment. The absence of such evidence does not assist  the
       weight to be placed above the evidence.

    8. The report states that the expert assessed the first  appellant  need
       to reside with her parents in  the  United  Kingdom  as  exceptional.
       There is no reliable evidence which demonstrates this conclusion. Nor
       is there  any  meaningful  analysis  of  the  potential  alternatives
       available to the first appellant in Sri Lanka and why  settlement  of
       the United Kingdom is the  only  viable  option.  The  conclusion  of
       chronic and enduring mental illness is unsustainable when  considered
       in light of the report's contents.

    9. There  is  no  discernible  analysis  in  the  report  of  the  first
       appellant's condition arrived at  this  stage  or  how  she  remained
       effectively within the education system and labour market and all the
       circumstances that caused her to leave the labour  market.  The  same
       author  who  compiled  the  first  appellant's  report  compiled   in
       identical terms a report on  behalf  of  the  second  appellant.  The
       second appellant report is of limited probative value  for  the  same
       reasons as stated for  the  first  appellant.  It  carries  the  same
       defects in terms of meaningful analysis and  inconsistency  with  the
       sponsor's evidence.

   10. The sponsor claims that a dependency by  the  appellants  upon  their
       parents is because the appellants have come to the adverse  attention
       of the Sri Lankan authorities. This is  this  inconsistent  with  the
       medical reports.

   11. The appellant's eldest son is in  the  United  Kingdom.  Despite  the
       sponsor's  personal  experience  of  the  asylum  process   and   the
       appellant's alleged fear of harm the sponsor's older son  has  failed
       to avail himself of legal representations and persists in his  status
       as an illegal immigrant in the United Kingdom.

   12. The sponsor left Sri Lanka in 2006 and the appellants completed their
       education under the supervision of  the  sponsor's  wife.  After  the
       appellants completed their education and became adults, the sponsor's
       wife left Sri Lanka and went to the  United  Kingdom's  to  join  the
       sponsor. The available evidence taken  at  its  highest  demonstrates
       that the appellants have access to adequate medical services for  any
       support that they require. There is no reliable evidence of  suicidal
       ideation for the same reasons.

   13. There is no reliable evidence to demonstrate that the  appellants  do
       not have access to accommodation or other forms of support to  assist
       with the pursuit of independent life as adults. The sponsor  provided
       evidence of an extended family in Sri Lanka and there is no  reliable
       evidence to  demonstrate  that  this  no  longer  exists.  There  are
       therefore no exceptional circumstances for the purposes of Article  8
       outside  the  immigration  rules.  The  Judge  dismissed   both   the
       appellants appeals.

   14. The grounds of appeal state the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
       appellants case is that after their sponsor left Sri Lanka 2006,  the
       authorities started harassing the appellants and his  wife  and  that
       this caused his children  to  suffer  from  mental  health  problems,
       requiring  counselling  and  medication.  The  appellant's  wife  was
       granted entry clearance to the United Kingdom which caused her  great
       dilemma as the adult children were still  highly  dependent  on  her.
       Nevertheless, she opted to join the sponsor in the United Kingdom and
       had to leave the appellants in a safe  place  as  arranged  with  the
       sponsor. Since their mother left in November  2016,  the  appellant's
       mental health deteriorated further, and they have lived  in  fear  of
       the authorities. Their mother had to return to  Sri  Lanka  from  the
       United Kingdom in February 2017 and stayed there until April 2017  to
       look after the appellants and since she has come back to  the  United
       Kingdom their mental health has got worse, they are suicidal and have
       been living in hiding from the authorities.

   15. In legal terms despite the appellants being adults, they both have  a
       high level of dependency on their parents over and above  the  normal
       emotional ties which exist between adult children and their  parents.
       Theirs is a sufficiently compelling case and in effect meets the Home
       Office own policy guidance on the asylum policy instruction on family
       reunion for refugees and those granted humanitarian protection.

   16. The Judge erred by not taking into account the  positive  credibility
       findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge who heard and  allowed  the
       sponsor's appeal for asylum. The Judge's decision in respect  of  the
       sponsor, should have been considered the starting point  in  positive
       credibility findings should have been taken into account by the Judge
       who  heard  the  appellants'  appeals.  The  Judge  who  decided  the
       sponsor's asylum claim, accepted as credible the  sponsor's  evidence
       that after he left Sri Lanka the authorities kept coming to his  home
       and because of that his family had to move home and  that  there  has
       been ongoing harassment of his  family  by  the  authorities  in  Sri
       Lanka.

   17. The Judge did not take into account these earlier  positive  findings
       of the sponsor which make his own adverse  findings  and  credibility
       and thus it is submitted has materially flawed in law. Reference  was
       made to the case of AA Somalia the SS HD [2007] EWCA 1040 Civ.

   18. The next ground is that the adverse findings by  the  First  Tribunal
       Judge who states in  his  decision  that  the  sponsor  in  his  oral
       evidence claimed that the appellants went  into  hiding  in  November
       2016 before his wife came to the United Kingdom. However, the sponsor
       stated in his written statement that they went into hiding  following
       information provided by a neighbour in January 2017. It was  only  in
       January 2017 when the appellants went to  visit  their  former  house
       that they were warned by their neighbour  that  the  authorities  had
       come looking for them. Therefore, there is no factual discrepancy  in
       the sponsor's written and oral evidence in this regard.

   19. The next ground of appeal is that the Judge misdirected  himself  and
       gave inadequate reasons as  to  the  correct  approach  to  apply  to
       Article 8 claims for  entry  clearance  outside  of  the  immigration
       rules. The case of P G (USA) v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  118  applies
       because the Judge failed to make clear which Razgar questions  he  is
       finding  against  the  appellants.  The  Judge  in   addressing   the
       proportionality question fails to make clear whether he  is  applying
       the  correct  compelling  circumstances  test  and  or  an  incorrect
       exceptionality and very compelling circumstances test.

   20. The respondent in his rule 24 response stated that the Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately. He considered all
       the evidence and gave adequate reasons for dismissing the appeals  on
       human rights grounds. The Judge considered all the  medical  evidence
       and gave adequate reasons for finding that the medical  reports  were
       of little assistance in supporting the appellants claim. Although  it
       was accepted that the sponsor had been granted  refugee  status,  the
       Judge of the First--tier Tribunal was entitled to take  into  account
       the fact that the appellants were able to receive government  funding
       for counselling and were able to travel to  different  locations  for
       counselling sessions. The decision discloses no material error of law
       and the grounds of appeal amount to  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
       Judge's findings.

   21. At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  parties.  Mr  Lay
       submitted that the sponsor's family has been harassed in  Sri  Lanka.
       He further submitted  that  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
       considered the positive credibility findings made about  the  sponsor
       at his appeal hearing for asylum, he would have come to  a  different
       conclusion. He referred me to page 69 of  AS  in  that  there  was  a
       material overlap  of  evidence  in  this  appeal.  In  the  sponsor's
       decision allowing his appeal, the Judge accepted that  the  sponsor's
       children had been harassed  by  the  authorities.  The  Judge  simply
       ignored this evidence. The Judge was obliged to have  regard  to  the
       earlier decision which would  be  material  for  his  decision  under
       Article 8.

   22. Miss Jones on behalf of the respondent  accepted  that  the  previous
       Judge's decision with regard to the sponsor's asylum appeal, was  the
       starting point and although the Judge  had  not  specifically  stated
       that in his decision, it was not material and no  error  of  law  has
       been occasioned thereby. She further submitted  that  the  appellants
       are two adults and not children. She said that the  Judge  considered
       that the appellant's wife went back to Sri Lanka in 2017 and returned
       without any adverse consequences. She also referred to the fact  that
       the appellant's medical counselling was funded by the government  and
       that it is not credible that the authorities would do so and  at  the
       same time harass the appellants.

       Error of law decision.

   23. This  appeal  therefore  involves  two  steps,  the  first  being  to
       determine whether there is an error of law in the decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge and the second, if I find there was an  error  of
       law, either remit it to the  First--tier  Tribunal  for  a  rehearing
       remake the decision myself.

   24. I have paid careful attention  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge to ascertain whether there is a material error of law.
       The  Judge  having  considered  the  evidence  concluded   that   the
       appellants are adults and who have lived  in  Sri  Lanka  since  2006
       which was when their sponsor left Sri Lanka and came  to  the  United
       Kingdom and subsequently granted asylum.

   25. The main ground of appeal and the ground upon  which  permission  was
       granted, is that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  take  into
       account the case of Justin Surendran Devaseelan v SSHD  [2002]  UKIAT
       00702 guidelines which were given on how a second adjudicator  should
       approach the determination of another adjudicator who has  previously
       heard an appeal and when there is a material overlap in the  evidence
       as stated in AS. I accept the proposition that the  material  overlap
       in evidence should be taken into  account.  Therefore,  the  starting
       point as the authoritative assessment of the  appellant's  status  at
       the time of the First-tier Tribunal's decision which was in 2006.

   26. I however find that the Judge was aware that the  appellants  sponsor
       has been granted protection in the United Kingdom on the bases of his
       narrative as of 2006. I do not accept that the fact that he was found
       credible to the  lower  standard  of  proof  in  his  asylum  appeal,
       demonstrates that he should  be  found  credible  in  all  subsequent
       hearings. It depends on the evidence given.

   27. The question for the Judge to decide  was  whether,  at  the  present
       point in time, the respondent's decision to  exclude  the  appellants
       from the United Kingdom would be in breach of its  obligations  under
       Article 8 of the European Convention on human rights. The  Judge  was
       clear that that is the issue that was before him to decide.

   28. The Judge found at paragraph 33 that "there is no  reliable  evidence
       to demonstrate family life for  the  purpose  of  Article  8  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights. Although in the same sentence he
       said that the sponsor is not a reliable witness, that does  not  mean
       that he decided the appeal on the basis  that  the  sponsor  was  not
       credible. The Judge decided the appeal based on the  evidence  before
       him about the appellants circumstances after 2006.

   29. The 5-step approach under the European Convention on human rights  is
       set out in Razgar 2004 UKHL 27 where the House of Lords set out  five
       steps to follow when determining Article 8 outside of the Rules.  (i)
       Does family life, private life, home or correspondence  exist  within
       the meaning of Article 8  (ii) If  so,  has  or  will  the  right  to
       respect  for  this  been  interfered  with   (iii)  If  so,  is   the
       interference  in  accordance  with  the  law   (iv)  If  so,  is  the
       interference in pursuit of one of the  legitimate  aims  set  out  in
       Article 8(2); and (v) If so, is the  interference   proportionate  to
       the pursuit of the legitimate aim. Lord Bingham indicated that if the
       first question, whether  removal  would  interfere  with  private  or
       family life, was answered in the  affirmative,  the  second  question
       would be whether such interference would have "consequences  of  such
       gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8".

   30. The Judge having found that there  is  no  family  life  between  the
       appellants and their sponsor such as to engage Article 8 should  have
       ended  the  decision  there.   The   First-   Tier   Tribunal   Judge
       misunderstood that it is only once  the  material  interference  with
       family life is established that  the  issue  of  proportionality  and
       whether there are any exceptional circumstances arises. If  there  is
       no family life, there cannot be a breach of Article 8 in  respect  of
       family life.

   31. The Judge found that there was no family life between the  appellants
       and their parents in the  United  Kingdom,  a  finding  that  he  was
       entitled to make on the evidence in the appeal.

   32. The appellants case was that Sri Lankan authorities' adverse interest
       in them makes their case exceptional for the purposes of  Article  8.
       The Judge did not accept this evidence and gave  cogent  reasons  and
       these were as follows.

         . There was a consistency as  to  when  the  appellant  went  into
           hiding. They could not have been in fear prior to  January  2017
           as they were  willing  to  return  to  their  family  home.  The
           sponsor's evidence was that the appellants went into  hiding  in
           November 2016 before the sponsor's  wife  left  for  the  United
           Kingdom to join him in the United Kingdom.

         . The sponsor left Sri Lanka in 2006 and  their  mother  left  Sri
           Lanka in  2016  and  experienced  no  difficulties  leaving  the
           airport. This demonstrates that the authorities had no  interest
           in her so there would be no reason  for  them  to  be  adversely
           interested in the appellants.

         . The appellants evidence in their witness statement was that they
           were subject to adverse attention from the authorities following
           the sponsor's departure in 2006. This is  not  credible  because
           their evidence also was that they were hiding in  a  safe  place
           from January 2016. In the  interim  they  lived  safely  in  Sri
           Lanka.

         . Despite the appellant's claim that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
           have and had an adverse interest in them which necessitated them
           living in hiding, they were issued with Sri Lankan passports  on
           10 March 2016. The appellants mother did not  give  evidence  at
           the hearing about these  matters  which  did  not  assist  their
           appeal.

         . The sponsor who claims to have access to  corrupt  officials  in
           Sri Lanka approached the Sri Lankan officials on the  appellants
           behalf, but no reason has been given for why he  waited  for  11
           years before to facilitate the appellant's  departure  from  Sri
           Lanka,  as  he  claims  to  have  continued  access  to  corrupt
           officials. The  sponsor  also  failed  to  employ  this  alleged
           corrupt contact with the officials to keep the  appellants  safe
           but only bring these influences to bear for them  to  leave  the
           country.

         . The appellant's mother who claims that she and her children were
           at risk from the Sri Lankan  authorities  yet  returned  to  Sri
           Lanka from the  safety  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  visit  the
           appellants. She did not give evidence where she could have  been
           asked questions about the alleged harassment and questioning  by
           the authorities that she alleges, and these allegations are self-
           serving and unsubstantiated. She and the appellants did not come
           to the adverse attention of the authorities during her visit  to
           Sri Lanka which was from 5 February 2017 to 23 April 2017. There
           was no evidence that the sponsor  needed  to  employ  a  corrupt
           official to facilitate his wife's passage to and from Sri  Lanka
           for her visit.

         . Despite the appellants claim that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
           have an adverse interest in them they claim that the  government
           has funded their counselling since 2011. There  is  a  potential
           conflict in this evidence that they fear the government who  are
           their benefactors.

         . The appellant sponsor left Sri Lanka in 2006 which was  some  13
           years ago. The appellants have lived apart  from  their  sponsor
           without adverse consequences in Sri Lanka.

         . The medical  evidence  was  considered  in  accordance  with  JL
           (medical reports - ability) China [2013] UKUT 00145  (IAC).  The
           sponsor in his medical report drafted on 13 November 2014, there
           is no  reference  to  the  alleged  trauma  experienced  by  the
           appellants following the sponsor's arrest in  2006  despite  the
           appellants assertion that they began  counselling  in  2011  and
           that an adverse interest from the authorities began in 2006. The
           sponsor also does not refer to the adverse consequences  of  his
           circumstances upon the appellants when he presented himself  for
           a medical examination  which  resulted  in  a  report  dated  20
           December 2013. There is no reference  of  the  potential  mental
           anguish in either report that may potentially flow from a parent
           whose circumstances caused  the  appellants  to  require  mental
           health services from 2011. Nor is there  any  reference  to  the
           historic  and  ongoing  mental  health   consequences   to   the
           appellants.

         . The medical reports were compiled on the express instructions of
           the appellants dated  20  August  2017.  However,  there  is  no
           reference in the report of the first appellant's current dilemma
           which specifically arose in January 2017 which is  seven  months
           before the report was written.

         . The medical report has no meaningful analysis of the  subjective
           account provided by the  first  appellant.  The  author  of  the
           report relies exclusively upon one remote meeting with the first
           appellant despite the sponsor's oral evidence that he  exerts  a
           positive influence above the appellants behaviour to control the
           potential for self-harm. The report does not refer to the coping
           mechanisms  available  to  the   appellants   in   the   overall
           assessment. The report does not assist the weight to  be  placed
           above the evidence.

   33. In S v UK [1984] 40 DR 196 Sedley LJ  made  it  clear  that  "Neither
       blood ties nor the concern and affection that ordinarily go with them
       are, by themselves altogether, in my judgment  enough  to  constitute
       family life.  Most  of  us  have  close  relations  of  whom  we  are
       extremely fond and whom we visit, or who visit us, from time to time;
       but none of us would say on those grounds alone that we have a family
       life with them in any sense capable of coming within the meaning  and
       purpose of Article 8

   34. In ZB (Pakistan) v SSHD 2009 EWCA Civ 834 the Court  of  Appeal  said
       that when considering whether, for Article 8  purposes,  family  life
       existed between a parent and adult children, account must be taken of
       the parents need for the children and  the  totality  of  the  family
       relationships must be considered

   35. The Judge was entitled to find on the evidence that  the  appellant's
       exclusion from the United  Kingdom  not  breach  their  rights  under
       Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and  that  there
       were no exceptional circumstances where they should be granted  leave
       to enter when they cannot meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
       rules.

   36. There has been time-lapse of  some  13  years  since  2006  when  the
       sponsor was granted asylum. The Judge took into account the  evidence
       subsequent to 2006 and was entitled to come to the conclusion that he
       did on the evidence that the appellants  exclusion  from  the  United
       Kingdom would not breach their rights under Article 8 of the European
       Convention on Human Rights and that there was nothing exceptional  or
       compassionate in their cases and that they can continue  to  live  in
       Sri Lanka as adults. The Judge was also entitled  to  find  that  the
       emotional ties between them and their parents  are  normal  emotional
       ties expected between as parents and  adult  children.  This  was  an
       obvious finding given that the appellants have lived apart from their
       father for nearly 13 years.

   37. I therefore uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



DECISION

  Both appellant's appeals are dismissed.




       Signed by


       A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal   Date: 25 March 2019
       Ms S Chana




