
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/21264/2018
                                                               HU/21269/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2019                            |On 4 November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                            m m (First Appellant)
                           s a (Second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


[Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given orally at the end of the hearing on 22 October 2019.

 2. These are appeals by the appellants, both citizens  of  Ghana,  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sweet  ('FtT'),  who  in  a
    Decision and Reasons  promulgated  on  16  July  2019  dismissed  their
    appeals, based on their human rights, of the refusal of their entry for
    the purposes of settlement with their mother, (the 'sponsor'), who is a
    British national, in the United Kingdom ('UK').

 3. The first appellant was born on 30 November 2001. The second appellant,
    his sister, was born on 28 September 2002.  The  respondent's  decision
    refusing entry clearance was dated 27 July 2018.  The  application  had
    been made under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 4. In essence, the gist of the appellants' claims involved  the  following
    two issues: first, whether the sponsor had sole responsibility for  the
    appellants; and second, in the event  that  there  was  not  such  sole
    responsibility, there were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which made the exclusion of the appellants from  the  UK
    undesirable and suitable arrangements had been made for the  children's
    care. These were the alternative requirements of  paragraphs  297(i)(e)
    and (f) of the Immigration Rules.

The FtT's decision

 5. In his decision dated 16 July 2019, the FtT rejected the  appeal  based
    on both sub-(e) and sub-section  (f).   He  did  so  by  reference,  at
    paragraph [29], to the well-known authority of TD (Yemen) [2006]  UKAIT
    00049.

 6. Having referred himself correctly to the relevant case law he then  did
    not accept the sponsor's credibility which he regarded  as  central  to
    the claim.  He noted at [30] the sponsor's conflicting  evidence  about
    the length of time that the first appellant had been at school and  the
    second appellant's state of  health.   He  also  took  issue  with  the
    absence in correspondence from church supporters of  any  reference  to
    the second appellant.  At [31] he concluded that the sponsor's evidence
    lacked  credibility  because  of  her  inconsistency  and  insufficient
    evidence on material aspects of the case, such  as  why  the  sponsor's
    sister could not continue to look after appellants just because she was
    married herself in November 2018.

 7. Having rejected the appeal by through the lens of  paragraph  297,  the
    FtT then failed to refer to the  appellants'  human  rights,  when  the
    appeal was by reference to, (and could only have been by reference  to)
    their human rights under section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 Act because of the limited statutory rights of  appeal.
    The FtT confined his analysis  to  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

The Grant of Permission

 8. In light of the absence of express reference to the  appellants'  human
    rights, a Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Andrew,  granted
    permission to appeal on 6 September 2019 confirming at [2] that she was
    satisfied that there was an arguable error of law as the  FtT  did  not
    appear to have considered article 8.   This  was  an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds only and whilst the FtT's findings in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules were able to stand, he had not applied those findings
    to article 8.

The Grounds of Appeal

 9. Exploring the grounds further with Ms Sharma,  as  already  identified,
    one point was the absence of an analysis by reference to article 8.  It
    was also said in the written grounds, albeit in generic terms, that the
    FtT had ignored the arguments and evidence on  the  appellants'  behalf
    and had given  insufficient  reasons  for  his  findings.   By  way  of
    example, the appellants' aunt had made it  clear  that  she  could  not
    continue to provide care, in the absence of the appellant's father,  as
    she was married and arrangements had been intended to be temporary.

10. At the hearing before me, I considered  the  documents  in  the  bundle
    before the FtT.  I was  referred  to  the  witness  statements  of  the
    appellants' aunt dated 4  June  2019  and  the  appellants'  biological
    father of the same date, which were  at  pages  [10]  to  [13]  of  the
    appellants' bundle.

11. When I explored with Ms Sharma, in terms of her submissions beyond  the
    issue around the article 8 analysis, of what was said to be wrong about
    the way in which the FtT reached his decision, Ms Sharma indicated that
    the FtT had placed 'too  much  weight'  on  certain  aspects  and  'not
    enough' on others.  She gave the example about the medical evidence not
    being considered by the FtT, although when I  explored  with  her  what
    medical  evidence  was  said  to  be  relevant,  which  had  not   been
    considered, she referred to the fact that the sponsor had  been  upset,
    as had the appellants, at the  previous  refusal  of  entry  clearance.
    There was a subsequent reference to gynaecological problems  which  had
    commenced in 2014, albeit there had been express reference to  this  by
    the FtT at [55] of the challenged decision.

12. Ms Sharma also invited me to consider that it  was  possible  that  the
    sponsor  did  not  have  a  detailed  insight  as  to  the  appellants'
    upbringing, which had resulted in the FtT  drawing  adverse  inferences
    about her credibility, because in reality the appellants' father,  with
    whom she had shared parental responsibility up until  April  2018,  had
    lived with the appellants on a day-to-day basis and  therefore  it  was
    hardly surprising  that  he  would  have  more  detailed  knowledge  in
    contrast to the sponsor.  I was invited to consider that  the  aunt  no
    longer was willing to provide a caring role for the children, at  least
    the younger of whom remained  a  minor,  so  that  there  were  clearly
    exceptional compelling circumstances in this case.  They previously had
    lived with one parent (their father) throughout their lives until April
    2018 and now they had no-one.



The respondent's submissions

13. Even if there were an issue with the absence of an  analysis  of  human
    rights, what the FtT had done was reach the conclusion that this was  a
    manufactured claim.  What the FtT was being asked to consider was  that
    after around fifteen years  of  looking  after  the  appellants,  their
    father was now abdicating all  responsibility  whatsoever,  from  April
    2018 onwards, which happened to coincide precisely with the  time  that
    the  appellants  applied  for  entry  clearance.   Whilst  it  was  now
    contended that the sponsor could not possibly return  to  Ghana  having
    lived in the UK for sixteen years, nevertheless she had lived  for  the
    vast majority of her life in Ghana,  and  the  fact  that  this  was  a
    manufactured claim was supported by the fact that there had  only  been
    one attempt to visit in sixteen years,  to  which  the  FtT  had  given
    consideration at [26].  The FtT was unarguably entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that he did about the sponsor's credibility.  There  was  no
    explanation  for  why  correspondence   from   those   supporting   the
    appellants, for example churches, has only referred to  one  child  and
    indeed the FtT had been  entitled  to  criticise  why  the  appellants'
    father would be induced to write the brief statement that he did,  only
    a copy of which had been provided and dated in the same handwriting  as
    the aunt's statement, purporting to abdicate parental responsibility.

14. There were no serious or other compelling circumstances.  In this  case
    there was limited evidence of family life  over  a  period  of  sixteen
    years as evidenced in the bundle as nearly all the  appellants'  family
    life had been with their father. Where the FtT was unarguably  entitled
    to conclude that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) and  (f)  were
    not met, then a stand-alone article 8 claim could not possibly  succeed
    and therefore ultimately the error was not material.

Discussion and conclusions

15. On the one hand, the FtT had erred in not making an  express  reference
    to article 8, when the appeal only lay in respect  of  the  appellants'
    human rights by virtue of section 84 of the 2002 Act.    On  the  other
    hand, the FtT was correct to take as he  did  his  starting  point  the
    Immigration Rules, namely the lens through which the appellants'  human
    rights claims could be considered and he correctly identified both  the
    Rules in question and the relevant case law.  The question,  therefore,
    noting the analysis within the Immigration Rules was whether the  wider
    human rights analysis outside the Rules resulted in a different  answer
    to the questions posed by paragraph 297, noting  section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act and the need for a proportionality assessment.

16. While the issue by reference to article 8 necessarily must  be  broader
    than the initial consideration under paragraph 297, I do not accept the
    criticisms of the  FtT's  analysis  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   I
    further conclude  that  the  subsequent  proportionality  exercise,  by
    reference to article 8 and based on the same findings, would  not  have
    resulted in any different conclusion, so that the FtT's decision should
    not be set aside.

17. In reaching this conclusion I had first explored  with  Ms  Sharma  the
    basis on which it was said that the way in which the  FtT  had  reached
    his conclusions in relation  to  paragraph  297(e)  and  (f)  could  be
    criticised.  Her criticism was very limited and mostly generalised. The
    one example she gave was about a  failure  to  consider  the  sponsor's
    illness from 2014 onwards, when this was in fact expressly referred  to
    by the FtT at [15].

18. The FtT had also assessed, as a central issue, the witness statement of
    the appellants' father and the FtT set out clearly his  concerns  about
    why the father would be prepared to write such a statement, when he had
    had the main, if not sole parental responsibility  for  the  appellants
    for almost the entirety of their lives, cohabiting with them from  2003
    until April 2018.

19. I was conscious that this was an appeal hearing on  an  error  of  law,
    rather than a first instance hearing, and I had to consider whether  in
    reaching the conclusions that he did, the FtT had erred in  failing  to
    take into account relevant considerations, or  alternatively  that  the
    conclusions that he reached about the  sponsor's  evidence  lacking  in
    credibility were irrational.

20. I concluded that on the evidence before him, the FtT  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the claimed severing of parental  responsibility  between
    the appellants and their father, with whom they had lived for virtually
    the entirety of their lives, was not reliable; and that it was open for
    him to reach the conclusion he did about the sponsor's credibility. The
    fact that the appellants' father had not, as claimed, severed  parental
    responsibility for them went to the core of the appeal  and  undermined
    the claim that their aunt would not care for them, even accepting  that
    serious and compelling family or other considerations, for the purposes
    of paragraph 297(i)(f), might still exist even  if  there  were  shared
    parental  responsibility.   Nevertheless,  the   appellants'   domestic
    circumstances, in terms of accommodation and day-to-day supervision and
    care, at the time of the FtT's decision, was in the  context  that  the
    claimed abandonment by their father had not been accepted. The FtT  was
    unarguably entitled to conclude that on the evidence before him,  there
    was not enough evidence that there were serious,  compelling  or  other
    financial circumstances.  Whilst the reasoning and conclusions may have
    been brief, they reflected the relatively limited evidence  before  the
    FtT.

21. In considering the difference, if any, that  the  assessment  of  human
    rights would have made to the FtT's eventual conclusion;  and  adopting
    the well-known five stage analysis of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27,  on
    the one hand  I  accept  that  there  is  a  family  life  between  the
    appellants and the sponsor, although on the evidence before the FtT, it
    appears that the sponsor was very much the minor partner  in  terms  of
    the sharing of that parental responsibility.   Nevertheless,  the  fact
    that the sponsor plays a more minor role partly by virtue  of  distance
    but also because of the more  major  role  played  by  the  appellants'
    father, does not exclude the natural existence of family life between a
    parent who remains in contact, albeit one that lives so far  away,  and
    albeit one who visited their children only once in  the  sixteen  years
    since she has been outside the UK.  Despite the limited nature of  that
    family life, it is possible that the refusal of entry clearance  would,
    whilst maintaining the  status  quo,  be  significant  enough  to  have
    engaged the appellants' rights under article 8 where the  children  are
    minors; and noting their best interests pursuant to section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

22. However, on the assessment  of  proportionality,  based  on  the  FtT's
    findings and applying them to a human rights analysis, I conclude  that
    the FtT would inevitably have reached the same decision  as  under  the
    Immigration Rules,  namely  ultimately  that  it  was  a  proportionate
    decision.  Using the balance sheet approach to proportionality, on  the
    one hand, there is the existence of family  life,  as  I  have  already
    indicated.  It could well be, and I am prepared  to  accept,  that  the
    appellants are proficient in English, for the purposes of section  117B
    of the 2002 Act, and as found by the FtT, there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    financial means and accommodation for the appellants.

23. However, the overwhelming counterweight against any human rights  claim
    succeeding, is that what paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  seeks
    to reflect, in the appellants' article 8  rights,  is  the  welfare  of
    children where there are no longer two parents  who  continue  to  have
    parental responsibility; or where there is shared responsibility, there
    are clear, compelling family or other considerations which  mean  their
    exclusion is undesirable.  In other words, in a case such as this,  the
    assessment under paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) of the  Immigration  Rules
    really does go to the heart of that proportionality analysis,  for  the
    simple reason that it cannot follow that it is in the best interests of
    these two minor appellants to be moved from their  country  of  origin,
    Ghana; from the people with whom, and communities in which,  they  have
    lived the entirety of their lives, to move  with  their  mother;  where
    parental relations continue with their father and where  there  is  not
    reliable evidence that the appellants' father has relinquished parental
    responsibility; or that the childrens' move to the UK is in  accordance
    with his wishes or with his consent.  By analogy with the rigour of the
    procedures for international adoption cases, any  First-tier  Tribunal,
    when faced with the concerns about the sponsor's  credibility  and  the
    very limited evidence presented to the FtT about the  circumstances  in
    Ghana, would have inevitably reached the conclusion that the appeals by
    reference to article 8, outside  the  Rules,  would  have  failed,  and
    therefore based on the findings  and  considerations  included  in  the
    FtT's decision, the omissions relating to the article 8 analysis should
    not result in the FtT's decision being set aside.

Decision on error of law

24. I conclude that there are no errors of law in the FtT's  decision  such
    that it should be set aside. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed            J Keith                    Date         30 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
