
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21389/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 15 October 2019                |On: 18 October 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                           MR JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 GREGORY [I]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Uzoechina, Patterson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 0. The appellant appeals against the decision of Tribunal Judge Lodge
    promulgated on 13 May 2019 after a hearing on 26 April 2019 by which
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision of 3 October 2018 refusing his human
    rights claim further to the making of a Deportation Order on 2 October
    2018 pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007


Factual Background


 0. The Appellant was born in Jamaica on 30 June 1978 and is a national of
    Jamaica.  His immigration history is set out accurately in the
    Secretary of State's Deportation Decision.  In briefest outline, the
    appellant first arrived in the UK on 6 September 2002.  He was
    successively granted 6 months leave to enter and then leave to remain
    as a student until 31 January 2005.  On 13 November 2004 he married [O
    I], who is a French National. For present purposes it is sufficient to
    record that in October 2007 he was issued with an EEA residence card
    that was valid until 10 October 2012.    He then applied for EEA
    Permanent Residence as a non-EEA national, but this was refused.  He
    appealed this decision but his appeal was refused and his appeal rights
    were exhausted by January 2014.  There are two young children of the
    marriage.


 0. In July 2016 he applied for an EEA permanent residence card as a spouse
    of an EEA national, but his application was refused on 21 January 2017.




 0. On 6 October 2017 he was convicted at Warwick Crown Court of possession
    of crack-cocaine with intent to supply.  He was sentenced to 4 years 6
    months imprisonment.


 0. On 17 January 2018 the Secretary State's Notice of Decision to make a
    deportation order was served on him.  From at least 1 February 2018 he
    has been represented by solicitors, Patterson & Co.  On that date the
    Solicitors submitted a letter informing the respondent of an intention
    to make representations on the basis that the appellant was the family
    member of an EEA National.  Subsequently, on 24 April 2018 the
    Appellant made Article 8 Family and Private Life representations
    verbally at his prison induction which was treated as a human rights
    claim.


 0. Put shortly, the Secretary of State's decision rested on the
    Appellant's conviction and sentence.  It included detailed
    consideration of the Appellant's Article 8 claim, starting with the
    principle that the public good required the appellant's deportation
    unless there were very compelling circumstances over and above those
    described in the exceptions to deportation set out at paragraphs 399
    and 399A of the Immigration Rules.  The decision noted the absence of
    evidence of anything other than the bare fact that the Appellant is
    still married to Ms [I].  In this state of the evidence, the Secretary
    of State did not accept that the appellant was in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with Ms [I] or that she is even residing in
    this country.  The decision noted that there are two children of the
    marriage, both born in Reunion Island, and noted the absence of any
    evidence of the Appellant's meaningful involvement in the lives of the
    two children.  While recognising that the Appellant has established
    some private life in this country, the Secretary of State did not
    accept that there were very compelling circumstances which outweighed
    the public interest in seeing the appellant deported.


The Issues before First-tier Tribunal


 0. The appellant's notice of appeal was lodged on 23 October 2018.  It
    challenged the Secretary of State's decision on the grounds that he has
    been living in the UK legally since 2004 having married an EEA national
    in November 2004.  It alleges that he has lived and worked in the UK
    and been a UK tax payer; and that he has family and friends in the UK.


 0. The first issue for the First-tier Tribunal to decide at the hearing
    was whether the hearing should go ahead, as there was no attendance by
    the appellant or his representative.


 0. The issue of an adjournment had been raised previously by a fax dated
    23 April 2019, from the appellant's representatives on the basis that
    they were awaiting a probation report and could not say when it would
    be ready and that they had not been sent the respondent's appeal
    bundle. They were accordingly not ready to proceed. The adjournment
    request was considered by Assistant Resident Judge O'Brien who refused
    the application to adjourn and said that any application should be made
    at the main hearing.


 0. The background, as recorded by the Judge, was set out at [7] to [17] of
    the Judgment, as follows:


         "7.      With regard to the appellant I have an email dated 25th
         April 2019. That email states that the appellant informed the
         prison guards that his hearing had been adjourned and he did not
         need to attend. It would seem the prison was informed that that was
         not the case. The prison then replied stating that the appellant
         having been informed of that was stating that he was refusing to
         attend the hearing. The prison indicated that they have used their
         best endeavours but he has refused to attend the hearing.


         8. With regard to the representative's non-attendance I have a fax
         dated the 23rd April 2019. The representatives indicate that there
         is a Probation Report they wish to rely on, it is not ready and
         they cannot say when it will be ready. They also indicate the
         respondent's bundle has not been sent to the appellant. Having
         regard to those two difficulties they are not ready to proceed.


         9. Assistant Resident Judge O'Brien considered that letter and
         application but nonetheless refused the application to adjourn
         indicating that such an application should be made at the
         substantive hearing. He mentioned the Probation report noting the
         there was still no explanation as to why a Probation report would
         assist the tribunal.


         10.      Today, the day of the hearing, I have received a fax dated
         25th April 2019 emphasising that the central concern of the
         representatives is the non-receipt of the respondent's bundle and
         adding that there is no burden on the appellant to explain how the
         Probation Report would assist his case. The representatives go on
         to say that they are acting pro-bono and so are not in a position
         to travel from London to Nottingham. Again an adjournment is
         requested.


         11.      A note at the bottom of the letter states that the
         appellant has contacted the representatives from prison indicating
         that the prison are trying to transport him to the hearing centre.
         The letter continues "I advised him that the hearing was unlikely
         to go ahead as I was still waiting for a decision on the
         application. Therefore, in reliant (sic) on this advice, it is
         unlikely the appellant will be brought to (sic) Tribunal tomorrow".


         12.      Miss Simbi for the Home Office opposed the application to
         adjourn. She said that according to her records the appellant had
         been served with a Home Office bundle on the 13th March 2019. That
         the Home Office bundle in any event contained nothing that the
         appellant would not be aware of. She added that the solicitors
         clearly had the reasons for refusal letter and that letter
         contained everything the respondent was relying on. That the proper
         procedure would have been for the appellant and his representative
         to attend the Tribunal as they were directed to and make an
         application to adjourn if at that point they were unable to proceed
         with the hearing.


         13.      I gave this matter anxious consideration. I noted that
         within the bundle is a CMR review. In that review completed on the
         12th April 2019 the appellant's representatives indicate that they
         are ready to proceed, Q3. There is a reference to the appellant
         seeking an expert report from the Probation Service, Q6. Funding is
         said to be in place, Q6(d).


         14.      There is a note from the Tribunal Clerk on the same day
         which states that the representatives have indicated they are not
         ready to proceed because of the absence of the Probation Report.
         The note states they have not provided reasons as to why that
         report is necessary.


         15.      I am satisfied the appellant has had the Home Office
         bundle. The representatives never raised the issue of the absence
         of the bundle at the CMR on the 12th April 2019. The only issue
         raised is with regard to the Probation Report. In any event, the
         Home Office bundle, as Miss Simbi said, contains very little that
         is not covered in the reasons for refusal letter. I am satisfied it
         was incumbent upon the appellant's representatives and the
         appellant to attend the hearing and to identify any problems which
         the failure to timeously serve the Home Office bundle has caused or
         the lack of a Probation Report.


         16.      I cannot find in any event that the Probation Report would
         be likely to be of any significant assistance. This is a case where
         the appellant falls into category A. He has received a sentence of
         over four year's imprisonment. Any rehabilitation undertaken will
         only have a marginal impact on any decision I have to make. The
         appellant's representatives have had the opportunity to say why a
         Probation Report would significantly advance the appellant's case
         and have failed to do so.


         17.      I would seem, in the face of it, that the appellant's
         representatives have effectively encouraged the appellant not to
         attend the hearing. I am not happy that they have failed to attend
         the hearing themselves. The CMR indicates that they are in funds
         contrary to the letter saying that they are acting pro bono.
         Whatever is the position with regard to funds it is still incumbent
         upon the appellant's representatives to have attended the Tribunal
         in the light of the direction from the Tribunal."


 0. Accordingly, the judge proceeded with the hearing in the appellant's
    absence.


 0. Turning to the substantive challenge to the decisions of the SSHD, the
    Judge reviewed the matters relied upon by the SSHD and concluded that
    he had not been provided with any satisfactory evidence in support of
    an Article 8 claim that would outweigh the public interest in deporting
    the Appellant.  In these circumstances, he dismissed the appeal.


 0. The appellant then sought permission to appeal Judge Lodge's decision.


The Appeal to UTIAC


 0. The Appellant's skeleton argument submitted for the appeal hearing
    summarises his grounds of appeal as follows:


      i) The refusal of the adjournment application was unfair and unjust
         disposal of the appeal;


     ii) The consideration of the appeal and dismissal under Para 339 and
         339A [sic], was unlawful and inconsistent with the applicant's
         right as a family member under the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulation 2016.


Fairness of the Decision to Adjourn


 0. The Appellant's skeleton argument and submissions took issue with the
    chronology set out by the judge at [10] above, which has caused us to
    re-examine the case file.  The actual chronology is as follows:


    iii) On 29 January 2019 the First-tier Tribunal sent the parties notice
         that there would be a pre-hearing review and hearing on 12 April
         2019 with a direction that the appellant was to complete the
         accompanying reply notice by 10 April 2019.  Notice was also given
         that, if the appeal proceeded to a full hearing, the hearing would
         be on 26 April 2019;


     iv) The appellant's solicitors returned the Reply to the Notice of
         Hearing by fax on 5 April 2019.  They answered Question 3 ("Is
         there any reason why you will not be ready to proceed with the Full
         Hearing on the date given in the "Notice of Pre-Hearing Review and
         Hearing?") by ticking the "yes" box.    In answer to Question 4
         ("Is there anything in your personal or family circumstances in the
         United Kingdom, or abroad, that you have not told the Respondent
         and that you wish to raise to rely upon at the Full Hearing?") they
         ticked the "yes" box and added that "the appellant's spouse is
         pursuing an application for confirmation of her and Appellant's
         right to permanent residence having been married to EEA spouse
         since 2004.  Confirmed, this would have determinative effect on the
         outcome of the appeal."  The solicitors said that it was intended
         to call two witnesses in addition to the appellant, including Ms
         [I], whose address was given as being in Coventry.  In answer to
         section 6, the solicitors said that they intended to submit expert
         evidence in the form of a probation report and a medical report
         but, in answer to question 6D, said that they did not have funding
         for the expert evidence.   They said the expert evidence was
         anticipated to be ready by 30 July 2019.  In section 12 the
         solicitors said that they had been authorised to represent the
         appellant but that all necessary financial and other arrangements
         had not been made to enable the solicitors to have conduct of the
         matter including the Full Hearing.


      v) On 12 April 2019 the pre-hearing review was carried out.  A form
         summarising the appellant's Reply to the Notice of Hearing was
         completed by a Tribunal Caseworker.   It is evidently this form
         that the Judge was referring to in [13] of the determination.
         Unfortunately for all concerned, the summary was inaccurate in two
         important respects because it recorded that the appellant was ready
         to proceed (when the solicitors had said in answer to Question 3
         that they were not) and that funding was in place for expert
         evidence (when the solicitors had said in answer to Question 6D
         that it was not).


     vi) The Tribunal Caseworker created a separate note of directions on
         the same day stating (as recorded by the Judge) that the solicitors
         had in fact said that they were not ready to proceed to the full
         hearing.  The note pointed out that Section 3 specifically requires
         the appellant to explain why more time was needed, and that this
         had not been done.  It noted that there was reference to a
         probation report being awaited but said that "it is not for the
         Tribunal to presume that this is the cause of the delay".  No
         mention was made of any medical report or the absence of funding.
         The note concluded by saying that "the appeal will accordingly
         remain as listed until such time as the requirements in section 3
         above are complied with."


    vii) The direction that we have just summarised was sent to the parties
         on 15 April 2019.  The notice also confirmed that the Full Hearing
         would be on 26 April 2019 in Nottingham.


   viii) A further notice was sent to the solicitors confirming the date of
         the Full Hearing.  It noted that the Tribunal had not received any
         bundle of documents for the appellant.


     ix) On 23 April 2019, the solicitors wrote to the Tribunal in an
         attempt to comply with the requirement that they explain the cause
         of the delay.  The solicitors said, first, that the probation
         report was not ready and that they could not say with certainty
         that it would be ready by 30 July 2019; and, second, that they had
         not been sent the Respondent's bundle.  They submitted that the
         substantive appeal hearing was not ready to proceed in the absence
         of the Respondent's bundle and the probation report.  They
         therefore asked for the direction of 15 April 2019 to be set aside
         and for the substantive hearing to be relisted at the first
         opportunity after 30 July 2019;


      x) On 24 April 2019 Assistant Resident Judge O'Brien directed that any
         application to adjourn should be made at the substantive hearing
         addressing the questions how a Probation Report would assist the
         Tribunal and whether the Probation Service had agreed to provide
         one;


     xi) On 25 April 2019 the Tribunal was informed by the prison that the
         Appellant was "refusing" to attend court because (he said) his case
         had been adjourned and he did not need to travel;


    xii) Also on 25 April 2019 the solicitors wrote to the Tribunal applying
         for an adjournment on the basis that (1) Judge O'Brien had not
         directed his mind to the absence of a Respondent's bundle, (2) the
         direction of 15 April 2019 had not required them to explain the
         benefit of a probation report, and (3) because they were
         representing the appellant pro bono and as a sole practitioner,
         they were not able to travel to Nottingham at their own expense to
         make a further application for an adjournment.  It was submitted
         that failure to provide the Respondent's bundle to the solicitors
         meant that they could not prepare for the appeal hearing and would
         deny the appellant a fair hearing.  The solicitors confirmed that
         they had told the appellant on 24 April 2019 that the hearing was
         "unlikely to go ahead", which may explain his reported refusal to
         travel.


 0. At the hearing today, the solicitor assured us that the respondent's
    bundle had still not been received.  When asked why no obvious steps
    had been taken to submit evidence to the First-tier Tribunal in light
    of the projected hearing on 26 April 2019 and the directions that had
    been given, he submitted that he could not effectively advise his
    client on what documents or other evidence should be put in until he
    had seen what was in the respondent's bundle.  This would apply whether
    the contents proved to be contentious and complex or merely matters of
    which the appellant was already aware and could address easily.


 0. The situation that has arisen is cause for concern.  The stated reasons
    for the First-tier Tribunal's decision not to adjourn were wrong in at
    least two respects, namely the belief that the solicitors had said in
    early April 2019 that they were ready to proceed and that funding was
    in place.  In the light of the solicitors' assurance today about non-
    receipt of the respondent's bundle Mr Lindsay, who appears for the
    respondent, fairly accepted that although he had not found anything to
    indicate that the respondent's bundle had not been sent, mistakes can
    happen in a large organisation.  There is also the possibility, which
    cannot be wholly excluded, that the bundle was sent but went astray for
    some unknown reason.  In any event, we are minded to accept today's
    assurance from the solicitor in the absence of compelling evidence to
    the contrary.  On that basis, there were three respects in which the
    basis for the refusal for the adjournment was erroneous.


 0. We note in passing that it seems to us to be highly unsatisfactory that
    a solicitor should take on the responsibility of representing someone
    in a case of such importance to the client as this appeal is to the
    appellant if he is not able to represent the person fully and properly.
     That must involve and include compliance with directions from the
    Court and, in particular, attendance to represent the client at
    properly listed hearings.  While we have sympathy with the financial
    implications for a sole practitioner of travelling significant
    distances when acting pro bono, we cannot escape the concern that the
    absence of the solicitors at the listed full hearing in this case may
    have acted to the detriment of the appellant.  This applies not least
    in relation to the renewed application for the adjournment: we can only
    suspect that the Judge may have taken a different view of the
    significance of the respondent's bundle if the solicitor had been there
    to explain his position and give his assurance in person as he did to
    us.


 0. Does any of this render the adjournment and subsequent hearing unfair
    so that the determination should be set aside?  For the respondent, Mr
    Lindsay submits that the appeal was bound to fail for want of evidence
    of a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife.  Conversely the
    appellant's solicitor submits that the appeal should have been bound to
    succeed and should have succeeded below on the basis that the Part VA
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and paragraphs A398
    and 399A do not apply.


 0. It is possible to question the materiality of a probation report and to
    downplay the possible significance of the appellant and his
    representatives not having seen the respondent's bundle.  However, one
    central issue was whether the appellant and his wife were in a genuine
    subsisting relationship.  Another was whether there was a subsisting
    parental relationship between the appellant and the two children of the
    marriage.  To that end, the appellant had indicated his intention to
    call his wife to give evidence.  We are not able to predict what the
    outcome of evidence from his wife would have been; but it clearly had
    the potential to be material.


 0. At one point in his submissions to us, the solicitor appeared to submit
    that there was no need for the appellant to adduce evidence about the
    genuineness and subsistence of his relationship with his wife.  This
    submission is at odds with the statement in the Reply to the Notice of
    Hearing that the appellant intended to call evidence, including
    evidence from his wife.  We note also that Ms [I] attended the hearing
    before us.  In our judgment, the proper conduct of the appellant's
    appeal would necessarily involve the calling of evidence about the
    genuineness and subsistence of his relationship with Ms [I] in order to
    provide a foundation for his Article 8 claim.  In the absence of such
    evidence, the previous history of his failed attempt to obtain an EEA
    permanent residence card as a spouse would be evidence adverse to his
    appeal that would be likely to be accepted, as it was by the Judge in
    the present determination.  Similarly, if there is a subsisting
    parental relationship with the two children of the marriage, that needs
    to be evidenced.


 0. The result of the refusal of the adjournment was that no relevant
    evidence in support of the appellant's case was before the tribunal.
    While noting the high threshold that needs to be achieved for an
    Article 8 claim to succeed in circumstances such as these, we cannot
    exclude the possibility of success in this case if the appeal were
    properly evidenced and presented.  We therefore conclude that, despite
    the unsatisfactory circumstances that led to the non-attendance of
    either the appellant, his representative or any evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal, the refusal of the adjournment on a wrong factual
    basis was erroneous and unfair.


 0. We therefore remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be tried de
    novo.




Signed: [pic]

Mr Justice Stuart-Smith

Dated: 16 October 2019



