
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21440/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th January 2020                 |On 17th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD RAFIQ
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He claims to have arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 1995. On 19th February 2009, the  appellant  made
    an application for leave to remain in the UK on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence. The  application  was  rejected  on  3rd  March  2009.   The
    appellant made a further application for leave to remain on  6th  March
    2009 and that application was refused, but the  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain on 23rd November 2009, valid  until  23rd
    November 2012. On 20th  November  2012,  he  made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain on Article  8  grounds.  That  application  was
    refused for the reasons set out in a decision dated 2nd July  2013  and
    the appellant's appeal against that decision,  was  dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mayall
    promulgated on 16th December 2013.  On 24th January 2014, the appellant
    made yet a further application  for  leave  to  remain  on  family  and
    private life grounds. That application was refused for the reasons  set
    out in a decision dated 4th April 2014. A further application was  made
    by the appellant on 16th March 2015 and that application was refused on
    19th July 2016, and an appeal against that decision was  dismissed  for
    the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 15th  September  2017.
    The appellant's most recent application was made on 27th February  2018
    and was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in a decision
    dated 8th October 2018. That decision  attracted  a  further  right  of
    appeal and the appellant's appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out
    in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul  promulgated  on  26th
    July 2019.


The decision of FtT Judge Paul


 2. The judge refers to the appellant's immigration history  at  paragraphs
    [2] and [3] of his decision. The Judge records,  at  [4],  the  matters
    relied upon by the appellant in support of his most recent application.
     At paragraph [5], the judge stated:


         "The core feature of the appellant's case throughout  has  been  to
         try to persuade the relevant authorities that he has  been  in  the
         country since  1995.  On  16  December  2013,  in  a  determination
         promulgated by Judge Mayall, specific consideration  was  given  to
         the appellant's evidence and claim that he had been in the UK since
         1995. After  careful  consideration  of  the  evidence,  the  judge
         concluded that the appellant had been  here  since  1999  based  on
         concessions made by the respondent. The judge also  said  that  the
         date of his arrival would probably fall somewhere between 1995  and
         1999. However, he had not established 20 years, and his appeal  was
         dismissed."


 3. At paragraphs [11] and [12], the judge stated:


         "11. There was then a discussion between the representatives as  to
         how this appeal could succeed  on  the  basis  that  the  20-years'
         continuous residence had to be shown at the  date  of  application.
         The date of application in this  case  was  18  February  2018.  It
         followed, therefore, that the appellant would have to show that  he
         had been in the UK since February 1998. I pointed out that, in  the
         light of the previous Tribunal decisions,  and  in  particular  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal in the second  appeal,  this  was  a
         point that had been exhaustively considered  previously.  Thus,  it
         appeared at the outset that there was an insuperable burden on  the
         appellant to show that he had been in the country for the requisite
         period of 20 years at the date of application.


         12.  For the appellant, Miss Stuart-King submitted that  under  the
         Article 8 jurisprudence it was pertinent to look at  the  situation
         as of the date of hearing. Now, more than 20 years passed since his
         accepted arrival in the UK  which  the  respondent  had  previously
         conceded was 1999. It followed, therefore, that  the  Tribunal  was
         invited to consider whether it would be proportionate  in  all  the
         circumstances; that somebody who had exceeded 20 years by the  date
         of the appeal, for the appellant to have his appeal  dismissed  and
         effectively  face  removal  so  that  he   could   make   a   fresh
         application."


 4. The judge's reasons and conclusions are set out at paragraphs  [14]  to
    [18] of the decision.  The judge noted  that  the  Tribunal  previously
    proceeded  on  the  basis  of  the  respondent's  concession  that  the
    appellant could prove that he was in the UK by 1999.


 5. At paragraphs [17] and [18], the judge stated:


         "17. In my view, it was wrong for the  appellant's  representatives
         to argue that, in effect, because the appellant had  now  completed
         20 years by the date of hearing, that  in  some  way  narrowed  the
         margin between the consideration of long residence under the  Rules
         and any prospective application under Article 8.  The  point  about
         long residence under the Rules is that there is no requirement that
         a person had been in the  country  lawfully.  Clearly,  a  critical
         feature in relation  to  Article  8  (applying  the  principles  of
         section 117B and obviously the overriding principle of Razgar),  is
         that a person's status is a highly material  factor.  In  my  view,
         there is clearly nothing in this case that  distinguishes  it  from
         the previous appeals, and the appellant's point that because he now
         has 20 years that in some way should get  him  over  the  finishing
         line, in my view, is a flawed argument.


         18.  The fact is that the appellant is entitled to proceed  on  the
         basis that he could be treated as being in  this  country  since  1
         January 1999, which means that any application he  now  makes  will
         demonstrate that he probably has been in the country for  20  years
         subject to all the other requirements of that particular rule being
         considered. In my view, this was a fundamentally flawed attempt  to
         get around the 20-year rule by relying on the fact that at the date
         of the appeal he had  been  in  the  country  for  20  years.   The
         previous decisions of the Tribunals and the Courts have established
         the principle that a 'near miss' is a near miss, but does not  help
         the appellant to get over the finishing line. The only solution now
         is for the appellant to make another  application,  which  will  be
         considered on the merits in accordance with all the other  relevant
         factors under the long residence Rule provisions."


The appeal before me


 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey  on
    28th November 2019.  In doing so, he noted that it is arguable that the
    judge erred in law in failing to properly assess the public interest in
    the appellant's removal, given that any application made at the date of
    his determination, would have met the requirements of  the  immigration
    rules. That was particularly relevant since the respondent's policy  on
    immigration control is expressed through the rules (including  the  20-
    year rule referred to by the judge) and, as correctly advanced  by  the
    grounds, it is  entitled  to  be  afforded  'considerable  weight';  TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at [34].


 7. Mr Mackenzie submits the authorities establish that on  appeal,  s85(4)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  properly  read,
    requires the Tribunal to consider the appellant's circumstances as they
    are at the date of the hearing; SE (Mauritius) -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
    2145 at [33 & 34] and OA  (human  rights;  new  matter;  s120)  Nigeria
    [2019] UKUT 00065 (IAC) at [33].  He submits that the Senior  President
    of Tribunals confirmed in TZ (Pakistan) at [32] to [34], that  where  a
    person meets the rules, the human rights appeal  must  succeed  because
    'considerable weight' must be given to the respondent's policy  as  set
    out in the rules.


 8. At the hearing before me, Mr Singh on behalf of the respondent candidly
    accepts the judge was wrong, at paragraph [17], to say that the  appeal
    could not succeed because the appellant could only  establish  that  he
    has live continuously in the UK at the date of the appeal, rather  than
    at the date of the application.   He  accepts  the  judge  should  have
    considered the facts as they stood at the  date  of  the  hearing.   He
    accepts that in a decision promulgated  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mayall on 16th December 2013,  the  judge  considered  the  appellant's
    evidence and the judge concluded that the appellant had been here since
    1999, based on concessions made by the respondent.  He accepts that  in
    her  decision  of  8th  October  2018,  the  respondent  confirmed  the
    application does not fall for refusal on grounds of suitability.


 9. Mr Singh, properly my judgement, accepts that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is tainted by a material error of law and should be
    set aside.


10. As to disposal, the parties agree that the appropriate course is for me
    to remake the decision, noting the finding  made  previously  that  the
    appellant has established that the has lived  in  the  UK  continuously
    since 1999.


Discussion


11. I am satisfied that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul  is
    tainted by a material error of law for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    grounds of appeal and, in particular, the concession properly  made  by
    Mr Singh, that I have referred to at paragraph [8] above.


Remaking the decision


12. The only ground of appeal available to  the  appellants  was  that  the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  The appellant's ability to  satisfy  the  immigration  rules  is
    therefore not the question to be determined by  the  Tribunal,  but  is
    capable of being a  weighty,  though  not  determinative  factor,  when
    deciding whether the refusal of the application for leave to remain  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.


13. Article 8 is plainly engaged.  I find that the decision to  refuse  the
    appellant leave to remain may have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.  I  accept  that  the
    interference is in accordance with the law, and that  the  interference
    is necessary to protect the legitimate aim of immigration  control  and
    the economic well-being of the country.  The issue in this  appeal,  as
    is often the case, is whether the interference is proportionate to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


14.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mayall  had  previously  found  that  the
    appellant has lived in the UK continuously since 1999 and he also  said
    that the date of the appellant's arrival in the UK would probably  fall
    somewhere between 1995 and 1999.  On any view, as at today's date,  the
    appellant has now lived continuously in the UK for at least  20  years.
    Mr Singh did not seek to persuade me otherwise and accepts, as set  out
    in the respondent's decision, the application does not fall for refusal
    on grounds of suitability in  Section  S-LTR  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    immigration rules.


15. The appellant relies upon his private life.  I am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has established on a balance of  probabilities  that  he  has
    lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20  years  and  therefore
    satisfies the requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life  as  set  out  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.


16. Having regard to the policy of  the  respondent  as  expressed  in  the
    immigration rules, and in the absence of any countervailing factors  in
    the public interest that weigh against the appellant,  I  am  satisfied
    that on the facts here, the decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  is
    disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control.  In  the
    circumstances I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision


17. The appeal is allowed and the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Paul is set aside.


18. I remake the decision and allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Signed   Date 14th January 2020


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

FEE AWARD

The appellant was unable to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  of
the immigration rules as at the date of his application or as  at  the  date
of the respondent's decision dated 8th October  2018.  I  have  allowed  the
appeal on the basis of the facts as they are as at the date of  my  decision
and in the circumstances, I decline to make a fee award  in  favour  of  the
appellant.


Signed   Date 14th January 2020

    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

