

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21364/2016
                                                               HU/22443/2016
                                                               HU/22446/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 August 2017                             |On 16 August 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                            OSARUMWENSE OMOROGBE
                        (and two dependent children)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr J. Jamil of Arndale Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant ("the  appellant")  and  her  two  children  ("the
    second  and  third  appellants")  appealed  against  the   respondent's
    decision dated 18 August 2016 to refuse a human rights claim.

2.    It is not necessary for the Tribunal to set out  the  full  course  of
    events relating to the lodging of the appeals. The evidence shows  that
    the appeals of  the  first  appellant  and  her  children  were  lodged
    separately. As a result the appeals  were  not  dealt  with  as  linked
    appeals as would normally be appropriate. Having considered  both  sets
    of files, mostly likely the  problem  was  caused  by  the  appellants'
    previous legal representative  who  filed  bundles  separately  without
    reference to all three court reference numbers. The way  in  which  her
    previous  representatives  handled   the   matter   led   to   separate
    determinations by two  different  First-tier  Tribunal  judges  on  the
    papers. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Powell  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  21  November  2016.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Tobin dismissed the appeals of the  two  children  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 May 2017. Because of the way  in  which  the
    appeals were handled, and through no fault of their own, neither  judge
    had sight of a bundle of documents prepared by the appellant in support
    of the appeal. Mr Tufan accepted, as a matter of fairness, that it  was
    appropriate to remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
    hearing.

3.    Rule 40 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  allows
    the Upper Tribunal to give a decision orally at a hearing.  Rule  40(3)
    states that the Upper Tribunal must  provide  written  reasons  with  a
    decision notice to each party as soon as reasonably  practicable  after
    making  a  decision  which  finally  disposes  of  all  issues  in  the
    proceedings. Rule 40(3) provides exceptions to the rule if the decision
    is made with the consent or the parties or the parties  have  consented
    to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons.  In  this  case  both
    parties consented to the decision at the hearing so it is not necessary
    to give detailed reasons.

4.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  decisions  are  set  aside  on  grounds  of
    procedural fairness and the appeals are  linked  and  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  The  appeals  were  initially
    listed for determination on the papers, but will now be listed for oral
    hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decisions involved the making of errors of law

The decisions are set aside

The appeals shall be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date   14 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




