
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21705/2018
                                                               HU/21708/2018
                                                               HU/21724/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2019                    |On 25 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  DAMANDEEP
                                   SHARMA
                                   SHARMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Uddin
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterse, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India. The first and  second  appellants
    are the parents of the third appellant who was born in 2010. The  third
    appellant is a 'qualifying child' for the purposes of  section  117  of
    the 2002 Act (as amended), having lived in this country for  more  than
    seven years. The Secretary of State, by a  decision  dated  12  October
    2018, refused the applications made by  the  appellants  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds. The appellants appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29  May  2019,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellants now appeal,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellants assert that the judge made an error by finding that  the
    first and second appellants have no  right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom  [100].  The  appellants  submit  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants had been granted limited leave remain and  now  enjoy  leave
    under the provisions of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  whilst
    their appeals are pending.

 3. I find that the judge has  not  erred  in  law.  At  [100],  the  judge
    referred to the fact that neither the first nor second appellant  'have
    a right to remain' [my emphasis]; the fact that the appellants may have
    limited leave to remain whilst their appeals are pending is  not,  with
    respect, the same as having a right to remain here indefinitely. It  is
    plain that the judge uses the expression 'right to remain' in the sense
    of citizenship or indefinite leave to remain and the first  and  second
    appellants  do  not  have  a  'right'  in  that  sense.  To  adopt  the
    interpretation suggested by the appellants  would  render  the  passage
    from  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  which  I  cite   below
    meaningless.

 4. The appellants also assert that the judge erred by concluding  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave  the  United
    Kingdom. It is submitted that the judge also found that it would be  in
    the best interests of the third  appellant  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that the two findings are contradictory.

 5. Again, I find that the judge has not fallen into error. It may well  be
    in the best interests of a child to remain this country and at the same
    time also reasonable for the child to leave it. Whilst it is  important
    for decision-makers to carry out a 'best  interests'  assessment,  this
    appeal turns on the question of reasonableness. Clear guidance has been
    provided by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) 2018 UKSC 53 to which the
    judge made reference at [95]. He referred also to EV  (Philippines)  at
    [58]:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?"

 6. The judge has answered the  'ultimate  question'  in  this  appeal  and
    supported his conclusion with  cogent  reasons  at  [100-113].  He  has
    directed himself appropriately in respect of the law. He concluded that
    it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to travel to India
    with his parents, neither of whom have a right  in  the  long  term  to
    remain living in the United Kingdom. The judge's finding [100] that the
    third appellant's best interests are met by his  remaining  within  the
    same family unit as his  parents  is,  notwithstanding  his  length  of
    residence in this country, unimpeachable. Accordingly, this  appeal  is
    dismissed



    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 21 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

