
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21210/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 July 2021                               |On 4 August 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     m a
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.



Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by HC395 Limited
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is the re-making decision in  the  appeal  of  MA,  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, who asserts that the respondent's refusal of his human rights
    claim  (made  in  the  context  of  deportation   proceedings)   is   a
    disproportionate interference with his family life under Article 8 ECHR
    and is therefore also unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998.

 2. The appellant claims to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  1995,
    although this does not appear to ever have been accepted as a fact.  In
    any event, and following a number  of  unsuccessful  applications,  the
    appellant was not granted any form of the  leave  to  remain  until  25
    April 2016, and this only on a discretionary basis.

 3. In 2007, the appellant underwent an Islamic marriage  to  his  partner,
    SC, a Bangladeshi  citizen,  and  they  have  been  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship ever since. The couple have four children, born
    in 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016. The children are all Pakistani citizens.

 4. In May 2017, the appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  conspiracy  to  assist
    unlawful immigration and conspiracy to possess identity documents  with
    intent. SC pleaded guilty to possession of false identity documents. In
    June  of  that  year,  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  59   months'
    imprisonment and SC to 13 months' imprisonment, suspended for 18 months
    with a requirement to undertake 120 hours of unpaid work.

 5. The appellant's sentence led to deportation action  by  the  respondent
    under the UK Borders Act 2007. A decision to deport was  issued  on  18
    August 2017 and a deportation order was signed  10  October  2018.  The
    following day the appellant's human rights claim, which had been raised
    in response to the 2017 decision, was refused with a right of appeal.

 6. The right of appeal is  under  section  82(1)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended ("the 2002  Act")  and  the
    sole ground of appeal available to the appellant is that under  section
    84(2).



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross dismissed the appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 9 January  2020.  His  reasons  for  doing  so,
    together with my conclusions as to  why  the  decision  was  materially
    flawed, are set out in my error of law decision, annexed  to  this  re-
    making decision. In short, I found that the judge had  failed  to  deal
    with the question of whether SC would in fact leave the United  Kingdom
    with the children and follow the appellant to Pakistan  and,  in  turn,
    failed to deal with the evidence of an independent social worker that a
    split in the family unit could lead to the children  being  taken  into
    local authority care.

 8. I set the judge's decision aside, preserving only the finding that  the
    appellant's eldest child did not suffer from selective mutism.

 9. My error of law decision was made without a hearing, pursuant  to  rule
    34 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  it
    preceded the decision of Fordham J in the JCWI case  [2020]  EWHC  3103
    (Admin). There has been no indication  from  the  respondent  that  the
    course of action I adopted was procedurally unfair and that my error of
    law decision should not stand on that basis.



The evidence

10. I have considered the following evidence when re-making the decision in
    this appeal:

          a) The appellant's first bundle,  indexed  and  paginated  E1-247
             (items A-E are not included);

          b) The appellant's second bundle, indexed and paginated 1-35;

          c) The appellant's third bundle, indexed and paginated A1-G;

          d) The appellant's fourth bundle, indexed and paginated A-D6 (the
             pagination has gone awry);

          e) A letter from SC's GP, dated 16 December 2019;

          f) The respondent's original appeal bundle;

          g) Oral evidence from SC.

11. At the hearing, it transpired that an interpreter had not  been  booked
    for the appellant. Following a discussion, both representatives  agreed
    that they had no questions for the appellant in any event and  so  this
    omission would not prevent the hearing from proceeding.

12. SC gave her oral evidence with the assistance of a Bengali interpreter.
    In examination-in-chief she adopted her latest witness  statement.  She
    clarified her employment, which consisted not of working in a  kitchen,
    but sewing clothes/materials at home on a self-employed basis for which
    she earned approximately �120 a  week.  She  also  explained  that  the
    individual described as an "aunt" in her  statement  was  not  a  blood
    relative, but simply someone she used to work with years ago  whom  she
    referred to in this manner. She no longer had contact with this person.
    Finally, she confirmed that her  discretionary  leave  to  remain  runs
    until August 2021.

13.  In  cross-examination  she  stated  that  there  was  now  a   pending
    application to register her eldest child  as  a  British  citizen.  She
    confirmed that when the appellant was in  prison  unidentified  friends
    helped her "when there was an emergency". She had never sought or  been
    provided with assistance from social services. When asked about whether
    she would go with the appellant to Pakistan, SC stated that this  would
    be very hard and she did not know how she would cope. She  stated  that
    she was taking tablets for depression. When asked about  the  languages
    spoken at home, SC told me that English was  used  with  the  children,
    that the appellant had spoken Urdu to them before he  went  to  prison,
    that the eldest child used to speak Urdu and Punjabi, and none  of  the
    children now spoke either of these languages. SC stated that she  would
    not go to Pakistan with the appellant.

14. In response to a couple of questions  from  me,  SC  explained  that  a
    "doctor" told her that she suffered from depression. It transpired that
    this individual had in fact been  the  Independent  social  worker,  Mr
    Horrocks. SC confirmed that she spoke a little Urdu with the  appellant
    and that he tries to speak to the children in English  as  much  as  he
    can.

15. In re-examination, SC stated that she takes her medication once  a  day
    and had been doing so since  2017  or  2018.  When  asked  about  other
    reasons why she would not go to Pakistan, she listed the following: her
    lengthy residence in the United Kingdom (approximately 20  years);  her
    Bangladeshi nationality; not having relatives in Pakistan; not  knowing
    anything about Pakistan; fears over how Pakistani people would see her;
    lack of opportunities for the children; her inability to work and  find
    food and accommodation; and inadequate medical services.



Submissions

16. A full note of the parties' submissions is contained in the  record  of
    proceedings. I summarise it only very briefly here and will  deal  with
    particular points raised when setting out my findings and  conclusions,
    below.

17. In essence, Mr Tufan submitted that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for
    the whole family unit to go to Pakistan or for that unit  to  be  split
    up. In any event, the appellant could  not  rely  on  the  family  life
    exception under section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.  The  very  compelling
    circumstances threshold under section 117C(6) was demanding and no such
    circumstances existed in this case. As to SC's  stated  intent  not  to
    leave the United Kingdom, it was submitted that this was nonetheless  a
    choice on her part.

18. Mr Bazini focused his attention on the  children,  submitting  that  it
    would plainly be unduly harsh for them to go and live in  Pakistan.  In
    respect of the "stay" scenario, he submitted that  SC's  history  as  a
    victim of domestic abuse, her mental health problems, and the fact that
    she lost twins in  2008,  combined  to  show  that  she  was  extremely
    vulnerable. If the appellant was removed from the  family  unit,  there
    was a strong likelihood that the children would become the  subject  of
    care proceedings, a scenario supported by the evidence of Mr  Horrocks.
    This outcome constituted very compelling circumstances.





Relevant legal framework

19. I have taken account of the statutory considerations set out in section
    117B and 117C of the 2002 Act. In addition, I have had  regard  to  the
    various authorities referred to me  by  the  parties  (including  those
    contained in the authorities bundle provided by  Mr  Bazini),  together
    with other relevant case-law I have deemed it appropriate to cite.



Findings of fact and analysis

20. If it need be said, I have considered all of the evidence before me  in
    the round, applying the balance of probabilities when assessing whether
    the appellant has made out his factual case. For ease of reading, I  am
    separating out the various relevant factors which bear on the  ultimate
    question of whether the appellant's deportation would be  proportionate
    or not.



The appellant's relationship with SC

21. It is  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with SC and I so find.  I  accept  that  the  relationship
    began in or around 2003 and that the couple began cohabiting  in  2007.
    There is nothing to indicate that the relationship  has  been  anything
    other than strong and the couple have dealt with the separation  caused
    by their offending and the loss of their twins.

22. I am willing to accept that the  relationship  was  disapproved  of  by
    their respective families, as claimed. Both  have  provided  consistent
    evidence on this; the appellant asserting that his family  was  unhappy
    because SC was not Pakistani and was a  divorcee,  whilst  SC's  family
    blamed her for the breakdown in the first marriage and did not like the
    idea of her then marrying a  Pakistani.  However  unjustified  one  may
    consider these attitudes to be,  I  am  willing  to  accept  that  they
    existed  and  were  applied  to  the  relationship.  I  accept  that  a
    consequence  of  this  is  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  SC  have
    meaningful relationships with their respective families.

23. By virtue of section 117A(2)(a) of the 2002 Act, I am bound to  address
    the mandatory considerations under section 117B. Sub-section (4) of the
    latter provides that "little weight" should be given to a  relationship
    formed with a "qualifying partner" established by a  person  when  they
    are in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.  In  the  present  case,  the
    relationship was established at a time when not only was the  appellant
    in this country  unlawfully,  but  SC  was  not  (and  is  not  now)  a
    "qualifying partner". As matters now stand, their status is precarious.
    This clearly has an impact on the weight  attributable  to  the  family
    life enjoyed between the appellant and SC when it comes to the  overall
    balancing exercise.

24. Having said that, the central focus of this case is  on  the  children,
    not the relationship between the appellant and SC.

25. A final point about the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  SC
    relates to language. I am bound to say that I have concerns  over  this
    aspect of the evidence, relating as it  does  to  the  ability  of  the
    children to speak and understand a  language  used  by  their  parents.
    Neither the appellant nor SC have provided any significant evidence  to
    show that they speak good English. I assume they  have  an  ability  to
    converse at a reasonable level, this probably having developed over the
    course of time and through interaction with the children. However, they
    both met in 2003, at a time when neither had been in the United Kingdom
    for very long. I find it wholly improbable that they did not  learn  to
    converse in Urdu, Punjabi, Bengali, or a combination of these. I do not
    accept that  they  have  been  able  to  communicate  with  each  other
    effectively  in  English  from  the  beginning  of  their  relationship
    onwards. It is in my view more likely  than  not  that  SC  speaks  and
    understands Urdu to a reasonable level, and that the  appellant  speaks
    and understands Bengali, albeit probably to a lesser extent.



SC's circumstances

26. It is common ground that  SC  is  a  Bangladeshi  citizen  and  has  no
    connection to Pakistan other than through  her  relationship  with  the
    appellant.

27. It has never been disputed that SC came to the United  Kingdom  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled in this  country  or  a  British
    citizen. I accept that she did and that this occurred in 2000.

28. I accept that SC was the victim of domestic  abuse  within  her  short-
    lived first marriage. There is not a great deal of  detail  about  this
    issue, but it appears as though she  had  in  effect  been  used  as  a
    domestic slave by her first husband's mother and  that  the  ex-husband
    physically abused her as well. I find that this relationship lasted for
    about three months before SC was effectively abandoned in this country.
    She then made unsuccessful attempts to regularise her  status  here.  I
    have not been provided with evidence to indicate  that  the  respondent
    specifically rejected her claim to have been  the  victim  of  domestic
    violence. I do not  have  evidence  which  specifically  considers  the
    potential mental health consequences to SC of this abuse in  2000/2001.
    On what there is, I do not find  their  to  be  a  direct  causal  link
    between those events and any mental health difficulties now experienced
    by SC. However, it is in my view more  likely  than  not  that  adverse
    memories will still exist for SC.

29. I do accept that SC would have seen the appellant has a stabilising and
    supportive element in her life, given what she had experienced  in  her
    previous relationship.

30. I find that SC was pregnant with twins in 2008,  but,  tragically,  one
    was stillborn and the other passed away soon after birth. I accept that
    the couple visit the grave on a regular basis. Again,  I  do  not  have
    expert evidence concerning the specific impact,  if  any,  of  on  SC's
    mental health over the course of time and  currently.  It  is,  though,
    more likely than not that this will be  an  event  which  still  causes
    upset.

31. There is a lack of clarity as to whether SC was  granted  a  period  of
    discretionary leave in 2010. SC and the appellant both assert that  she
    was. The respondent's decision letters make  no  reference  to  such  a
    grant. However,  a  decision  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Juss,
    promulgated on 31  December  2015,  and  relating  to  previous  linked
    appeals by the  appellant,  SC,  and  their  eldest  child,  does  make
    specific reference to SC having been granted leave in 2010 on  a  basis
    unconnected to any family life claim. I have not been provided with any
    documentary evidence to confirm this earlier grant of leave.

32. On balance I accept that SC was granted discretionary  leave  in  early
    2010 for a period of three  years.  I  find  that  SC  applied  for  an
    extension of that leave on  19  December  2012.  This  application  was
    refused, but was ultimately granted following proceedings in the First-
    tier Tribunal and then the Upper Tribunal in 2015. It  is  that  second
    grant of discretionary leave which runs until August 2021.

33. SC's status is, and always has been, either unlawful or precarious.

34. I find that SC has  no  family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Her
    evidence does not indicate that she has any  significant  private  life
    ties in this country. I am willing to accept that she is currently self-
    employed undertaking sewing work from home and that  the  reference  to
    kitchen assistant in her latest witness statement was an error.

35. As the appellant is not working, it seems to me almost inevitable  that
    the family must be reliant, at least to an  extent,  on  public  funds,
    although this particular issue was not explored in evidence before me.

36. I turn to SC's health. There is no psychological or psychiatric  report
    on SC, nor is there any  other  medical  evidence  post-dating  the  GP
    letter of 16 December 2019.

37. On the basis of the GP letter, I accept  that  she  has  a  history  of
    depression and, at that time, suffered from  insomnia.  I  also  accept
    that she had been taking relevant anti-depressant medication,  but  had
    stopped this  due  to  breastfeeding  (presumably  in  respect  of  her
    youngest child, born in 2016). I find that as at late 2019, her  mental
    health was stable, but she continued to take  a  particular  medication
    because of insomnia. The letter goes on to say that SC had struggled to
    cope with caring for the children on her own (this presumably  being  a
    reference  to  when  the  appellant  was  in  prison),  and  that   the
    appellant's deportation could cause a relapse in the depression.

38. SC has stated that she continues to suffer from depression and anxiety,
    and that she is taking medication for this. I do not accept this to  be
    the case. The GP patient record  printout  at  D5  of  the  appellant's
    fourth bundle confirms that as at June 2021, SC  was  being  prescribed
    amitriptyline, on a 10mg dosage, with one tablet taken at  night.  Both
    the medication and the time of day it is taken are consistent with  the
    2019 GP letter and what it says about ongoing  insomnia.  It  does  not
    materially support SC's assertion that she is currently suffering  from
    depression and/or anxiety and has been prescribed medication for  these
    conditions. If there was a current diagnosis and relevant treatment  in
    place, it is reasonable to expect that appropriate evidence would  have
    been adduced. Her reference in evidence to what Mr Horrocks might  have
    told her is, with respect, beside the point: he was in no  position  to
    make a diagnosis or provide any form of medical opinion.

39. The above finding does not render irrelevant SC's health  as  a  factor
    which must be assessed as part of the overall proportionality exercise.
    The fact that she is not  currently  suffering  from  a  mental  health
    condition does not preclude the possibility that  her  past  depression
    will re-emerge in the future. I note that the GP's letter  was  written
    at a time when the appellant had been released from prison for a number
    of  months  (the  release  date  was  March  2019).   Whilst   he   was
    incarcerated, SC would have known that release would take place  within
    a relatively well-defined timescale. However, were the appellant to  be
    deported and SC remain in the United Kingdom, the  situation  would  be
    different: there would be a long-term, if not  indefinite,  separation.
    On balance, I find that there is a  risk  that  SC  would  suffer  from
    depression once again as a consequence of this.

40. As to the extent of any relapse and its effect on SC's functionality in
    so far as care for the children is concerned, it is very  difficult  to
    say, even on the balance of probabilities. There is no detailed medical
    evidence as to the nature of her past depression, nor is there any more
    recent medical assessment of the consequences of  the  appellant  being
    deported. There is no evidence of  any  external  professional  support
    provided to SC in the past, nor of any possible  support  available  to
    her in the future. Taking what I do have in the round, I  find  that  a
    further occurrence of  the  depression  would  not  result  in  a  very
    significant loss of overall functioning, or, if this did  occur,  there
    is  no  indication  that  it  could  not  be  materially  mitigated  by
    appropriate medical or other therapeutic treatment.  In  reaching  this
    conclusion I have  not  left  out  of  account  the  evidence  from  Mr
    Horrocks, but I will deal with his reports in more detail, below.

41. A final matter to be addressed at this stage is whether, as a matter of
    fact, SC would leave the United Kingdom and go with  the  appellant  to
    Pakistan if he were deported. Her answer  to  this  is  "no".  She  has
    provided a number of reasons for this in her  evidence,  as  summarised
    previously. From her perspective at least, these reasons are plausible.
    On balance, I find that SC's intention, as matters currently stand,  is
    that she would not leave the United Kingdom with the children. That  is
    a choice on her part, albeit no doubt a very difficult one.  I  confirm
    that the primary  basis  on  which  I  approached  the  proportionality
    exercise is that SC and the children will remain in the United  Kingdom
    if the appellant is deported.



The children

42. In the absence of up-to-date evidence on the  children's  education,  I
    have sought to calculate their current stages at school. From eldest to
    youngest, they are now (as at the date of my decision) in: Year 5; Year
    2; Year 1; and Reception Class.

43. I have no reason to doubt that the children are well-settled  in  their
    respective settings and are happy at school. There is no evidence  from
    the school, particularly in relation to the eldest child,  of  apparent
    behavioural  or  educational  difficulties  as  result  of  either  the
    appellant's previous incarceration or in light of the family's  current
    precarious circumstances.

44. I find that none of the children suffer  from  any  significant  health
    conditions. I accept that the two eldest suffer from allergies and  the
    third has asthma. However,  the  evidence  does  not  show  that  these
    materially prejudice their day-to-day lives. It is a preserved  finding
    that the eldest does not suffer from selective mutism, and  no  further
    evidence or submissions have been provided to the contrary. I find that
    he does not suffer from selective mutism. I have considered the  report
    from Dr Karim, dated 12 November 2019, notwithstanding  my  finding  on
    the selective mutism diagnosis. However, in light of that  finding  and
    the absence of any recent medical evidence, I do not  accept  that  the
    eldest   child   is   suffering   from   any    material    behavioural
    problems/conditions at present.

45. Although I have not been provided with  documentary  evidence  of  this
    (the absence of  relevant  up  to  date  evidence  is  something  of  a
    recurring theme in this appeal),  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  an
    application to register the eldest child is a British citizen has  been
    made and a decision is awaited.

46. As to the linguistic abilities of the children, I have a concern that a
    fully accurate picture has not been portrayed.  Although  SC  has  said
    that none of the children speak or understand Urdu and that the  eldest
    child's past comprehension disappeared once  the  appellant  came  home
    from prison, I find it to be somewhat unreal to suggest  that  the  two
    older children in particular, have lost all  ability  to  speak  and/or
    understand the mother tongue of their father and an adopted language of
    their mother. I accept that the parents will have done their very  best
    to converse in English with the children as much as possible, but it is
    in my view more likely than not that Urdu is still used within the home
    and that the two eldest children have a decent level of ability. I also
    find that the youngest two have a rudimentary grasp of that language.

47. There are two reports from Mr Peter  Horrocks,  an  independent  social
    worker whose expertise has been expressly or implicitly  recognised  by
    the Tribunal and Courts in a number of cases. In  the  present  appeal,
    the respondent  has  not  expressly  challenged  Mr  Horrocks'  general
    ability  to  provide  expert  evidence,  although  criticism  has  been
    levelled at an important  conclusion  reached  (I  will  address  this,
    below). I accept his suitability as a source of expert opinion and,  in
    general terms, I place relatively significant weight on  his  evidence.
    Having said that, I am not bound to accept each  and  every  conclusion
    provided.

48. The first report is dated 14 of February 2018. It followed a  visit  to
    the family home two weeks earlier. At  this  time,  the  appellant  was
    still in prison. Having spoken at length to SC, Mr Horrocks reached the
    following core conclusions:

          a) SC had been struggling to cope in the appellant's absence;

          b) She was a "very vulnerable woman" due to her overall history;

          c) The appellant has a good relationship with all  the  children,
             in particular the eldest;

          d) A permanent separation of  the  appellant  from  the  children
             would cause the latter "great distress and  trauma"  and  that
             the children were already vulnerable  due  to  the  separation
             whilst the appellant had been in prison;

          e) It would be in the best interests of all four children for the
             appellant to remain with them in the United Kingdom;

          f) For the children to move to  Pakistan  would  be  detrimental,
             particularly in respect of the eldest two;

          g) A separation of the appellant from SC would run  "real  risks"
             of a "significant downturn in her functioning" as a result  of
             which she "would no longer be able to meet the  needs  of  the
             children to a good enough standard." This, it is  said,  would
             lead to the "real risk" of intervention of social services  to
             ensure the well-being of children.

49. Mr Horrocks' second report is dated 14 November  2019  and  followed  a
    telephone interview with SC. The appellant was by  that  time  back  at
    home. Mr Horrocks confirms the conclusion stated in his 2018 report and
    says the following at paragraph 3.2:

           "I continue  to  share  the  same  opinion  in  respect  of  the
           implications for this family and for [SC] as a single parent and
           for the four children of the family, as outlined in my  previous
           report. In my  professional  opinion  in  the  event  that  [the
           appellant] was removed from the UK separated from  this  family,
           there is a very significant risk of intervention by social  care
           services  in  the  family  and  that  the  outcome  of  such  an
           intervention, would be that some if  not  all  of  the  children
           would come into the care of the Local Authority  and  that  they
           would become Looked After Children."

50. Unsurprisingly, Mr  Bazini  placed  great  store  on  that  conclusion,
    submitting that separation would indeed have the consequence alluded to
    by Mr Horrocks. In turn, care proceedings would be likely to occur  and
    the possibility of any or all of the children being  removed  from  the
    family home would constitute a very  compelling  circumstance  in  this
    case.

51. Mr  Tufan  has  taken  issue  with  the  conclusion.  He  queried  what
    underpinned Mr Horrocks' firm opinion that some or all of the  children
    "would" go into care if the appellant were to be deported.

52. If the consequence of the appellant being deported to Pakistan and  the
    rest of the family remaining United Kingdom was that it was more likely
    than not that the children would not be properly cared for  by  SC  and
    would, as a result, be taken into care, this  would,  in  my  judgment,
    constitute a very compelling circumstance sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public   interest   and   to   render   the    respondent's    decision
    disproportionate.

53. However, for the following reasons, I conclude that whilst there  is  a
    risk of such a scenario, it is not, on balance, likely to occur.

54. First, I reiterate my acceptance of Mr  Horrocks'  relevant  expertise,
    with the caveat that I am not bound to accept all  of  the  conclusions
    reached.

55. Second, Mr Horrocks does not of course profess  to  have  expertise  in
    psychiatric/psychological and/or legal issues relating to mental health
    conditions or relevant criteria or thresholds for the  intervention  of
    social services and, in particular, the stage at which children "would"
    be taken into care. Mr Horrocks did not base his conclusions on medical
    evidence relating to SC. I do not criticise  him  for  taking  at  face
    value what she said in interview, but it is relevant that he was unable
    to place his own expertise in the context of a fuller  picture  of  her
    medical circumstances.

56. I have addressed SC's mental health earlier in my  decision.  I  import
    what I have said there into the current discussion.

57. Third, there is in my view a difference in the evidence provided in  Mr
    Horrocks' two reports. In his 2018 report, he was of the view that  the
    appellant's deportation "would" lead to  a  "significant  downturn"  in
    SC's functioning and that she "would" no longer be able  to  adequately
    care for the children (see paragraph 4.24). This led  him  to  conclude
    that there was a "real risk" that this deterioration "could" lead to  a
    family breakdown and the intervention  of  social  services  (paragraph
    5.2). At paragraph 3.2 of the 2019 report, he states that there  was  a
    "very significant risk" of intervention by  social  services  and  that
    this "would" lead to some or all of the children going into care. On  a
    fair reading of the two reports, the view expressed in  the  second  is
    put in materially stronger terms than in the first. It is unclear to me
    why, if this was intended, the conclusion was more certain than before:
    they  do  not  appear  to  have  been  any  material  changes  in  SC's
    circumstances other than the appellant returning to the family home.

58. Fourth, the lack of familial or other close social support  for  SC  in
    this country is clearly a relevant factor in respect of her ability  to
    look after the children in the appellant's absence. This was relied  on
    by Mr Horrocks and certainly supports Mr Bazini's  central  submission.
    The same is true of SC's history of domestic abuse and the loss of  the
    twins. The combination of these factors  makes  SC  vulnerable  in  the
    sense that she is likely  to  experience  greater  emotional  upset  as
    result of the appellant's deportation than might a partner without  her
    particular history. She is also vulnerable to a relapse in her previous
    depression, but I have already found that this would not lead to a very
    significant loss of functionality.

59.  I  appreciate  that  Mr  Horrocks'  opinion  is  that  she  is  "very"
    vulnerable. To the extent that this is intended to lead directly to the
    conclusion that one or more  children  would  be  taken  into  care,  I
    disagree. There is  no  evidence  of  past  neglect  of  the  children.
    Everything points towards SC being dedicated to the well-being  of  her
    children., Although it was clearly a struggle, she  did  in  fact  care
    adequately for the children when relatively substantial period of time.
    There has as yet been no social services intervention with the  family,
    requested or not. There is no  suggestion  that  SC  would  refuse  any
    assistance  from  relevant  services.  The  past   is   obviously   not
    determinative of the future, but it does act as  an  indicator  and  is
    therefore relevant to my overall assessment of SC's vulnerability.

60. Fifth, although this is by its nature speculative on my part, I am  not
    prepared to assume that social services would not do all they could  to
    assist the family and to avoid the instigation of care proceedings.  In
    the absence of clear evidence to the contrary, my speculation is, in my
    judgment, reasonably permissible.  When  this  consideration  is  taken
    together with the other points discussed  above,  I  conclude  that  Mr
    Horrocks' opinion that such proceedings "would" occur and that  one  or
    more of the children "would" be taken  into  care,  involves  too  many
    degrees of speculation on his part. The chain of events  contended  for
    by the appellant does not of course have to be shown to be a  certainty
    or anything approaching that. Nonetheless, in my judgment the  prospect
    of the children being taken into care is too remote.

61. Despite what I have just said, I have no hesitation in concluding  that
    it would be firmly in the children's best interests for them to  remain
    in a single family unit and to  continue  to  be  brought  up  by  both
    parents. I also find that it would be firmly  in  the  children's  best
    interests for them to remain in the United Kingdom so that  they  could
    continue with the life known to them thus far.



The public interest in general

62. By virtue of the UK Borders Act 2007, section 117C(1) of the 2002  Act,
    and, to a lesser extent the Immigration Rules, the public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals is powerful. It is not a  fixity,  but  its
    reduction to the point at which  it  is  outweighed  by  the  protected
    rights of a person who has been sentenced  to  4  years  or  more  will
    require very strong elements of an Article 8 claim.



The offending

63. As the appellant is unable to rely on  either  of  the  two  exceptions
    under section 117C(4) and (5), I am entitled to  take  account  of  the
    seriousness of  the  offending  when  undertaking  the  proportionality
    exercise.

64. I have had reference to the sentencing remarks of HHJ  Kent,  the  Case
    Summary prepared by the CPS, the OASys report, and what  the  appellant
    himself has had to say.

65. The appellant and the co-conspirator had been under surveillance by the
    UK Border Force  during  the  late  summer  and  autumn  of  2016.  The
    appellant was caught in  possession  of  a  variety  of  passports  and
    identity documents. In addition, he and his co-conspirator had  engaged
    in a conspiracy to prepare counterfeit documents which were to be  used
    to facilitate  the  entry  of  numerous  individuals  into  the  United
    Kingdom. There were aggravating features to the offending: the  illegal
    entry was intended to be facilitated for strangers  and  for  financial
    gain; there was a high degree of planning and sophistication. I set out
    a passage from the sentencing remarks here:

           "In your case, [MA] and [Mr S],  you  committed  these  offences
           with total disregard for the serious,  immediate  and  long-term
           consequences that your criminal action would have on society, on
           the proper enforcement of immigration and border control, on the
           hidden security risks  that  would  result,  on  the  impact  on
           community relations that might result,  and  ultimately  on  the
           long-term impact that it  has  on  precious  state  resources...
           there were a number of individuals being facilitated, as can  be
           seen from the agreed facts; and the sheer quantity of  passports
           and parts of passports show that these were repeated incidents."

66. The appellant was given credit for  his  plea  of  guilty  and  it  was
    accepted that he was of previous good character. I, like the sentencing
    judge, have taken these mitigating factors into account.

67. This case is somewhat unusual in that SC herself was  involved  in  the
    offending. She was caught in possession of  39  counterfeit  or  stolen
    passports or parts  of  passports,  and  a  laptop  containing  several
    hundred images of passports and parts of passports. Her position as the
    mother of four very young children represented significant  mitigation,
    and this was reflected in the sentence imposed. I confirm that  I  have
    not taken SC's offending into account, as I am concerned only with  the
    appellant's criminality in this appeal.

68. I note from the indictment and the PNC printout that the offending took
    place only a matter of four months or so after the couple were  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in April 2016. This may  have  been  more
    than simple coincidence, but I do not draw that inference. Having  said
    that, it is  a  simple  fact  that,  notwithstanding  their  precarious
    position in the United Kingdom, both the appellant and SC embarked on a
    criminal enterprise in the knowledge that they were putting in jeopardy
    not only their status, but the potential stability  of  the  children's
    lives as well.

69. The nature of the enterprise undertaken by the appellant  and  his  co-
    conspirator went directly to undermine the integrity of the immigration
    control system of the United Kingdom. As the sentencing judge remarked,
    it  also  raised  security  risks,  which  must  of  itself  engage   a
    significant element of the public interest. For my  part,  the  conduct
    must also have created a significant risk that the illegal  entry  into
    the United Kingdom using counterfeit passports could have been for  the
    purposes of facilitating modern slavery.

70. Taking the circumstances surrounding the offending as a whole, I regard
    it as being very serious (albeit not of the most  serious  nature)  and
    deserving of very significant weight in the balancing exercise.




Risk of reoffending

71. The appellant is currently on licence and his sentence  is  due  to  be
    completed on 20 October 2021 (as to this date, I prefer the information
    contained on the Licence and the release date notification slip to  the
    date stated in the letter from the National Probation Service, dated  1
    July 2021). He is deemed to be of low risk of reconviction  within  two
    years and low risk of serious harm towards others. I accept this to  be
    the case as matters stand. The fact that the  appellant  committed  the
    offences for financial gain must be a concern, but this does  not  lead
    me  to  go  behind  the  overall  assessment  made  by   the   relevant
    professionals.

72. A low risk of  reoffending  is  a  relevant  factor  in  the  balancing
    exercise. It will not normally carry significant weight and I find that
    to be so on the facts of this case. The offending was very serious, the
    appellant remains under licence and thus has an added incentive not  to
    transgress, and there is no  evidence  of  any  additional  courses  or
    actions undertaken by him which might  otherwise  increase  the  weight
    attributable to the low risk assessment.



The "stay" scenario

73. The central plank of the appellant's case has been the consequences  to
    SC and, in particular, the children, of the "stay" scenario,  in  which
    the appellant goes to Pakistan alone whilst the  other  family  members
    remain in the United Kingdom.

74. For the reasons already set out when considering SC's circumstances and
    those of the children, and despite a separation being contrary  to  the
    latter's best interests, I conclude that it would harsh, but not unduly
    so, were this to occur. It would undoubtedly be a struggle  for  SC  to
    cope as a single parent, but the overall impact does not reach the high
    threshold imposed by the exception in section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.

75. Even if that threshold was satisfied, the appellant  cannot  of  course
    rely on the exception. Taking all relevant considerations into account,
    I conclude that there are no particular features of  the  unduly  harsh
    assessment which, taken in isolation or together with any other factor,
    disclose very compelling  circumstances  or  what  might  otherwise  be
    described as a very compelling case, given the strength of  the  public
    interest. Nor can I see any other factors which have not featured in my
    assessment thus far  which  would  otherwise  render  the  respondent's
    decision disproportionate.



The "go" scenario

76. However strong SC's intention to remain in the United Kingdom currently
    is, it  nonetheless  represents  a  choice  on  her  part.  I  deem  it
    appropriate to adopt a belt and braces approach  and  to  consider  the
    alternative, or hypothetical, "go" scenario in which SC did  decide  to
    go with the children to Pakistan.

77. Mr Bazini has submitted that it would be "plainly" unduly harsh for  SC
    and the children if this course of action were taken.

78. On the basis of the cumulative effect of the reasons set out  below,  I
    conclude that a relocation of SC and the children to Pakistan would  be
    very difficult, indeed harsh. However, I also conclude  that  it  would
    not be unduly harsh (in respect of SC and,  assessed  independently  or
    together with their mother, the children) for  the  family  members  to
    follow the appellant. Again, the appellant cannot rely on the statutory
    exception under section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act and even if it were  to
    be said that the unduly harsh threshold had been met, I conclude  that,
    on the basis of the reasons set out below, there are no very compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in the relevant exception,
    or any very strong additional factors, such  as  to  render  relocation
    disproportionate.

79. First, the children's  best  interests  are  obviously  a  primary  and
    important consideration, but they do  not  necessarily  outweigh  other
    significant competing factors. For the avoidance of any doubt,  leaving
    United Kingdom would be contrary to their best interests.

80. Second, whilst not wishing to underestimate the  difficulties  inherent
    in a relocation, it is the case that this course of action would  avoid
    separation of SC from the appellant and the children from their father,
    which in turn would avoid the emotional consequences of a split.

81. Third, the children are all Pakistani citizens and would be entitled to
    the rights attached  to  this  status  if  they  were  to  relocate.  I
    acknowledge that the  eldest  child  is  awaiting  a  decision  on  the
    registration application. However,  as  matters  stand,  he  is  not  a
    British citizen. Even if he were, British citizenship,  whilst  clearly
    important,  would  not  of  itself  render  a  relocation  to  Pakistan
    disproportionate (see, for example,  Patel  (British  citizen  child  -
    deportation) [2020] UKUT  45  (IAC)  and  the  discussion  of  case-law
    contained therein). Further, as I understand it, Pakistani  law  allows
    for an individual to hold dual Pakistani-British  nationality.  On  the
    facts of this case, I cannot see any specific significant prejudice  to
    the eldest child in respect of the nationality issue.

82. There clearly would be a high level of re-adjustment to be made by  the
    children, none of whom have experienced life in Pakistan before.  I  am
    not assuming that they will somehow have been provided with an in-depth
    understanding of Pakistani  society  simply  by  virtue  of  being  the
    appellant's children. Having said that, the appellant is in a  position
    to impart at least a degree of knowledge to them.

83. Fourth, the  children's  education  will  clearly  be  disrupted  by  a
    relocation to Pakistan and I have fully taken Mr Horrocks' evidence  on
    this issue into account. They  would  be  removed  from  their  current
    settings in which they are undoubtedly happy  and  well-supported.  The
    disruption would be felt most keenly by the eldest child, as he is  the
    furthest advanced in his educational and social 'career'. I have  found
    that the children have, to a greater or lesser extent,  an  ability  to
    speak and understand Urdu. This will  not  equate  to  that  of  native
    speakers  of  equivalent  ages  and  there   is   also   the   relevant
    consideration of writing and reading, which would be an  impediment  to
    the children. I place these factors together with  the  impact  of  the
    upset caused by being removed from friendships at school and elsewhere.
    The impact of this is likely to be greatest on the  eldest  and  second
    eldest of the children.

84. There are no additional factors relating specifically to  the  children
    which would render it even more difficult to integrate into a different
    educational environment. For example, none of  the  children  have  any
    developmental or other conditions and there is no evidence  from  their
    schools  indicating  specific  concerns.   There   is   a   functioning
    educational system in Pakistan and,  particularly  in  light  of  their
    Pakistani citizenship, and I am satisfied that there would not  be  any
    formal barriers to the children being able to access this.  I  have  no
    doubt that both parents would be as supportive as they could,  although
    it would be the case  that  the  appellant's  cultural  and  linguistic
    background would be of greater assistance than that of SC.

85. There is, as Mr Horrocks points out, a risk that the children would  be
    subjected to bullying in Pakistan. Such a risk would exist  in  respect
    of any child relocating to another country. Indeed, a risk  might  well
    exist where a child moved to  a  different  school  within  a  country.
    Taking this point from the general to the specific,  I  do  not  regard
    this  factor  as  carrying  significant  weight  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's children, having regard to their particular circumstances.

86. I also accept that relocation and entry into a new  educational  system
    would be likely to have an adverse impact on the children's  education,
    at least in the short term and specifically  in  relation  to  the  two
    older children. This is likely to be a consequence common to  many,  if
    not most, relocations of children to another country. I do  not  simply
    treat this as a "to be  expected"  factor,  but  even  with  the  focus
    resting on the children in this particular case, I do not regard it  as
    representing, alone or cumulatively, a very compelling circumstance.

87. Fifth, there is no evidence to show that SC's  Bangladeshi  citizenship
    would prevent her from being  able  to  reside  in  Pakistan  with  the
    appellant. She holds the view that life  would  be  difficult  in  that
    country because of her nationality, but there is no country information
    to indicate that there is in general significant official  or  societal
    discrimination against Bangladeshis. As with the children, SC has never
    lived in Pakistan and her relocation would involve a removal  from  the
    life she is known in this country for approximately  20  years.  On  my
    findings, she did  not  have  family  here,  nor  has  she  established
    particularly strong social or community ties. In one sense,  she  would
    not be leaving behind as much as an individual with different  familial
    and/or social circumstances. I have  found  that  she  does  speak  and
    understand Urdu. This would be of at least some assistance in adjusting
    to a new country. Her skills in sewing could, in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence to the contrary,  be  utilised  in  Pakistan  in  terms  of  a
    potential source of income. It is true that  she  would  not  have  any
    family support, but this pertains to her current circumstances as well.

88. SC's health is clearly relevant. I have found that she is not currently
    suffering from depression. The overall impact of moving to Pakistan  is
    likely to cause her upset and anxiety. I cannot, and do not,  rule  out
    the possibility that she would face depression once again, but I  weigh
    this against the fact that she would be part of a  united  family  unit
    and would have the support of the appellant.  There  is  no  suggestion
    that  relevant  medication  could  not  be  obtained  in  Pakistan,  if
    necessary. I have also considered SC's overall personal history and the
    potential impact this might have  on  her  if  she  were  to  relocate.
    Without wishing to diminish the  significance  of  the  very  difficult
    events she has experienced in the past, I do not consider these,  alone
    or in combination with other factors, would render it  disproportionate
    for SC to accompany the appellant to Pakistan.

89. Sixth, I can see no reason why, notwithstanding general difficulties in
    re-establishing himself and the time he has been away from the country,
    the appellant would not be  able  to  find  reasonable  employment  and
    accommodation in Pakistan within an appropriately limited timeframe. He
    is clearly able to work and would undoubtedly wish to do so in order to
    support his family.

90. Seventh, I have considered the travel advice issued by the Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office and the other country information contained in  the
    appellant's fourth bundle. Strictly speaking, the FCO advice relates to
    British citizens travelling to Pakistan: none of the  individuals  with
    which I am concerned have that status. In respect of Covid-19,  I  note
    that SC has now had her second vaccination. I have no information as to
    the  position  of  the  appellant.  The  children  have  not   received
    vaccinations, and would be unlikely to receive any if they remained  in
    the United Kingdom. In my  judgment,  the  prevalence  of  Covid-19  in
    Pakistan does not, taken alone or cumulatively, represent a significant
    factor in the balancing exercise. It is, by definition, a pandemic  and
    there will be risks and restrictions in place in almost  every  country
    around the world.

91. In respect of general security advice provided by the FCO, it is  clear
    that certain parts of Pakistan are  unstable  and/or  subject  to  high
    levels of crime of one description or another. Having  said  that,  the
    advice does not go to show that there are not  numerous  parts  of  the
    country which are reasonably safe for Pakistani nationals. Although  SC
    is a Bangladeshi citizen, there is in my judgment  a  materially  lower
    risk of adverse attention from criminals than might apply to a  British
    citizen (or indeed a citizen of other Western  European  countries  for
    that matter). I have not been provided with any travel advice issued by
    the Bangladeshi authorities.

92. The country information  before  me  highlights  the  high  numbers  of
    children engaged in labour, general and specific forms of  poverty  (in
    particular, food poverty), and connections between the two. I  have  no
    reason to doubt the reliability of the  information  contained  in  the
    various materials. Child labour and poverty are undoubtedly significant
    problems in Pakistan, as in numerous other countries around the  world.
    The question is whether it is more likely than not that  the  appellant
    and his family would find themselves in  a  cohort  of  the  population
    subject to poverty and the consequent risks this might  entail.  In  my
    judgment, they would not. On the one hand, there would not be  familial
    support, the appellant has been away from his home country for a fairly
    significant period, and SC has no experience of living in Pakistan.  On
    the other hand,  both  parents  would  be  willing  and  able  to  find
    reasonable employment; the appellant has significant  lived  experience
    of the country; and I am not satisfied that the parents would be unable
    to adequately protect the children from any risk of, for example, child
    labour.

93. Eighth, as discussed earlier in my decision,  the  public  interest  in
    this case is very strong.



Overall conclusion

94. As is apparent from the foregoing, there  are  a  number  of  competing
    factors within the overall proportionality exercise. In this  case,  as
    with many involving children, the resolution of that exercise  has  not
    been easy (absent the children I would have had  little  hesitation  in
    concluding   that   the   appellant's    deportation    was    entirely
    proportionate). Ultimately, I conclude that the balance  falls  in  the
    respondent's favour.  The  decision  under  appeal  does,  in  all  the
    circumstances, strike a fair balance between the competing interests.

95. It follows that the appellant's appeal must be dismissed.



Anonymity


96. The First-tier Tribunal initially made an anonymity direction. I deemed
    it appropriate to maintain that direction at the error of law stage.
    There is nothing before me now to warrant a change in that position.
    Given the involvement of four minor children in this case, it is
    appropriate to maintain the anonymity direction.



Notice of Decision

97. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and it has been set aside.

98. I re-make the decision by dismissing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 20 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21210 2018

                                                                       (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided without a hearing                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     M a
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of  his/her  family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.




    The error of law component of the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  this
    appeal has been made without a hearing, pursuant  to  rule  34  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ross ("the judge"), promulgated on 9  January  2020,  by
    which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of a human rights claim  made  in  response  to  a  deportation
    decision.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan,  is  married  to  a  Bangladeshi
    citizen who has limited leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    couple have four minor children, born in February 2011, February  2013,
    March 2015, and August 2016, respectively.  In May 2017, the  appellant
    was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to  assist  unlawful  immigration   and
    conspiracy to possess identity documents with intent.  In June of  that
    year he was sentenced to 59 months' imprisonment



Decision without a hearing

 3. The appellant has submitted that there should be  an  oral  hearing  in
    respect of whether the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.   Although
    specific reasons as to why this should be the case have  not  been  set
    out, it is implicit that the appellant would regard a decision  without
    a hearing as being potentially unfair.  In  the  respondent's  rule  24
    response, an oral hearing was requested, but without any explanation.




 4. I have considered the following matters:


              i. rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
                 2008;


             ii. the Pilot Practice Direction made by the Senior President
                 of Tribunals on 23 March 2020;


            iii. the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020;


             iv. the need to ensure fairness to both parties;


              v. the overriding objective;


             vi. the guidance set out by the Supreme Court in Osborn v
                 Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61;


            vii. the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds of
                 appeal, and the grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge
                 Blum;


           viii. the written submissions provided by both parties.






 5. Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules 2008 does not require the consent of the
    parties in order for a  decision  to  be  made  without  hearing.   The
    relevant issue in this case, as identified in the restrictive grant  of
    permission by Judge Blum, is narrow  in  scope.   The  content  of  the
    parties' respective do  not  raise  any  additional  matters  requiring
    further exploration.


 6. Having considered all the circumstances of the case, I  have  concluded
    that the question of whether the First-tier Tribunal did err in law can
    fairly and justly be decided without a hearing.




The judge's decision


 7. Having set out  the  relevant  background  to  the  appeal,  the  judge
    summarised the evidence, both written and oral.  Of relevance  to  this
    appeal are [9] - [10] in which it is recorded that the appellant's wife
    stated that she could not go to  live  in  Pakistan  for  a  number  of
    reasons, and that if husband was deported, "it  would  be  the  end  of
    their relationship".  Having gone on to direct himself to the  relevant
    legal framework (both in respect of the Immigration Rules  and  section
    117C NIAA 2002, the  judge  set  out  his  findings  at  [19]  -  [23].
    Reference was made to the "opinions" of  Mr  Horrocks,  an  Independent
    Social Worker, who had prepared two reports on behalf of the  appellant
    (dated 14 February 2018 and 14 November 2019).  No detailed analysis of
    this expert evidence is provided; the judge  simply  summarised  it  as
    relating to the "consequences of the family splitting up"  This  aspect
    of the evidence was predicated on the family  not  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom as a single family unit.




 8. At [20] the judge rejected the claim made by the appellant and his wife
    that one of their children suffered from mutism. At [21]  he  addressed
    the claim that the appellant's wife could not live  in  Pakistan.   The
    claimed difficulties in residing in Pakistan as a Bangladeshi  national
    are rejected.  So too is the assertion  that  the  appellant's  parents
    would not accept her.  The final sentence of the paragraph  states:  "I
    therefore do not accept that because of [the  wife's]  nationality  the
    family would be split up."  The judge accepted that a move to  Pakistan
    would cause disruption, but concluded that in all the circumstances the
    appellant had failed to show "very compelling reasons"  as  to  why  he
    should not be deported.  The appeal was duly dismissed.


The grounds of appeal and grant of permission


 9. In essence, three grounds were  put  forward  in  the  application  for
    permission:  first,  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant's eldest child did not suffer from mutism; second,  that  the
    judge failed to make a finding on the appellant's wife's evidence  that
    she would not go to Pakistan; third, and connected to ground 2,  it  is
    said that the judge failed to have adequate regard to the  evidence  of
    Mr Horrocks as to the consequences of the family being split up  (those
    consequences including the "very significant risk  of  intervention  by
    social care services and of some or all of  the  children  being  taken
    into care).




10.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  concluded  that  the  first  ground  was
    unarguable.  He also took the view that the judge's  assessment  of  Mr
    Horrocks' evidence was brief but essentially adequate.  However, it was
    arguable that the judge had failed to make  a  finding  on  the  wife's
    evidence that she would not relocate to Pakistan and,  in  consequence,
    the judge had failed to address the relevant  aspect  of  Mr  Horrocks'
    evidence as to the children's future if  the  family  unit  was  indeed
    split up.  The grant of permission was expressly limited in scope.


11. There has been no subsequent application by the appellant  to  rely  on
    ground 1.


12. I have approached this appeal purely on the basis of the limited  grant
    of permission by Judge Blum.


The parties' submissions


13. The written submissions, drafted by Mr Bazini of  Counsel,  follow  the
    grounds upon which permission was granted. Their essence can  be  found
    in the following passage:



        "The fact that she could in principle go is not  the  issue.  If  in
        fact she will not go and hence the children will  not  go  then  the
        ISW's assessment has to be carefully considered. If in fact some  or
        all of the children are likely to end up "in care" as a  consequence
        this is plainly a highly  relevant  and  material  consideration  in
        considering whether the  [very  compelling  circumstances]  test  is
        met."


14. For the respondent, Mr Melvin submits that the judge  was  entitled  to
    take account of the fact that  the  appellant's  wife  had  engaged  in
    dishonest criminal conduct in the past, and was entitled to reject  her
    reasons for not wanting to go and live in Pakistan.  The trust  of  the
    submissions is that, whilst the judge did not expressly make a  finding
    on the evidence that she would not go to  Pakistan,  such  a  claim  is
    implicitly rejected by the judge, and that this was sufficient.




15. In reply, Mr Bazini has submitted that it  is  wrong  for  a  judge  to
    simply  operate  on  the  premise  that  if  an  individual  has  acted
    dishonestly in the past then all subsequent evidence must therefore  be
    incapable of belief.




Conclusions on the error of law issue


16. I have concluded that the judge did err in law,  as  contended  for  in
    grounds 2 and 3.




17.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  reject,  on  an  objective  basis,  the
    appellant's wife's concerns about living in Pakistan.  However, it  was
    sufficiently clear from her evidence as a whole, that she was asserting
    that she would not in fact follow the  appellant  to  Pakistan.   Given
    that she had limited leave to remain in this  country,  that  assertion
    was one that she was entitled to put forward without  it  being  simply
    fanciful.


18. It is the case that the judge did not make a specific finding  on  this
    aspect of the wife's evidence.  This evidence had taken  on  particular
    significance in light of  the  second  report  from  Mr  Horrocks.   He
    concluded that if the family unit split up  (i.e.  if  the  appellant's
    wife did not in fact go to Pakistan with  her  husband),  there  was  a
    serious risk of one or more of the  children  being  taken  into  Local
    Authority care because of the  wife's  inability  to  look  after  them
    adequately.  The judge was aware of this opinion, having referred to it
    in passing at [19].   In  turn,  those  consequences  would  have  been
    material to the question of whether  the  appellant  could  show  "very
    compelling circumstances"  in  his  case,  with  reference  to  section
    117C(6) NIAA 2002.  In my view, the judge erred in failing  to  address
    this evidence head-on, as it were, and reach a  specific  finding  upon
    it.




19. The question then arises as to whether what was said at [20] - [21] was
    nonetheless sufficient to at  least  have  implicitly  dealt  with  the
    matter.  In my view, the answer to this  is  "no".   I  agree  with  Mr
    Bazini's point, stated in his reply, that previous dishonesty is not of
    itself sufficient to render any and all subsequent evidence untruthful.
     In this regard, I note the comments of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  its
    recent judgment in Uddin [2020] EWCA Civ 338:


           "11. I note in that regard the conventional warning which judges
           give themselves that a person may be untruthful about one matter
           (in this case his history) without necessarily being  untruthful
           about another (in this case the existence of  family  life  with
           the foster  mother's  family),  known  as  a  'Lucas  direction'
           (derived in part from the judgment of the  CACD  in  R  v  Lucas
           [1981] QB 720 per Lord Lane CJ at 723C). The classic formulation
           of the principle is said to be this: if a court concludes that a
           witness has lied about one matter, it does not  follow  that  he
           has lied about everything. A witness may lie for  many  reasons,
           for example,  out  of  shame,  humiliation,  misplaced  loyalty,
           panic, fear, distress, confusion and emotional pressure. That is
           because  a  person's  motives  may  be  different  as   respects
           different questions. The warning is  not  to  be  found  in  the
           judgments  before  this  court.  This  is   perhaps   a   useful
           opportunity to emphasise that the utility of the  self-direction
           is of general application and not limited to family and criminal
           cases."


20. The examples provided in the passage quoted do  not  precisely  reflect
    the facts of the present case.  However, the point made is  nonetheless
    relevant.  It emphasises the need for the judge  to  have  specifically
    addressed the wife's assertion that she would not go to  Pakistan,  and
    not simply deal with the absence of objectively-justified  reasons  why
    she could not go.




21. For the reasons set out above, the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to
    make a finding on a relevant aspect of the evidence.




22. That error is material to the outcome of  the  appeal  because  of  the
    expert evidence from Mr Horrocks, referred to previously.   Whilst  the
    appellant certainly faced significant obstacles  in  succeeding  (given
    his lengthy sentence  and  the  lack  of  other  identifiable  features
    weighing in his favour), the existence of  expert  evidence  suggesting
    that a family split might lead to children being taken into  care,  was
    capable (I  put  it  no  higher)  of  constituting  a  very  compelling
    circumstance.




23. Therefore, I conclude that the judge's decision must be set aside.


Disposal


24. I see no good reason to remit this appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The issue relating to the family units' position, seen in  the  context
    of section 117B(6) can be considered by the Upper Tribunal.




25. There is no basis for disturbing  the  judge's  conclusion  as  to  the
    eldest child's claimed mutism.  I agree with  Judge  Blum's  view  that
    this was unarguably open to him.  I also bear in mind the fact that the
    appellant has not sought  to  rely  on  ground  1  notwithstanding  the
    limited grant of permission.  Having said that, there will be no  other
    preserved findings.


26. My provisional view is that there will need to be a resumed hearing  in
    this appeal, and that it should take place  on  a  face-to-face  basis.
    This is in large part because oral evidence may well be  sought  to  be
    called, and it is likely that an interpreter will be required.  I  will
    issue directions to the parties asking for their respective views.


Anonymity


27. The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction.   Given  the
    existence of minor children in this case and  the  evidence  that  they
    could potentially become the subject of care  proceedings,  I  deem  it
    appropriate to maintain that direction in the Upper Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.


I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal  in  due
course.


Directions to the parties

   1. No later than 5 days after this notice of decision is  sent  out,  the
      appellant is to file and serve brief submissions on the  form  that  a
      resumed hearing  should  take  (thee  should  include  reference,  for
      example, to the need for oral evidence and an interpreter);

   2. No later than 10 days after this notice of decision is sent  out,  the
      respondent is to file and serve brief submissions in  respect  of  the
      same issue as indicated in direction 1;

   3. Whether the resumed hearing is conducted remotely or on a face-to-face
      basis, the appellant shall, no later than 14 days before that hearing,
      file and serve in physical and electronic form, a consolidated  bundle
      including all materials relied on (and having regard to  the  contents
      of this decision notice);

   4. With liberty to apply.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 12 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
