









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21243/2018
                                                               HU/21245/2018
                                                               HU/21247/2018
                                                               HU/21249/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on      |
|On: 16 May 2019                   |On: 23 May 2019                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between
                                     S L
                                     P K
                                     M K
                                     Y M
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr Y Din, counsel, instructed by GLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Direction Regarding Anonymity


      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants
      are granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
      or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
      direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure
      to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
      proceedings.


   1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge French, who in a decision promulgated on 14  March
      2019, dismissed their appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
      dated 4 October 2018 refusing their human rights claims,  made  on  18
      October 2017, for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  family
      life.


      The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The first appellant was born in India on 10 December 1973.  His  wife,
      the second appellant, was born in India on 10 October 1973. The  third
      and fourth appellants are their children, born on 18 February 2000 and
      2 July 2001.


   3. The second appellant arrived in the UK on 29 October 2006 on  a  visit
      visa valid until 26 March 2007. The first, third and fourth appellants
      arrived on 15 July 2010 on visas  valid  until  5  January  2011.  All
      applied for leave to remain on 18 October 2017.


   4. The respondent considered whether  there  would  be  very  significant
      obstacles to their integration into the country of their  nationality.
      The first appellant left India when he was 36 years old and the second
      appellant when she was 32 years old. It was 'concluded' that the first
      appellant was familiar with the cultural norms in India.


   5. The expectation was that the third and fourth appellants would  remain
      with their parents, although at the time  of  their  applications  the
      third appellant was 17 and the fourth was 16 years old.  The  argument
      on their behalf was that their parents should be able to "piggy  back"
      behind their children.


   6. It was acknowledged that both children had lived in the  UK  for  more
      than seven years and might therefore  potentially  meet  the  criteria
      under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).


   7. Each child had  spent  more  than  half  their  lives  in  India.  The
      respondent's view was that their return to India would not be  to  the
      detriment of  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  as  India's  higher
      educational system is the third largest in the world  and  they  could
      fulfil their academic ambitions there.


   8. Judge French stated at [4] that he was required to conduct a balancing
      exercise between the public interest of  controlling  immigration  and
      the rights of the appellants to family life under Article  8,  and  to
      decide whether a refusal would be unlawful  under  s.6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act.


   9. He considered the oral evidence of the second appellant, that her  two
      children had had the benefit of the UK education  system  even  though
      they had no leave to be in the UK. The  third  appellant  was  now  19
      years  old  and  the  fourth  appellant  was  now  17  years  old.  No
      applications had been made to the  Home  Office  to  regularise  their
      status after the expiration of their visitors' visas in  January  2011
      until they had resided in the UK for seven years. They had been living
      in India until they were ten and nine years old respectively.


  10. In considering the public interest, the Judge had regard to s.117B  of
      the Immigration Act  2014.  He  did  not  accept  that  there  was  an
      insurmountable obstacle to the second appellant returning to India. As
      with his wife, the first appellant was familiar with  life  in  India.
      The strongest argument put forward as to  why  the  parents  might  be
      given leave to remain was on the basis of the  maintenance  of  family
      life. However, Article 8 does not permit people to choose  where  they
      wish to enjoy family life. There was no reason why they could not  all
      live together in India. This would not be unduly harsh as far  as  the
      children were concerned [7].


  11.  Having  weighed  the  merits  of  the  public  interest  of  managing
      immigration as against the individual  rights  of  the  appellants  to
      respect for family and private life, he was satisfied that the  scales
      were in favour of confirming the respondent's decision.


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


  12. On  24  April  2019,  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      MacDonald granted the appellants permission to appeal. He  found  that
      it was arguable that the Judge applied the wrong test and also  failed
      to apply any of the relevant case law  including  KO  [2018]  UKSC  52
      which was considered and applied  in  JG  (s.117B(6):  "Reasonable  to
      Leave") Turkey [2019] UKUT 0072 (IAC).


  13. Mr Din, who did not represent the  appellants  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal,  settled
      by counsel  who  represented  the  appellants  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  14. The third and fourth appellants were qualifying children at  the  date
      of the application  on  18  October  2017,  albeit  they  had  reached
      majority at the time of the hearing.


  15. The Judge stated at [7] that he was conscious of  the  requirement  to
      ensure that s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009
      had been followed.


  16. At [4] of the decision the Judge stated that the key issue in deciding
      this appeal was whether there  were  exceptional  circumstances  which
      would render a refusal to be a breach of Article 8  because  it  would
      result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.  That Mr Din submitted was
      the wrong test and the wrong approach.


  17. He submitted that prior to the decision in KO, whatever else was  said
      on the respondent's side of the scales, these would be  outweighed  by
      the seven years on the side of the child. The court in KO considered a
      number of factors whereby the scales tipped in favour  of  refusal  of
      leave despite the qualifying period being fulfilled.


  18. That however  did  not  mean  that  the  converse  is  now  true.  The
      qualifying child is still a significant primary factor on the  scales,
      as confirmed in JG.


  19. He noted that the appellants in KO were either reliant on  s.117C  due
      to criminality, or had other factors beyond immigration control adding
      to the balancing exercise. The question that  the  Supreme  Court  was
      being asked was whether the Tribunal should be concerned only with the
      position of the child or whether it  was  a  balancing  exercise.  The
      court determined the latter, but in so  doing,  did  not  overturn  MM
      (Uganda) and ZH (Tanzania) or section 55.


  20. He submitted that provided the seven year criteria are met, s.117B (6)
      is a stand alone route requiring no other  additional  factors  to  be
      completed - Treebhawon &  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -  Compelling
      Circumstances Test) [2017]  UKUT  0013.  The  child's  best  interests
      should not be compromised on account of  the  misdemeanours  of  their
      parents.


  21. There needs to be a powerful reason to remove child over  seven  years
      old as stated by the Upper Tribunal in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 88.


  22. Lord Carnwath set out the general approach at [13]. This  involves  an
      assessment of all of  the  factors  relevant  to  the  application  of
      Article 8. The child is not to be blamed for  the  matters  for  which
      they are not responsible, such as the conduct of  a  parent.  What  is
      "reasonable" for the child is central to the question [17].


  23. Lord Carnwath's discussion of the issues at [23] noted the  difference
      in language between s.117B(6) and s.117C (1) and that  "unduly  harsh"
      is a higher hurdle than "reasonableness". Mr Din noted that KO and  IT
      were foreign criminals - a s.117C case. The appellants NS and AR  were
      involved in the CCL scam.


  24. Following  KO,  the  Upper  Tribunal  re-examined  the  issues  in  JG
      (s.117B(6): "Reasonable to Leave") Turkey [2019] UKUT 0072 (IAC).


  25. The Tribunal was satisfied that counsel's construction of s.117B(6) is
      the correct one. Even  though,  on  the  Tribunal's  findings,  it  is
      unlikely that the children would leave the UK, if the  applicant  were
      removed, then the hypothesis (which s.117B(6)(b) demands) is that they
      are expected to leave, it must  be  determined  whether  it  would  be
      reasonable for them to do so.


  26. Section 117B(6) concerns an assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of  a
      child leaving the UK. It does not expressly demand  an  assessment  of
      the reasonableness by reference to the length of  time  the  child  is
      expected to be outside the UK. In the light of paragraph [18] and [19]
      of KO, the child's destination and future are to be assumed to be with
      the person who is being removed.


  27. The Tribunal referred to a case where  the  respondent's  position  is
      that the person who is being removed can be expected to make an  entry
      clearance application.  Did this require the Tribunal's assessment  to
      take this into account in determining whether it would  be  reasonable
      for the child to leave?  The Tribunal did not consider it necessary to
      resolve the question, at  least  in  its  stark  form.  The  Chikwamba
      principle is predicated  on  the  assumption  that,  where  there  are
      children, it is not envisaged that they would be expected to  go  away
      and stay with  the  parent  concerned,  whilst  the  latter  makes  an
      application for entry clearance. To envisage  otherwise  would  be  to
      turn a standard principle on its head.


  28. In any event, in  determining  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for
      children to leave in these circumstances, the likely temporary  nature
      of the absence from the UK may well be said, as in the  present  case,
      to make it unreasonable to expect the children to leave. The  Tribunal
      posed the question whether it was reasonable  in  that  case  for  the
      children to have their education disrupted so that they can be with  a
      parent making an entry clearance application, which is  predicated  on
      the need (and thus, an Article 8 case) to be with the children in  the
      UK.


  29. Mr Din noted that in JG, the Tribunal assessed that the appellant  was
      both dishonest and unscrupulous  to  a  high  degree.  She  flagrantly
      defied the law of the UK by  overstaying.  Nonetheless,  the  Tribunal
      concluded that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's
      children to leave the UK in the event of her removal. That meant  that
      their appeal succeeds. It does so because Parliament stated  in  terms
      that the public  interest  does  not  require  her  removal  in  these
      circumstances. It does so despite the fact that absent s.117B(6),  the
      appellant's removal would be proportionate in terms of  Article  8  of
      the Human Rights Convention.


  30. Mr Din accordingly submitted  that  as  there  was  a  wrong  approach
      adopted, no proper consideration or reference to key  decisions,  that
      there have been material errors.


  31. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker accepted  that  the  Judge  did
      apply the wrong test and in particular failed to apply  relevant  case
      law including KO and JG.


      Assessment


  32. I find in the circumstances as agreed,  that  the  Judge  applied  the
      wrong test and in particular did not consider the recent  decision  of
      the Upper Tribunal in JG.


  33. Mr Walker has properly accepted that the decision cannot stand.


  34. Both parties agreed that the decision should accordingly be set  aside
      and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision  to  be
      made, based on up to date evidence.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. It is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham)  for  a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.


















             Signed                             Date 22 May 2019


                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer








