


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/21513/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                     | Decision & Reasons            |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On: 23 January 2018                        | On: 25 January 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     so
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kutas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria  born  on  25  April  1975.  He
      claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 February 2003. On 16
      February 2007 he was arrested whilst attempting  to  board  a  Belfast
      bound  ferry  and  presented  a  forged  British  driving  licence  as
      identification. On 1 March 2007 he applied for  asylum.  On  26  March
      2007 he was convicted of  possession/  control  of  a  false  identity
      document and sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment. His asylum claim was
      refused and a decision was made to deport him. A Deportation Order was
      made on 30 October 2007 and  on  26  March  2008  he  was  removed  to
      Nigeria.

   2. On 19 May 2008 the appellant was granted entry clearance to the UK  as
      a spouse and re-entered the UK on 25 May 2008. On 30 October  2014  he
      arrived in the UK from Italy.  It  was  discovered  that  he  was  the
      subject of a Deportation Order and that he was divorced from his  wife
      and removal directions were set for  his  removal.  Following  various
      unsuccessful applications, the appellant was removed to  Italy  on  24
      March 2015. On 10 April 2015 an application was made on behalf of  the
      appellant for the Deportation Order to be revoked. On 30 July 2016 the
      respondent made a decision refusing to revoke  the  Deportation  Order
      and refusing the appellant's human rights claim.

   3. The appellant appealed against the decision to refuse his human rights
      claim. His appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey  on
      20 July 2017, on the basis of  submissions  only.  On  behalf  of  the
      appellant  it  was  argued  that  the  Deportation   Order   had,   by
      implication, been revoked by the consequence of the grant of leave  to
      enter on 19 May  2008.  It  was  also  argued  that  the  respondent's
      decision was in breach of the appellant's Article 8 human rights.  The
      appellant's human rights claim was based on his right to have a family
      life with his daughter, a British citizen born on 26 August  2009  and
      it was argued that the interference with the appellant's  family  life
      was disproportionate.


   4. In his written decision promulgated on 2  October  2017,  Judge  Davey
      rejected the argument that the Deportation Order had been  revoked  by
      the grant of leave to enter. With  regard  to  the  appellant's  human
      rights under Article 8 of the ECHR, he concluded that the respondent's
      decision was not disproportionate. He accordingly dismissed the appeal
      on all grounds.

   5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on behalf of the
      appellant on the grounds that the judge had made an error  of  law  by
      providing conflicting decisions, since he had indicated at the hearing
      that he would allow the appeal under Article 8, albeit  reserving  his
      position as to the implied revocation of the deportation order, yet he
      had dismissed the appeal in his written decision.


   6. Permission was granted on 26 October 2017.


   7. Judge Davey was invited to comment on the grounds and his response was
      sent to the parties in  a  Memorandum  on  8  December  2017,  in  the
      following terms:


    "At the hearing on the 20 July 2017 I said, after the conclusion of all
    the submissions that I intended to allow the appeal on  the  Article  8
    ECHR ground. However I said, as I always do in such circumstances, that
    there is no decision until the same is in writing  and  promulgated.  I
    did reserve my decision.

    On reflection upon the documentary evidence and submissions I  decided,
    rightly or wrongly, for the reasons given  to  dismiss  the  Article  8
    claim and other arguments, I did not cut short or limit the submissions
    made by either party...

         ...There are no 'conflicting decisions'...

    I set out in my decision why I rejected the Article 8 claim. It did not
    seem to me necessary to explain or give reasons why my view had changed
    on the merits of that claim: To do so served  no  evident  purpose  nor
    make any difference to the outcome..."

   8. At the hearing both parties made submissions. I was  provided  with  a
      copy of the Home Office Presenting  Officer's  notes  of  the  hearing
      before Judge Davey. Mr Dhanji relied on the statement  and  attendance
      note from counsel who had  presented  the  appellant's  appeal  before
      Judge Davey, and the Presenting Officer's note,  confirming  that  the
      judge had indicated at the end of the hearing that he would allow  the
      appeal under Article 8. He submitted that there  had  been  procedural
      irregularity and unfairness in the subsequent dismissal of the  appeal
      without the judge providing reasons for changing his mind and  without
      inviting submissions in response or reconvening the hearing. He relied
      upon the decision of the Tribunal in K v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department (Rwanda) [2003] UKIAT 00047 in that respect. Mr Kutas,
      in his submissions, relied on Judge Davey's response and on  the  case
      of SK (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]
      EWCA Civ 495 in submitting  that  reconvening  would  have  served  no
      useful purpose.

   9. Having considered the respective records of the hearing  before  Judge
      Davey there seems to be no  challenge  to  the  fact  that  the  judge
      announced that he was going to allow the appeal on Article 8  grounds.
      I accept Mr Kutas' argument, relying on Judge  Davey's  comments,  the
      judgment in SK and the relevant  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure
      Rules, that it  was  the  written  decision  which  was  the  relevant
      decision in the appellant's appeal and not the oral indication of  the
      judge. However, and as Mr Kutas acknowledged,  the  position  in  such
      circumstances where the judge  has  had  a  change  of  mind  is  that
      fairness usually dictates that the hearing should be reconvened. I  do
      not consider that the circumstances before me are the same as those in
      SK where it was found that reconvening served no useful purpose, since
      in that case there had already  been  a  further  reconsideration  and
      determination by another Tribunal.  In the circumstances it  seems  to
      me that, given the judge's change of mind and the lack of notice given
      to the parties and opportunity to make further  submissions,  fairness
      and justice  require  that  the  appeal  be  heard  again  by  another
      Tribunal.


DECISION


  10. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Davey.
Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  24 January
2018
