
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21882/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2019                   |On 15 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m a K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of India aged  54.
 On 5 May 2015  the  appellant  (hereafter  the  SSHD)  decided  to  make  a
deportation order against him in view of his history  of  offending  coupled
with his poor immigration history.  This was not the  first  time  the  SSHD
had made a deportation order against him.  The SSHD had served  him  with  a
deportation order on  21  February  2011.   Following  a  request  from  his
representatives in September 2011 to revoke  his  deportation  order,  on  4
October 2011 the SSHD served a decision refusing to revoke  the  deportation
order.  However, his appeal against  this  decision  was  allowed  by  Judge
Manuell of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) on 5 March 2012 and he was  granted
six  months  Discretionary  Leave.    The   claimant   then   made   several
unsuccessful applications for further leave to remain.

2.   The claimant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 5  May  2015
came before Judge Havard of the FtT who, in a  decision  promulgated  on  24
November 2017, allowed his appeal.  The SSHD  was  successful  in  obtaining
permission to appeal.

3.   At the hearing before us there was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of
the claimant.  Mr Whitwell said that his file held a note that the  claimant
had been staying in a homelessness unit in Swindon in  the  summer  and  had
had contact with a Probation Officer.

4.   Prior to the hearing before us, the Tribunal  had  contacted  the  last
known contact address for the  claimant,  the  Harbor  Project  in  Swindon,
asking them to confirm whether they knew if the claimant had  been  informed
about the adjourned hearing listed for 28 January 2019  and  if  they  could
furnish his  current  address.   In  an  email  of  9  January  2019,  Giles
Matthews, Drop In Manager of the Harbor Project, confirmed that the  project
is the claimant's c/o address.  Mr Matthews stated  that  the  claimant  had
presented himself drunk on several occasions and that as a result they  will
no longer be  admitting  him.   Mr  Matthews  stated  that  he  had  serious
concerns for the claimant's welfare as he  no  longer  seemed  to  have  the
capacity or will to  refrain  from  alcohol.   He  noted  further  that  the
claimant no longer had representation as he had withdrawn  his  instructions
to his solicitors, who were no longer operating anyway.   He  (Mr  Matthews)
stated that he had had discussions with the claimant's Probation Officer.

5.   Having considered the evidence we decided to  exercise  our  discretion
to proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of  the  claimant.   There  was
nothing to indicate that the claimant wished to participate at  the  hearing
or be legally represented.   We  saw  nothing  to  be  achieved  by  further
adjournment. Mr Whitwell then submitted that he was  content  to  leave  the
matter of the appeal to the Tribunal.

6.   The day after the hearing Mr Whitwell wrote  to  the  Tribunal  stating
that it had come to his attention:

    "that the [claimant] had been recalled (again) to  HMP  Bullington  ...
    following his arrest for committing an act outraging public decency and
    for which he was sentenced for a period of 8 weeks imprisonment  ending
    11 February 2019".


Mr  Whitwell  said  that  these  events  may  explain  the  claimant's  non-
attendance at the hearing the day before.

7.   Having reviewed matters in light of this information, we  have  decided
it does not cause us to alter our  decision  to  proceed  to  determine  the
claimant's appeal on the basis of the materials before us.  We  continue  to
discern no reason to consider that the claimant intended  to  attend  or  be
represented at the  hearing  before  us,  irrespective  of  his  arrest  and
imprisonment.

8.   The SSHD's grounds are three-pronged.  It is contended that  the  judge
erred in:

    (1)  finding that the claimant had "... been lawfully resident  in  the
         UK for most of [his] life";


    (2)  allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds  due  to  the  claimant's
         claimed inability to obtain appropriate  psychiatric  treatment  on
         return to India; and


    (3)  in relying on the guidance of the Strasbourg Court in Paposhvili v
         Belgium (no.41738/10 GC) over binding domestic authorities.


Our Analysis

9.   It is not in dispute that the claimant is a foreign criminal by  virtue
of being a persistent offender.  His criminal  history  pre-2012  and  post-
2012 was set out by the judge at paragraphs 109 and 112:

    "109.    At the time of the hearing before  Judge  Manuell  in  January
         2012, the criminal record amounted to  30  convictions  between  27
         January 2004 and 11 August 2010 for  43  offences.   The  sentences
         imposed were mainly  modest  fines  and  short  prison  terms,  the
         longest of which was for 16 weeks.  No individual offence could  be
         regarded as "serious" within the accepted definition of the gravity
         of criminal offending.  The Appellant accepted that the  underlying
         cause  was  his  alcohol  dependence.   Indeed,  on  one   occasion
         following sentence being imposed on 30 April 2009 the Appellant was
         required to undertake  an  alcohol  and  anger  management  course.
         Judge Manuell described the appellant's behaviour as a nuisance and
         a burden on the public purse but not so serious that he should  now
         be "cast adrift" at a time the Appellant believed his life was  due
         to improved and he had been in the United Kingdom for 27 years.


    110. In his decision of March 2012, Judge  Manuell  accepted  that  the
         Appellant was sincere when he  claimed  that  he  had  learned  his
         lesson from his offending and was remorseful.  Judge  Manuell  also
         based his decision on the fact that the  Appellant  had  been  free
         from alcohol for a significant period.  The judge assessed the risk
         of the Appellant reoffending as low.


At paragraph 28 of his decision, Judge Manuell said as follows:

    "Taking all of these matters into account as best it can, the  tribunal
    has concluded that the proportionality balance under paragraph 390  and
    under Article 8 ECHR is in favour of the Appellant on the facts  found.
    The appeal is allowed.  That is not to say however, that the  Appellant
    would not become a candidate for a fresh deportation order in the event
    that he commits further criminal offences.  He will no  doubt  bear  in
    mind that his future is in his own hands".


    112. On 28 May 2012 i.e. just under three months from the  decision  of
         Judge Manuell being promulgated, the Appellant  pleaded  guilty  at
         South London Magistrates Court to an offence  of  being  drunk  and
         disorderly.  He committed the same offence in August 2012.  Indeed,
         since March 2012, despite the assurances given to the  tribunal  at
         the hearing in January 2012, the PNC check shows that the appellant
         has appeared in various magistrates courts located  in  the  London
         area on no less than  19  occasions.   However,  all  the  offences
         appear to be alcohol-related, the Appellant pleads guilty  on  each
         occasion, and the most significant sentence imposed is  a  term  of
         imprisonment  of  14  weeks.   Nevertheless,  this  related  to  an
         appearance before South East London Magistrates on 6 April 2017."


Ground (1)

10.  As regards ground (1), we would first of all  observe  that  the  judge
allowed the claimant's appeal on three separate bases. The  principal  basis
was because it was considered that the claimant fell within  paragraph  399A
and Exception 1 of s.117C(4) of the NIAA 2002  because  he  had  established
the three-fold test these provisions  lay  down  of  having  been  "lawfully
resident in the UK for most of his life";  being  "socially  and  culturally
integrated in the  UK";  and  being  able  to  show  "there  would  be  very
significant obstacles to his integration into the country  to  which  it  is
proposed he is to be deported (paragraphs 118-125).  The  second  basis,  in
the alternative, was that even if  he  had  found  that  the  claimant  fell
within the permitted exceptions to deportation, he was satisfied that  there
were very compelling circumstances outweighing the public  interest  in  the
claimant's deportation (paragraphs 126-129).  The third basis was  that  the
deportation decision would be a violation of the claimant's Article 3  right
not to be ill-treated and also his Article 8 right to  respect  for  private
and family life.

11.  Focussing on  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  issue  of  whether  the
appellant  met  the  conditions  of  paragraph  399A  and  Exception  1   of
s.117C(4), we are persuaded that this treatment proceeded  on  an  erroneous
basis.  At paragraphs 118-121 the judge stated:

    "118.    I find that the Appellant has been lawfully resident in the UK
         for most of his adult life.  He has been here for  31  years  which
         represents the entirety of his adult life.  In 1989, he applied for
         leave to remain on a  basis  which  Judge  Manuell  found  to  have
         prospects of success and he had made subsequent applications  which
         have been successful and in-time.  I repeat the findings  of  Judge
         Manuell.  Furthermore, in respect of the position post-March  2012,
         I find that the Appellant has endeavoured to take such steps as are
         necessary to remain lawfully in the United Kingdom.


    119. On 25  March  2013  and  24  May  2013,  the  Appellant  submitted
         applications for leave to remain but they were rejected due  to  no
         fee being submitted but I accept Ms Hooper's  submission  and  find
         that the Appellant was simply unable to afford the fee.


    120. However, following a successful application for  Judicial  Review,
         the Appellant submitted a further application for leave  to  remain
         on 16 October 2013 which was accepted.  With effect from 27 January
         2014, the Appellant was  granted  six  months  discretionary  leave
         until 27 July 2014.


    121. On 23 July  2014,  the  Appellant  submitted  an  application  for
         further leave to remain but this application remains outstanding."


12.  Contrary to what these paragraphs assert, the  claimant  did  not  have
lawful status for the period from October 1989 - 19 September 2012  (on  the
latter date, he was granted six months Discretionary Leave  until  20  March
2013).  The correct particulars of the claimant's  immigration  history  are
as follows. Prior to 24 October 1989 he was an illegal  entrant.   After  he
had been detained in June 1989 as an illegal  entrant,  his  claim  to  have
been  granted  leave  to  enter  under  a  court  permit  was  found  to  be
unsubstantiated.  It is not entirely clear how long he had been  in  the  UK
prior to June 1989 (as he had been removed from the  UK  on  22  March  1984
when he attempted to gain entry as a visitor), but it is wholly  clear  that
he had no lawful status when apprehended in June 1987.  On 24 October  1984,
when his representatives made an application on  his  behalf  for  leave  to
remain on compassionate circumstances based on the fact that his  girlfriend
was pregnant, the claimant had no extant leave.  Therefore the fact that  he
subsequently  made  an  application  for  leave  had  no   impact   on   the
unlawfulness of his immigration status thereafter (we would observe that  in
any event that the application he made in  1987 appears to have  lapsed  due
to  her  own  failure  to  respond  to  Home  Office  requests  for  further
information and to attend interviews).  We do not  understand  Judge  Manuel
to have made a finding that the appellant had been lawfully  resident  prior
to September 2012, as all he found was that the appellant's application  had
prospects of success, but even if he had made such a finding, it would  have
been an incorrect one.  Even in relation to the appellant's short period  of
lawful stay (comprising a grant of six  months  Discretionary  Leave  on  19
September 2012), this expired on 20 March 2013 and  he  did  not  submit  an
application for further leave to remain  until  25  March  2013.   The  only
further period of lawful stay was on 27 January 2014  when  he  was  granted
six months Discretionary Leave until 27 July 2014.  We accept that  he  then
submitted an in time application for further leave  to  remain  on  23  July
2014, which remains outstanding, but that at  best  helps  in  covering  his
status between July 2014 to the present.

13.  It can be seen that the great majority of the claimant's  stay  in  the
UK has been unlawful.   Accordingly  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  finding
otherwise.  The judge should not have allowed the appeal on the  basis  that
the claimant fell within the deportation exceptions  set  out  in  paragraph
399A and s.117C(4).

14.  However, the judge also allowed the appeal  on  Article  3  grounds  as
well as on the basis of  very  compelling  circumstances  under  Article  8.
Unless the SSHD can establish that  these  latter  bases  for  allowing  the
appeal were also vitiated by legal error, we cannot conclude that any  error
of law has been material.

15.  It is convenient to deal with the Article 8 issue raised in ground  (2)
only after dealing with the challenge to the judge's treatment of Article  3
.

Ground (3)

16.  Ground (3) is drafted in narrow terms. It seeks to  identify  error  on
the part of the judge  in  applying  the  guidance  given  by  the  ECHR  in
Paposhvili. At the time the SSHD's grounds were drafted there was  a  cogent
reason for considering that superimposition of such guidance on UK case  law
embodied a legal error, as that is what the Tribunal had held in  EA  &  Ors
(Article 3 medical cases - Paposhvili not  applicable:  Afghanistan)  [2017]
UKUT 445 (07 August 2017). However, the reasoning in that reported decision
was clearly disapproved by the Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) [2008]  EWCA
Civ 64.

17.  At this point we must advert again to the narrow terms  in  which  this
ground is framed. It does not seek to challenge the  judge's  assessment  of
the claimant's Article 3 circumstances as such, only their reliance  on  the
guidance given in Paposhvili. The upshot is that there is no effective  SSHD
challenge to the judge's decision to allow the appeal on Article  3  grounds
and in particular no challenge to the opinion of Dr Briffa and no  challenge
to the judge's finding that if returned  there  is  a  "real  risk  of  [the
claimant] committing suicide". It is appropriate at this stage  to  set  out
in more detail the judge's  assessment  of  Article  3  as  applied  to  the
claimant's case.

18.  The judge set  out  the  medical  evidence  at  paragraphs  100-106  as
follows:

    "100.    There is now evidence in the form of medical records,  medical
         reports, psychiatric reports, and documents from those involved  in
         arranging for accommodation for the Appellant which  post-date  his
         last appeal.  They illustrate and confirm that, even  though  there
         may not have been evidence produced at the hearing in January 2012,
         there is a longstanding history of  mixed  anxiety  and  depression
         with a secondary diagnosis of alcohol dependence.


    101. The comprehensive psychiatric report of  Dr  Briffa,  outlines  in
         considerable detail the Appellant's history.  I have considered the
         details of Dr Briffa's qualifications and experience  in  providing
         expert evidence as to the psychiatric condition of  the  Appellant.
         I am satisfied that she  is  an  expert  qualified  to  express  an
         opinion with regard to the Appellant's state of mental health.   As
         stated, Ms Rushforth accepted that she did not take issue with  the
         content of Dr Briffa's report  and  the  conclusions  and  opinions
         expressed within it.


    102. I find that the Appellant is taking the following medication in an
         attempt to treat his condition: Mirtazapine, Olanzapine,  Thiamine,
         and this is confirmed by Dr Briffa as being appropriate.


    103. Dr Briffa confirmed that the Appellant, 'has an existing high risk
         of completed suicide'.   She  goes  on  to  say  '[the  claimant's]
         unresolved  immigration  status  and  fear  of  removal,   is   one
         contributory factor towards his existing risk of  suicide.   In  my
         opinion, if [the claimant] is faced with certain removal,  I  agree
         with [the claimant], that he will be at a high risk of suicide.  Mr
         Kumar expressed that life would not be worth living in a  situation
         of removal, and has a history of serious attempted suicide  amongst
         other risk factors (not exhaustive) for suicide  including  ongoing
         suicidal  thinking,  depression,   anxiety,   alcohol   dependence,
         unemployment, no fixed abode currently and social isolation.'


    104. At paragraph 7.30, Dr Briffa says, 'it is also important  to  note
         that mental health or alcohol treatment cannot remove the  risk  of
         suicide if [the claimant] is faced with  removal.   [The  claimant]
         has particular fears associated with removal based on  his  reality
         and not amenable to treatment.  [The claimant's] reality is that he
         has nothing to return to in India, no home and no family.'


    105. At 7.32, Dr Briffa says, 'it is my  opinion  that  [the  claimant]
         would  remain  at  risk  of  suicide,  accidental  death,   alcohol
         dependence and mental ill health, in India  also.   [The  claimant]
         could not identify any protective factors available in  India  that
         would reduce  his  risks  of  suicide,  accidental  death,  alcohol
         dependence or mental ill health.  In  fact,  [the  claimant's  last
         knowledge of  Indian  mental  health  services  in  the  1980s  was
         positively harmful - degrading physical containment and  punishment
         in response to mental distress his father experienced'.


    106. Finally, Dr  Briffa  did  not  consider  that  the  Appellant  was
         exaggerating his symptoms."


19.   Significantly  at  paragraph  107  the  judge  noted  that  the   HOPO
"confirmed very fairly  that  she  did  not  dispute  the  contents  or  the
opinions [Dr Briffa] expressed."

20.  The medical evidence led the judge to conclude at paragraphs 137-138:

    "137.    It is clear from the evidence of the Appellant  and  also  the
         expert evidence of Dr Briffa that there  is  a  real  risk  of  the
         Appellant committing suicide if he were to return  to  India.   The
         assessment of Dr Briffa suggests that the  Appellant  is  seriously
         ill to the extent that he has chronic anxiety  and  depression.   I
         take account of Paposhvili where it says that it is not the lack of
         medical infrastructure in India nor any obligation for  the  United
         Kingdom to alleviate the disparities between its healthcare  system
         and the level of treatment existing in  India  which  is  material.
         The responsibility that is engaged under the  Convention  in  cases
         such as the Appellant's is that of the United Kingdom on account of
         an  act,  which  in  this  instance  would   be   the   Appellant's
         deportation, which would result in an individual being exposed to a
         risk of treatment prohibited by Article 3.


    138. In exercising my judgment, I find that the act  of  deporting  the
         Appellant, taking account of his mental illness and the  real  risk
         of him committing suicide, would amount to exposing him to  a  risk
         of treatment prohibited by Article 3."


21.  It can be seen, therefore, that  as  regards  this  assessment  of  the
claimant's Article 3  circumstances  SSHD's  grounds  makes  no  substantive
challenge.

22.  Further, even if we had  considered  there  was  an  effective  ongoing
issue raised by the SSHD's grounds concerning  the  precise  application  of
Paposhvili to the facts of the claimant's case (for example on the  possible
basis that that the real risk he faced was still  not  imminent)  ,  on  the
accepted medical evidence  and  unchallenged  findings  of  the  judge   the
claimant was at real risk of committing suicide. For the judge  to  conclude
that such a risk meant that the decision  was  contrary  to  Article  3  was
entirely consistent with the principles set out at J v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
629; indeed,  to  have  decided  otherwise,  would  have  been  contrary  to
authority.

23.  Before returning specifically to Ground (2), we  have  also  considered
whether, although framed in the context of an Article 8 challenge,  the  key
point raised in Ground (2) (namely that it was wrong of the judge  to  allow
the appeal under Article 8 on the footing that the claimant would be  unable
to obtain appropriate psychiatric treatment on return to India)  is  capable
of being read as meaning to make the same point in relation to  the  judge's
Article 3 assessment. We have concluded that the ground cannot  be  read  in
this way; it very specifically identifies itself as an Article 8  challenge.
In any event, as already noted, the SSHD's  grounds  do  not  challenge  the
medical evidence and on the basis of the opinion of Dr  Briffa,  there  were
clearly sound reasons for concluding that the claimant would not be able  to
benefit from mental health  services  in  India,  namely  his  own  previous
adverse experience of them: see our paragraph 18  above.  At  paragraph  128
the judge found both that there was a "high risk of suicide" and that  there
was "inability [on the part of] the claimant to seek the  necessary  support
and treatment..."

24.   Certainly  we  are  not  prepared  to  deviate  from  our  conclusions
regarding Ground (3) on the basis of what could at best be  described  as  a
collateral challenge making no criticism of the medical  evidence  regarding
the claimant's likely situation on return to India.

Ground (2)

25.  We now revert to ground (2). In light of what we have  just  concluded,
this ground clearly cannot succeed on its own,  since,  having  allowed  the
appeal on Article 3 grounds, the fact that the  judge  also  allowed  it  on
Article 8 grounds was of  academic  significance,  but  in  any  event,  was
clearly justified on the basis that a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  clearly
constitutes a disproportionate interference with the right  to  respect  for
private life.

26.  We would also observe that even  if  we  had  found  that  the  judge's
treatment of Article 3 was legally flawed because of  some  misunderstanding
of the legal guidance to be applied in Article  3  health  cases,  we  would
still have had to recognise that the judge's assessment  of  the  claimant's
Article 8 circumstances was clearly and properly heavily influenced  by  the
state of the claimant's mental health, on the basis of unchallenged  medical
evidence. Indeed, even if we had found a material error of law and so  being
tasked, inter alia, with assessing the claimant's  Article  8  circumstances
on their merits, we would have found ourselves having to  address  the  same
difficulty as did Judge Havard, namely  that  the  opinion  of  the  medical
expert in this case had not been challenged.  As  noted  immediately  above,
the evaluation of  Dr  Briffa  also  addressed  the  issue  of  whether  the
claimant would be able to access mental health treatment on return to  India
and this evaluation stands  unchallenged.   As  paragraph  128  the  judge's
conclusions were that "the high risk of suicide and  the  inability  of  the
claimant  to  seek  the  necessary  support  and  treatment  represent  very
compelling  circumstances  which  outweigh  the  public  interest   in   the
[claimant's] deportation".

27.  The conclusion of our foregoing analysis is  that  we  cannot  conclude
that the judge's error regarding the claimant's history of lawful  residence
was material because in light of the accepted medical evidence  and  opinion
that the claimant was at real risk of committing suicide  if  returned,  the
judge would still have been obliged to allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.

28.  For the above reasons we conclude that  although  the  judge  erred  in
evaluating the claimant's history of lawful stay, the decision  of  the  FtT
judge to allow the appeal on Article 3 and 8 grounds has not been  shown  to
disclose a material error of law. Accordingly, the  decision  of  the  judge
must stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 28 February 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
