
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21750/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                              |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 FAHEED [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By permission of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer,  granted  on  31
    October 2017, the appellant appeals against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald, promulgated on 17  July  2017,  dismissing  his
    appeal on human rights grounds.  Judge Saffer  considered  it  arguable
    that there may have been an error of law in failing to consider whether
    the appellant fulfilled 276B of the Immigration Rules (10 years  lawful
    residence).

 2. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr McVeety acknowledged that there was
    a clear error of law  in  the  decision  and  that  as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had resolved the only issue of concern to  the  respondent  in
    the appellant's favour,  the  appropriate  remedy  was  to  remake  the
    decision by allowing the appeal on the basis of  Article  8.  Mr  Greer
    agreed with this course.  As the parties  agree,  I  can  set  out  the
    background and my reasons more briefly.

Background

 3. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, entered the UK as a student on 10
    September 2005.  His spouse joined him as his  dependent  in  2010  and
    they have two children, born in the UK.  The appellant has remained  in
    the UK lawfully since September 2005, first as a student and then as  a
    Tier 1 General Migrant.  On 16 October 2015, having  accrued  10  years
    lawful residence in the UK, the appellant applied for indefinite  leave
    to remain ('ILR').

 4. This was refused in a decision dated 3 September 2016.  The  respondent
    considered that the appellant had been dishonest in his  dealings  with
    the HMRC and concluded it would be undesirable for him to remain in the
    UK as a result of his conduct.  The application was  therefore  refused
    under the general discretionary grounds of refusal:  namely  322(5)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  In light of this, the respondent also concluded
    that there were no exceptional circumstances  to  support  a  grant  of
    leave on the basis of Article 8.

 5. The appellant appealed against this decision.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge correctly noted that the  appeal  was  limited  to  human  rights
    grounds.  He however regarded it as common ground that the  only  issue
    before him  was  whether  the  appellant  had  practiced  deception  or
    dishonesty to bring him within the ambit of 322(5).  He also considered
    it common ground  at  [20(a)]  "that  if  he  had  not  practised  such
    deception, then his application might indeed have been  granted".   The
    judge then reached the conclusion, for reasons set out  at  [20(b)]  to
    [20(h)] that the appellant had not at  any  stage  practiced  deception
    such that 322(5) could be invoked.   The  judge  went  on  to  consider
    Appendix FM and 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules,  before  turning  his
    attention to Article 8.  In dismissing the appeal, the judge said  this
    at [31]: "I am not persuaded on the evidence presented that  there  are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  the  Rules
    for granting leave to remain".

Error of law discussion

 6. This case plainly involved the refusal of a  human  rights  claim,  and
    therefore,  the  ultimate  issue  in  accordance   with   the   amended
    legislation should have been whether that refusal  was  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  As this is an Article 8  case,
    it required consideration of the five questions posed by  Lord  Bingham
    at [17] of the opinions in R (Razgar) v SSHD No 2 [2004] 2 AC 368.

 7. As set out in Charles (human rights appeal: scope)  [2018]  UKUT  00089
    (IAC) at [46] to [48], a person  whose  human  rights  claim  turns  on
    Article 8 will not be able to advance any criticism of the Secretary of
    State's  decision-making  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  unless   the
    circumstances engage Article 8(2).

 8. There has been no criticism of the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  that
    322(5) did not apply.  As Mr McVeety conceded, the respondent  did  not
    raise any other concerns regarding the application under  276B  and  as
    such on the judge's findings, his application for ILR should have  been
    successful.   It is now clear that the judge could not have allowed the
    appeal on this basis, as he did not have jurisdiction to  do  so.   How
    should the judge have given effect to this finding, in the  context  of
    an appeal solely on Article 8  grounds?   In  my  judgment,  the  judge
    certainly should not have left it entirely out of account  when  making
    his decision under Article 8.  This in itself is a  material  error  of
    law, as conceded by Mr McVeety.

 9. As set out in Charles (supra) at [48] and then  at  [65]  after  citing
    from Ahsan and others v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2009,  a  human  rights
    appeal can provide a suitable forum for the adjudication of  a  factual
    matter such as deception, which if decided in favour of  the  appellant
    may necessitate the finding that Article 8 would be breached.  Although
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a factual finding on  the  deception
    element there was a failure to go on to consider, whether in  light  of
    this, the appellant's removal from the UK would be contrary to  Article
    8.

Re-making the decision

10. Mr McVeety accepted  that  I  should  remake  the  decision  myself  by
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

11. The appellant and his dependents have built up longstanding, entrenched
    and entirely lawful private lives in the UK, and it is  uncontroversial
    that the Razgar questions (1) to (4) can be answered  positively.   The
    issue is whether the interference with these  private  lives  would  be
    proportionate for the purposes of question  (5).    Proportionality  is
    the "public interest question" within the meaning of  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. By section  117A(2)  I  am
    obliged to have regard to the considerations listed  in  section  117B,
    and do so below.

12. I start with the children's best interests.  They were born in  the  UK
    and have lived here all their lives albeit not for the period of  seven
    years required for section 117B(6) to bite, together with their parents
    in a stable family unit.  They are relatively young and would adapt  to
    life in Pakistan with their parents but I am satisfied on  the  limited
    evidence before me that given the extent to which the family has become
    immersed in life in Britain, their  best  interests  marginally  favour
    remaining in the UK.

13. The  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is not engaged.  This is because the respondent  now  accepts,
    in light of the First-tier Tribunal's findings regarding the absence of
    any deception or dishonesty on the part of the appellant, that he meets
    the requirements of 276B.

14. There is no infringement of the "English speaking" public  interest  as
    the appellant speaks fluent English.   The  economic  interest  is  not
    engaged because the appellant has demonstrated his  employment  at  all
    material times, as well as his payment of taxes to support  the  social
    and education benefits his family receives.

15. Although limited weight can be  attached  to  the  appellant's  private
    life, weight can still be attached and I find that private life  to  be
    entrenched and firmly established.

16. Having considered all the relevant circumstances, I find that it  would
    be disproportionate to remove the appellant, and any such removal would
    be contrary to Article 8.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law
         and is set aside.

      2) I remake the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds.



Signed                                  Date 13 April 2018


Ms Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Appeal Chamber)

