
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21061/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2021                   |On 09 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE



                                   Between

                               REIVILO VERMAAK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, instructed by Harley Solicitors,
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a citizen of South Africa who was born on 6  July  1941,
    appeals against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was
    promulgated on 24 February 2020. The First-tier Tribunal had  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing his claim for leave to remain human rights grounds.

 2. At the initial hearing on 27 January 2021, Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for
    the Secretary of State, told me that the  respondent  agreed  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to  be
    set aside. In the circumstances, I shall be brief.

 3. At [7], the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  incorrectly  found  that  the
    appellant had made his human rights application whilst an overstayer in
    the United Kingdom. The parties consider that this error  infected  the
    remainder  of  the  judge's  analysis.  Further,  that   analysis,   in
    particular the consideration of proportionality, is inadequate and,  in
    parts, brief to the point of being unclear.

 4. I set aside the decision and direct that the appeal is returned to  the
    First-tier Tribunal which will need  to  carry  out  a  fresh  finding-
    finding exercise. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The parties
    may adduce fresh evidence provided that such  evidence  (including  any
    witness statement) is filed at the Upper Tribunal  and  served  on  the
    other party at least 10 days prior to the next hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo. (Not Judge Abebrese; no interpreter;  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine whether remote of face to face; first available date).


Signed                                                      Date 27  January
2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



