
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21225/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st January 2020                         |On 16th April 2020            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     MIM
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Sardar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates; Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  Unless
      and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant is
      granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any other member of his family. This
      direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


   2. The appellant is a national of South Africa.  He arrived in the UK
      with his mother in 2000 as a visitor and has remained in the UK since.
       He was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK on 13th May 2014.
       On 15th December 2016, the appellant was convicted of possession of a
      knife blade/sharp pointed article in a public place, possession of a
      controlled drug, Class A - Crack Cocaine with intent to supply and
      possession of a controlled drug, Class A - Heroin with intent to
      supply.  He was sentenced to a total months of 44 months imprisonment.


   3. In February 2017 the appellant was informed that in light of his
      convictions he is liable to deportation under the Immigration Act 1971
      and may be subject to automatic deportation in accordance with s32(5)
      of the UK Borders Act 2007, unless one of the exceptions apply. The
      appellant was invited to set out any reasons he has for believing that
      the exceptions do apply. The appellant made representations dated 28th
      February 2017 and 24th March 2017 and on 10th October 2018 a
      deportation order was signed.  The appellant was served with a
      decision to refuse the human rights claim dated 11th October 2018.
      The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ford on 11th April 2019 and dismissed for reasons set
      out in a decision promulgated on 25th April 2019.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


   4. The background to the appeal is set out at paragraphs [2] to [3] of
      the decision.  the judge records at paragraph [4], concession made
      that the appellant does not meet the requirements of paragraph 399A(i)
      of the immigration rules. The human rights claim made by the appellant
      is summarised at paragraph [9] in the following way:


         "The appellant claims that he will not be able to survive in South
         Africa economically socially or culturally. As an individual who
         has not lived in South Africa since he was a child of 5, who knows
         nobody there and who cannot speak any of the local languages and
         has no knowledge of the social mores, culture or way of life there
         he says he will be (sic) find it virtually impossible to integrate.
         To show this he relies on an expert report of Jacob Van Garderen
         who is a public interest advocate, in South Africa, a member of the
         South Africa Bar and a human rights expert."


   5. At paragraphs [10] to [14], the judge refers to the evidence set out
      in the reports of Jacob Van Garderen, and Dr Lisa Davies.  The judge
      refers to the evidence received from the appellant, his mother,
      stepfather, sisters and his current employer, at paragraphs [21] to
      [29] of the decision.  The findings and conclusions are set out at
      paragraphs [31] to [42] of the decision.  The judge found, at [32],
      that the appellant has done everything within his power to
      rehabilitate himself within the time available. The judge noted
      however that the appellant had received two adjudications during his
      time in custody and rejected his explanation that a cellphone that he
      was found to be in possession of, belonged to his cellmate. The judge
      considered the adjudications to show that there were still reasons to
      be concerned about the appellant's ability to control his own
      behaviour as at 3rd February 2018 and his conduct showed a lack of
      maturity.


   6. At paragraph [32] of her decision, the judge listed the factors relied
      upon by the appellant to support his claim that there are very
      compelling circumstances that outweigh the public interest in his
      deportation. At paragraphs [34] to [36], the judge stated:


         "34. While I accept that it will be difficult financially for this
         family to visit the appellant in South Africa, they can remain in
         contact through letters, Skype and social media until such time as
         the family can save enough money for one or more of them to visit
         him.


         35.  I accept that the appellant will face difficulties in
         relocating to South Africa, but I find that the difficulties have
         been exaggerated. The appellant is a national of South Africa and
         his exposure to xenophobia will not be the same as those who do not
         enjoy the rights of citizens of South Africa. He does not speak the
         local languages which may limit his social integration, but I do
         not accept that it will limit his employment opportunities in the
         cities which is where he would naturally wish to live.


         36.  He is a personable and presentable young man who has benefited
         from secondary education in the UK. He has acquired additional
         qualifications as a personal trainer, and he is now older and wiser
         than when he got himself into difficulties in 2016. He has done
         behaviour and thinking courses that will be a protective factor for
         him. He has acquired some work experience which will stand him in
         good stead. He has no health difficulties. While I accept that
         rates of youth unemployment are very high in South Africa, this
         appellant has qualifications, work experience and skills that will
         stand him in good stead in finding employment or alternatively
         setting up in business as a personal trainer. He has the capacity
         to earn a decent wage. I do not accept that this particular
         appellant, will not be able to find employment and secure
         accommodation even though both are in short supply in South Africa.
         He has no vulnerabilities and he speaks well and is a confident
         young man who has the capacity to do well in life."


   7. At paragraph [37] the judge stated:


         "The appellant can only succeed under the Article 8 Deport rules if
         he can show that the public interest in his deportation is
         outweighed by very compelling circumstances over and above those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A. He has failed to show that he
         meets the requirements of paragraph 399A.  While he will face
         difficulties in integrating into South Africa, I do not accept that
         the difficulties that he will face will amount to "very significant
         obstacles to his integration".  Even if I am wrong on this, he
         still could not show that he has lived in the UK for most of his
         life."


   8. The judge noted the public interest in the appellant's deportation is
      strong given the nature of his offending and the length of his
      sentence. The judge went on to refer to the public interest
      considerations set out in s117 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002 ("the 2002 Act") and rejected the claim that there are
      compassionate circumstances in this case such as to outweigh the
      strong public interest in the appellant's removal as a foreign
      criminal.  At paragraph [42], the judge concluded:


         "Having considered the proportionality outside the rules placing
         the great weight I must place on the public interest and on Rules
         which express the will of Parliament in achieving the proper
         balance between that interest and private and family life rights, I
         find that this is a decision that is in accordance with the law.
         The decision is justified on the facts and it goes no further than
         is necessary to protect the public interest. It is a proportionate
         decision and there is no breach of protected article 8 rights to
         family and private life of the Appellant, his mother, stepfather,
         sisters and niece"


The appeal before me


   9. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal. First, in reaching her
      decision the judge failed to consider material factors when
      considering whether there are very compelling circumstances over and
      above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 set out in the 2002 Act.
      The appellant claims the judge did not have any or any adequate regard
      to the appellant's length of residence in the UK. Although the
      appellant had conceded that he had not lived lawfully in the UK for
      most of his life, that was not to say that the substantial length of
      residence in the UK from a young age was not relevant when the Judge
      was considering whether there are 'very compelling circumstances'.
      Furthermore, in addressing that question, the judge referred to the
      evidence of Dr Lisa Davies but did not engage with her conclusion that
      the risk of reoffending and risk of harm is low.  The appellant claims
      the risk of reoffending and/or risk of harm should have been
      considered and featured as part of the overall assessment of whether
      there are 'very compelling circumstances'.  Second, the judge failed
      to engage with the conclusions set out in the report of Mr Jacob Van
      Garderen and departed from the conclusions without undertaking and
      articulating a proper assessment of the evidence in relation to
      prospective integration on return and whether there are 'very
      compelling circumstances'.


  10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Nightingale on the second ground only, on 21st May 2019.  The judge
      observed:


         "The Judge sets out the expert report with regard to the background
         situation in South Africa but, I accept, it is arguable that the
         judge failed to give reasons for departing from the expert
         conclusions with the finding that the "difficulties have been
         exaggerated. This ground is arguable".


     The application for permission to appeal on the first ground was
      renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted by Upper
      Tribunal Judge Coker on 2nd July 2019.  She observed:


         "Although less arguable than the ground upon which permission was
         granted, it is arguable that the combination of grounds relied upon
         renders the appeal arguable although the appellant is reminded that
         the threshold is high."


  11. The matter comes before me to determine whether the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material error of law, and if so,
      to remake the decision.


  12. Before me, Ms Sardar submits the judge failed to consider the
      appellant's length of residence in the UK and the risk of reoffending
      expressed in the report of Dr Lisa Davies.  She submits the judge
      lists, at paragraph [32], the factors relied upon by the appellant to
      establish that there are very compelling circumstances in this case
      that outweigh the public interest in his deportation.  The length of
      the appellant's residence in the UK and the risk of reoffending and
      harm are noticeably absent from that list, and neither is there any
      reference to those matters in the judge's assessment of
      proportionality.  Ms Sardar refers to the decision of the Court of
      Appeal in Akinyemi -v- SSHD (No 2) [2019] EWCA Civ 2098 in which the
      Court of Appeal held that the correct approach to the balancing
      exercise is to recognise that the public interest in the deportation
      of foreign criminals is a flexible one, and that there would be a
      small number of cases where the individual circumstances reduced the
      legitimate and strong public interest in removal. The Court of Appeal
      held the Upper Tribunal had attached insufficient weight to the fact
      that the appellant had been lawfully in the UK his whole life. In view
      of that fact, and given that he had the right to acquire British
      citizenship and lacked any significant social or cultural links with
      the country to which he was to be deported, the weight to be
      attributed to the fact that he had never known any other environment
      than that of the UK, was of central importance.  Ms Sardar submits the
      First-tier Tribunal judge erred here in a similar way, by failing to
      have regard to the appellant's length of residence in the UK and his
      lack of ties to South Africa.


  13. Ms Sardar submits the judge outlines and summarises the report of Dr
      Lisa Davies but does not consider the conclusions set out in the
      report.  The judge does not take issue with the credentials of the
      expert, and at paragraph [31], the judge found the appellant has done
      everything he can to rehabilitate himself.  The two adjudications had
      been referred to by Dr Davies and were considered by the expert in her
      assessment of the risk of reoffending and the risk of harm.  She
      submits the fact that the risk of reoffending is low, does not feature
      in the judge's assessment of proportionality.  At paragraph [49] of
      Akinyemi the Court of Appeal confirm that the strength of the public
      interest must depend on such matters as the nature and seriousness of
      the crime, the risk of re-offending and the success of rehabilitation.
       Ms Sardar submits the omission of the length of residence and
      conclusions set out in the report of Dr Davies were material omissions
      in the judge's assessment of proportionality.


  14. Ms Sardar submits the judge outlined the conclusions set out in the
      report of Jacob Van Garderen at paragraph [10] of her decision.  The
      judge accepted at paragraph [35] that the appellant will face
      difficulties in relocating to South Africa but found the difficulties
      have been exaggerated. Ms Sardar submits the judge fails to give
      adequate reasons for departing from the conclusions of the expert at
      paragraphs [35] and [36] of her decision.  In Akinyemiu, Sir Ernest
      Ryder, the Senior President of Tribunals reiterated what had
      previously been said by Sales LJ in Kamara -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ
      813:


         "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of an insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the society in that other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."


  15. Ms Sardar submits there is an emphasis on being an insider and the
      extent to which the appellant is an 'outsider' because of the length
      of his absence from South Africa, was critical to the assessment of
      whether there are compelling circumstances and the assessment of
      proportionality.  Ms Sardar submits that what is lacking in the
      decision, is actual engagement with relevant factors.  The judge did
      not carry out the balance sheet exercise identifying the factors that
      weigh in favour of, and against the appellant. She submits that even
      when read as a whole, it is not clear what weight the judge applied to
      the length of residence and the risk of re-offending.


  16. In reply, Mr Bates submits that the judge clearly had in mind the
      appellant's length of residence in the UK.  At paragraph [4], the
      judge recorded the concession that the appellant could not meet the
      requirements of paragraph 399A(i), because he has not lived lawfully
      in the UK for most of his life.  At paragraph [16] of the decision,
      the judge notes the appellant cannot meet the immigration rules and
      she expressly states she has "considered the extent to which he does
      not need them." At paragraph [17], the judge referred to the decision
      in Maslov -v- Austria Application No. 1638/03 and noted that where an
      appellant has been lawfully resident in the UK since childhood, the
      long-held view is that the 'Maslov factors' should be considered.
      Maslov was a case in which the individual had spent lengthy period of
      time in the UK from a young age.  At paragraph [18], the judge also
      referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Olarewaju -v- SSHD
      [2018] EWCA Civ 557 in which Newey LJ held that where paragraphs 399
      and 399A of the Rules did not apply, "only a claim which was very
      strong" would succeed. There, the Tribunal judge had drawn attention
      to the respondent's youth and his apparent rehabilitation. However, it
      had only been two years since his last conviction and the significance
      of rehabilitation was limited by the fact that the risk of reoffending
      was only one facet of the public interest.  Newey LJ held that "Very
      real culture shock" was not the same as "very significant obstacles".


  17. Mr Bates submits the factors identified by the FtT judge at paragraph
      [32] of her decision are all directed to the length of time that the
      appellant has been absent from South Africa and the time he has spent
      in the UK.  The entire thrust of the appellant's claim was the length
      of his residence in the UK.


  18. The judge accepts the appellant has done what he can to rehabilitate
      and, Mr Bates submits, it was open to the judge to depart from the
      conclusions of the expert.  Mr Bates refers to the decision of the
      Upper Tribunal in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)
      Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 in which a Presidential panel of the Upper
      Tribunal held that "Rehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material
      weight in favour of a foreign criminal", and confirmed the test for
      'very compelling circumstances' is an extremely demanding one.  Mr
      Bates submits that in considering 'rehabilitation' the judge was
      entitled to have some concerns about the behaviour of the appellant
      and to conclude that his actions show a lack of maturity.


  19. Mr Bates submits the judge accepted the difficulties the appellant
      would experience in South Africa.  The judge considered the matters
      set out in the report of Jacob Van Garderen and reached her decision
      based upon the findings that the judge made.  The judge found the
      appellant would be able to secure employment and live in the bigger
      cities.  He has work experience and no health problems.  The judge had
      regard to the employment prospects of a healthy and fit individual,
      that has some work experience and skills.  The judge had regard to a
      number of relevant factors at paragraph [36] of the decision and the
      reasons given by the judge are entirely adequate, when the decision is
      read as a whole.  Mr Bates submits there is a high threshold for the
      appellant to meet and it was in the end, open to the judge to reach
      the conclusions that are set out at paragraphs [37] to [42] of her
      decision for the reasons set out in the decision read as a whole.


Discussion


   20. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 defines a foreign criminal, a
       person not a British citizen who is convicted in the UK of an offence
       and, inter alia, sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
       months. Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act sets outs out the clear
       proposition that deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to
       the public good. That is a statement of public policy enacted by the
       legislature, which the courts and tribunals are obliged to respect.
       Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act requires the Secretary of State to make
       a deportation order in respect of every foreign criminal, subject to
       the exceptions set out in section 33.  Insofar as is relevant that
       is:


         "(2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

             (a)  a person's Convention rights, or

             (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
         Convention.

         ...

         (7) The application of an exception-

             (a) does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

             (b) results in it being assumed neither that deportation of
             the person concerned is conducive to the public good nor that
             it is not conducive to the public good;

         but section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception 1 or
    4.".



  21. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 NIAA 2002
      informs the decision making in relation to the application of the
      section 33 exceptions. Section 117A in Part 5A provides that, when a
      court or tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made
      under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect for
      private and family life under Article 8, and, as a result, would be
      unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998, the court, in considering
      the public interest question, must (in particular) have regard to the
      considerations listed in section 117B and, additionally, in cases
      concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the considerations
      listed in section 117C.


   22. In NA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Lord Justice Jackson
       held that the fall back protection set out in s117C(6) also avails
       those who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2 and that on a proper
       construction of section 117C(3), the public interest requires the
       person's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies or
       unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
       described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  As to the meaning of "very
       compelling circumstances" over and above those described in
       Exceptions 1 and 2, Lord Justice Jackson said:


          "28.    ... The new para. 398 uses the same language as section
          117C(6) . It refers to "very compelling circumstances, over and
          above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399
          and 399A of the 2014 rules refer to the same subject matter as
          Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C , but they do so in greater
          detail.

          29. In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in JZ
          (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used in section
          117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have held is
          to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean that a foreign
          criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking
          to rely on matters falling within the scope of the circumstances
          described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that
          "there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
          described in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have indicated above, a
          foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he
          would need to be able to point to features of his case of a kind
          mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the
          2014 rules), or features falling outside the circumstances
          described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his
          claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

   23. Whether there are "very compelling circumstances" is a demanding
       test, but nonetheless requires a wide-ranging assessment, so as to
       ensure that Part 5A produces a result compatible with Article 8.


   24. I reject the claim that the judge failed to have proper regard to the
       appellant's length of residence in the UK.  The judge referred to the
       appellant's immigration history at paragraph [3] of her decision.  At
       paragraphs [8] and [9] of her decision, the judge referred to the
       respondent's decision, and noted the claim made by the appellant that
       he has no ties to South Africa having left there as a child at the
       age of five.  At paragraph [17], the judge refers to the decision of
       the ECtHR in Maslov -v- Austria, which emphasised the importance of
       age and youth spent in the host country.  At paragraph [24] of her
       decision, the judge records the oral evidence of the appellant that
       he has not visited South Africa since he was a child and has no
       relatives or contacts there.  At paragraph [32], the judge lists the
       factors relied upon by the appellant to show that there are very
       compelling circumstances that outweigh the public interest in his
       deportation.  The judge referred to the appellant's age, and at (vi),
       to the fact the appellant left South Africa when he was five.  As Mr
       Bates submits, the factors identified in paragraph [32], are all
       referable back to the appellant's age when he left South Africa, and
       the length of his presence in the UK.


   25. I also reject the claim that the judge did not engage with the report
       of Dr Lisa Davies and in particular, her conclusion that the risk of
       reoffending and risk of harm is low.  At paragraph [31], the judge
       accepted the appellant has done everything within his power to
       rehabilitate and has completed relevant courses in thinking skills
       and behaviour and that he has complied with the conditions of his
       reporting and of his licence.  The judge was however entitled to have
       regard to his conduct during the period of his imprisonment and the
       two adjudications.  In RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence:
       seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal
       considered the approach to s117C(6) of the 2002 Act and the
       significance to be accorded to the particular issue of
       rehabilitation.  The Tribunal said, at [32]:


          "As a more general point, the fact that an individual has not
          committed further offences, since release from prison, is highly
          unlikely to have a material bearing, given that everyone is
          expected not to commit crime. Rehabilitation will therefore
          normally do no more than show that the individual has returned to
          the place where society expects him (and everyone else) to be.
          There is, in other words, no material weight which ordinarily
          falls to be given to rehabilitation in the proportionality balance
          (see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
          [2014] EWCA Civ 256, paragraphs 48 to 56).  Nevertheless, as so
          often in the field of human rights, one cannot categorically say
          that rehabilitation will never be capable of playing a significant
          role (see LG (Colombia) v Secretary of State for the Home
          Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1225). Any judicial departure from the
          norm would, however, need to be fully reasoned."

   26. In his report, Mr Jacob Van Garderen confirms the appellant acquired
       South African citizenship by birth.  At section 5 of his report, he
       confirms that South Africa is generally considered to be a net-
       receiver of migration, hosting a significant number of migrants that
       have moved to the country in recent years. He states that although
       there is significant awareness and political focus on the deportation
       of migrants from South Africa, relatively little is known about
       returnees to the country. He states deportees to South Africa face
       serious challenges when they are returned and no assistance is
       available from the South African government or, as far as he is
       aware, any civil society organisations.  He expresses the opinion
       that it will be extremely difficult for someone in the appellant's
       circumstances to adapt to a new society with vastly different
       cultural foundations, and no social network nor support. He states
       that in South Africa, while English is used as the language of
       business, science,  politics and media, it is often considered a
       subordinate language in the broader social context, where the
       majority racial population are black Africans from a range of ethnic
       groups. It is said that the appellant's inability to communicate in
       an African language is likely to increase his profile as an
       "outsider" and expose him to discrimination and stigmatisation.  Mr
       Jacob Van Garderen refers to the unemployment rate among young people
       aged 15-34, which currently stands at 38%.  He states that the
       relatively high levels of crime and violence, specifically xenophobic
       violence in South Africa, are important factors that may impact on
       the appellant's ability to integrate. He refers to the South African
       government's inability to stem the ongoing xenophobic violence and
       states the exposure to violent crime and xenophobia is substantially
       determined by socio-economic factors.  He concludes:


          "Reintegration can be exceptionally complex in the case of
          deportation, due to the forced, hostile and spontaneous manner in
          which a deportee is forced leave and return to their country of
          origin. In [the appellant's] case there are a myriad of challenges
          that will negatively affect his reintegration experience in South
          Africa.

          Such challenges will be exacerbated by the absence of effective
          post deportation assistance and long-term resettlement support. In
          order to adjust positively to deportation [the appellant] will not
          only need financial support but also technical, emotional, and
          psychological support, all of which are currently non-existent and
          are extremely unlikely to materialise. Lack of such support, with
          no financial or social capital or benefits, would render him
          extremely vulnerable."

   27. I reject the claim the judge failed to engage with the conclusions
       set out in the report of Mr Jacob Van Garderen and failed to consider
       the matters set out in report when undertaking her assessment of the
       evidence in relation to prospective integration on return.  The judge
       accurately summarised the conclusions set out in the report of Mr
       Jacob Van Garderen at paragraph [10] of her decision.  At paragraph
       [35] the judge accepted the appellant will face difficulties in
       relocating to South Africa but found the difficulties have been
       exaggerated.  The judge noted the appellant is a national of South
       Africa and his exposure to xenophobia will not be the same as those
       who do not enjoy the rights of citizens. She accepted he does not
       speak the local languages and that may limit his social integration,
       but she did not accept that it will limit his employment
       opportunities in the larger cities which is where he would naturally
       wish to live. The judge noted, at [36], the appellant is a personable
       and presentable young man who has benefited from secondary education
       in the UK. He has acquired additional qualifications as a personal
       trainer, and he has acquired work experience which will stand him in
       good stead. He has no health difficulties.  The judge accepted that
       rates of youth unemployment are very high in South Africa, but noted
       the appellant has qualifications, work experience and skills that
       will undoubtedly assist him in finding employment or alternatively
       setting up in business as a personal trainer. The judge found the
       appellant has the capacity to earn a decent wage and did not accept
       the appellant will be unable to find employment and secure
       accommodation in South Africa.


   28. In Akinyemiu, the appellant was born in the UK in 1983 and had never
       left. His parents were Nigerian nationals who had come to the UK
       lawfully. Due to the legislation in force at the time of his birth,
       the appellant did not acquire British nationality automatically; nor
       did he acquire it subsequently, despite having been entitled to it
       for many years. Since his teenage years, the appellant had been
       convicted of 42 offences, including causing death by dangerous
       driving and drug offences. His mother's death when he was 14 had had
       a significant impact on him. He had a history of self-harming and
       suicide attempts and suffered from epilepsy and depression. The
       appellant had not offended since January 2017, which he attributed to
       the relationship he had been in for almost three years. In January
       2015, a deportation made against him was upheld by the UT on the
       basis of the 2002 Act. In reaching its decision, the Upper Tribunal
       took into account the appellant's repeat offending and expert
       psychological evidence that he was at medium risk of reoffending.
       Other factors included his moderate risk of suicide, his social and
       cultural integration into the UK and his lack of family connections
       in Nigeria.   At paragraph [39] Sir Ernest Ryder set out the correct
       approach:


          "...The correct approach to be taken to the 'public interest' in
          the balance to be undertaken by a tribunal is to recognise that
          the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals has a
          moveable rather than fixed quality. It is necessary to approach
          the public interest flexibly, recognising that there will be cases
          where the person's circumstances in the individual case reduce the
          legitimate and strong public interest in removal. The number of
          these cases will necessarily be very few i.e. they will be
          exceptional having regard to the legislation and the Rules..."

   29. At paragraph [40], Sir Ernest Ryder held that "one has to be careful
       to identify as a relevant fact that the appellant was in the UK
       lawfully for the whole of his life."  Here, the fact that the
       appellant had left South Africa at the age of five and had spent the
       major part of his childhood and youth in the UK are matters that the
       judge considered when considering whether there are very compelling
       circumstances that outweigh the public interest in deportation.  In
       her conclusions set out at paragraphs [37] to [42], the judge
       accepted the appellant will face difficulties in integrating into
       South Africa but did not accept the difficulties that he will face
       amount to very significant obstacles to his integration.


   30. The judge undoubtedly considered all matters in the round.  The
       public interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal is not set
       in stone and must be approached flexibly.  In my judgement, the judge
       had proper regard inter alia to the appellant's length of residence
       in the UK, the ties that he retains with his family, his immigration
       and offending history, and the family circumstances described in the
       evidence and the matters set out in the experts reports.  It was in
       my judgment open to the judge to conclude there are no compelling
       circumstances which make the appellant's claim based on Article 8,
       especially strong.  It follows that in my judgement, it was open to
       the judge to conclude the deportation of the appellant is in the
       public interest and not disproportionate to the legitimate aim for
       the reasons given by her.


   31. As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
        412, it is necessary to guard against the temptation to characterise
       as errors of law what are in truth no more than disagreements about
       the weight to be given to different factors, particularly if the
       judge who decided the appeal had the advantage of hearing oral
       evidence. The assessment of such a claim is always a highly fact
       sensitive task.  The FtT judge was required to consider the evidence
       as a whole and she plainly did so, giving adequate reasons for her
       decision.  The reader of the decision might consider it harsh, but
       the findings and conclusions reached by the judge are neither
       irrational nor unreasonable.  The decision was one that was open to
       the judge on the evidence before her and the findings made.


   32. It follows that I dismiss the appeal


Decision:


   33. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Ford, stands.

Signed                                  Date          24th March 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
