
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/21566/2016
                                                               HU/21568/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House and given                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Ex tempore on 5th October, 2017               |On 09 October 2017            |
|and signed and sent to promulgation           |                              |
|On 6th October, 2017.                         |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [sM1]
                                    [sM2]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS




1.   In these two appeals the Secretary of State for the Home Department  is
    the appellant and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her as being "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondents are twin sisters.  They were born on [ ] 2004, and  are
    Iranian nationals.  They made application for entry clearance  to  join
    [KM], who they claim to be their father and who is  a  refugee  in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   Their application was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  a
    notice dated 23rd August 2016, and  they  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Their appeals were  heard  on  1st  April  without  an  oral
    hearing by Judge K Swinnerton.  The judge  examined  the  evidence  and
    considered the relevant Immigration Rules and  concluded  that  on  the
    evidence presented, the respondents could not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  He then purported to remit the  appeal  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, so, to quote him, "that the  Appellants  (here
    meaning of course the respondents)  have  the  opportunity  to  provide
    additional evidence in relation to their appeals".  The claimant sought
    and was granted leave to appeal.

4.   There was no appearance by or on behalf of the respondents.

5.   Immigration Judges are  creatures  of  statute  and  their  powers  are
    governed by Parliament.   Immigration  Judges  have  no  discretion  to
    exercise.  They may either  allow  an  appeal,  or  dismiss  it.   They
    certainly have no power at all to remit an appeal to an Entry Clearance
    Officer or to the Secretary of State.  If after having  considered  the
    relevant Immigration Rule and the evidence presented on behalf  of  the
    respondents, the judge was of the opinion that the respondents met  all
    the requirements of the Rules, then he was required in accordance  with
    his judicial oath to allow the appeal.  If, on the other hand, as  here
    he concluded that there was insufficient evidence to enable him  to  be
    satisfied on a balance of probability that the respondents met each  of
    the requirements of the Rules, then his only choice was to dismiss  the
    appeal.

6.   The judge pointed out at paragraph 12 of his decision that  the  burden
    of proof was on the respondents to satisfy the Tribunal that  they  met
    the requirements for entry clearance on a balance of probabilities.  At
    paragraph 18 he explained why they failed  to  discharge  that  burden.
    The judge has clearly erred in purporting to exercise a power which  he
    does not have.  I substitute my decision  for  his.   The  respondents'
    appeals are dismissed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


