
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21064/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th June 2019                     |On 14 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Shahnawaz Khan, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   Introduction

    1. The respondent is 24 years old, having been born in April  1995.  He
       was born in the UK but is a citizen of Zambia. His  mother  held  no
       valid immigration status here when he was  born,  although  she  had
       been living here since 1989. The respondent's mother could not  cope
       with the demands of looking after him in his very early  years.  She
       arranged for him to move to Zambia in 1998 to live with her  mother,
       his grandmother. He was able to live in Zambia with his  grandmother
       only until late May 2000, when she sadly died at the age of just 43.
       The claimant was only 5 years old at that time. He then  lived  with
       his father in South Africa until 2004, when (aged 9) he returned  to
       the UK to live with his mother (as he has  done  ever  since,  apart
       from time spent in prison between January and November 2017 and then
       in immigration detention until April 2018).

    2. When the respondent came back to the UK in 2004, his  mother  was  a
       failed asylum seeker.  However,  in  August  2008  she  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain, as was he, in an  exceptional  grant  of
       leave outside the immigration rules. His father died in South Africa
       in 2014.

    3. Between March 2009  and  November  2016,  the  respondent  committed
       various criminal offences, collecting 7 convictions for 15 offences,
       the most serious being a conviction in November 2016 for  possession
       of Class A drugs with intent to supply in January 2019 (when he  was
       20). He was sentenced in January 2017  to  a  total  of  19  months,
       comprising 18 months for the November  2016  convictions  themselves
       plus 1 month  (consecutive)  by  way  of  partial  activation  of  a
       suspended sentence imposed in September 2015  for  possession  of  a
       knife or bladed article in public.

    4. An initial deportation decision in May 2017, certified  under  s.94B
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act')
       was reconsidered following the Supreme Court decision  in  Kiarie  &
       Byndloss [2017] UKSC 42, so that in August 2017 the  respondent  was
       granted an in-country right of appeal. He did  not  appeal,  but  in
       March 2018 further submissions were made to the appellant  Secretary
       of State on the respondent's behalf. They have rightly been  treated
       as an application to revoke deportation  and  led  to  the  decision
       challenged in these proceedings, an undated  decision  by  the  Home
       Office for the appellant, served on  the  respondent  on  6  October
       2018, refusing the respondent leave  to  remain  on  any  basis  and
       refusing to revoke his deportation order.

    5. The respondent's appeal against that decision was allowed by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson in a determination promulgated on  17
       January 2019, and the  appellant  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals
       against that decision. For the reasons set out in the Upper Tribunal
       Panel decision at Annex A of this decision it  was  found  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and the decision was set aside.



    6. The matter came before me to remake the appeal.  The  appellant  and
       his mother attended the Upper Tribunal and  gave  oral  evidence  in
       support of their statements. At the end of the hearing I reserved my
       determination.

   Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    7. The respondent's evidence is, in summary, as  follows.  He  explains
       his criminal record by saying that he  was  running  away  from  his
       mother's illness HIV as he was ashamed of it and had a lot  of  time
       alone when she was unwell, and because he wanted money, latterly  to
       give to the mother of his child, as he had no income from working as
       a musician at that time and was hanging about with a bad  crowd  and
       wanting to fit in and not be seen as an outsider. He has not had any
       further convictions or trouble  with  the  criminal  justice  system
       since he left prison/detention in April 2018.

    8. He is the father of two British citizen  children,  and  has  had  a
       close relationship with them, and has co-parenting the children with
       his ex-partner after a complex process due to  her  being  a  former
       looked after child by Social Services  although  currently  his  ex-
       partner is insisting he obtains a court order for contact and he  is
       in a process of  mediation  and  re-establishing  contact  with  his
       children which ceased due to her  actions  in  April  2019.  He  has
       concerns about the mental health of his children's mother. He  lived
       with his ex-partner for a few months prior to going to prison but no
       longer wants a relationship with her.

    9. He also does not want to leave the UK because of the relationship he
       has with his mum, as they have lived together for almost all of  the
       15 years he has been in the UK and because he is concerned about her
       vulnerable state of health, and also  because  of  his  relationship
       with his step-sister whose dad lives in  Nigeria.  He  is  concerned
       that if anything were to happen to his mum his step-sister,  C,  who
       was born in June 2016, would have to go into care. Her father  lives
       in Nigeria and visits approximately once a year for a few weeks.

   10. He wants to remain in the UK and get work in the music business.  He
       did do some work for Six Figure Music Studio in the UK for one  year
       as  an  assistant  sound  engineer,  having  done  an   after-school
       programme, after he left college. He believes he  is  integrated  in
       the UK because of his length of residence and family connections. He
       currently spends time going to the gym and meeting friends there and
       playing basketball, looking after his  children  when  their  mother
       permits this, caring for his little sister whilst his mum is at work
       between 3pm and 7pm, and researching the possibility of setting up a
       music or clothing business using the internet. He is  not  permitted
       to work, study or go out in the evening.

   11. He does not believe he would be able to obtain work in Zambia as  he
       has no real skills or work experience and has never  really  had  to
       manage his own accommodation and budget even in the UK, and he fears
       that his criminal record would be held  against  him.  He  only  has
       three GCSE passes: E in English, D in art and D  in  media  with  an
       additional ungraded work skills qualification. He  went  to  college
       after school to study IT but dropped out after six months. He has no
       knowledge as to how things work in Zambia and no contacts. He  fears
       that he might be exploited as people would  recognise  that  he  was
       from the UK and think he had access to money. He also says he  could
       not return to live in Zambia because he  has  no  family  connection
       with that country and does not speak the local languages.  The  fact
       that he was sent to South Africa to be  with  his  father  when  his
       grandmother died shows that there is truly no one there for  him  to
       turn to for help. He has not been to Zambia since he  left  when  he
       was three years old. His father died in South Africa  in  2014,  and
       was buried in Malawi  by  his  relatives.  He  did  not  attend  the
       funeral.

   12. The respondent's mother, CN, gave evidence which in  summary  is  as
       follows. She has no relatives in Zambia: one brother lives in Wales,
       one in Russia and she has a step-sister whom she has  never  met  in
       South Africa, and her parents are dead. She  was  not  sure  if  her
       brothers had contacts in Zambia as mostly she tried to avoid African
       contacts as they asked her for money she could not  afford  to  give
       them. Her brothers have helped her financially with things like  the
       legal fees for the respondent's case. She did not believe that  they
       could constantly support him in Zambia however.

   13. When she went back to Zambia in 2010 to visit her mother's grave and
       sort out her new passport she found that she had no one there  as  a
       lot of her mum's friends had died of HIV, strokes  and  cancer.  She
       felt lost and as if she no longer had that heritage. The friend  she
       stayed with on that trip has since married a Chinese man  and  moved
       to South  Africa.  She  saw  that  the  country  had  problems  with
       alcoholism and with thieves, as a friend who travelled there had her
       passport and money stolen.  She does not believe that the respondent
       could live in Zambia as it would be a foreign country  of  which  he
       has no knowledge, and he would be vulnerable  to  criminal  elements
       who wanted to exploit him due to his accent indicating he had access
       to funds as he would be identified as a western foreigner. He has no
       money to set up a business or rent a place to live  in  Zambia.  She
       fears that he might die there.

   14. She did travel to a village in Malawi called Mzuzu to bury her son's
       father in 2014: she had collected the body  from  South  Africa  and
       taken it back there. Her only contact with her son's father's family
       was to be contacted for money. She could  not  help  the  respondent
       with money if he went back as she was only taking home �1500 a month
       from her job at St Mungo's as a cook and is struggling  to  pay  her
       rent, council tax and bills and nursery money for  her  daughter  C.
       C's father does not pay anything towards her  upkeep.  He  lives  in
       Nigeria where he has another family. He last visited C a year and  a
       half ago.  She would be very stressed  by  worrying  about  how  the
       respondent would cope in Zambia. She would not be able  to  live  in
       Zambia due to her HIV status which means she is more susceptible  to
       diseases such as malaria and she could not afford to visit him there
       due to her low income.

   15. The respondent has lived with his mother since returning to  the  UK
       continuously except a period of about a year when he was supposed to
       be going to college. She had driven him out  of  her  house  as  she
       could see that things were going wrong but he would  not  listen  to
       her and the police would not help. She believed that he  lived  with
       his girlfriend during that time. She knew he was talented at  music,
       but did not think that he had worked  for  money  although  she  was
       aware he had gone to the studio a lot.

   16. It was very traumatic when the respondent was sent to prison for her
       as at that time he was her only child, but he has returned a changed
       man who wants to spend time at home and  help  her  out  around  the
       house and with his step-sister, C, whom he  picks  up  from  nursery
       everyday, and is listed as her next of  kin  so  he  can  deal  with
       things like medical appointments.

   17. Mr  Melvin  for  the  appellant  submits  that  there  are  no  very
       significant obstacles to integration if the respondent  is  returned
       to Zambia, as he will have friends of family or friends  of  friends
       in that country who can assist him to settle,  particularly  as  his
       mother visited Zambia in 2010 and knows other who have visited,  and
       because he is in good health. English is the  official  language  of
       Zambia, the respondent has GCSEs and worked in a music studio at one
       point. Zambia is a stable country  politically,  has  good  economic
       growth and does not have problems with war or internal conflict. The
       respondent had failed to do any research to show that he  could  not
       work as a sound engineer or in clothing retail in Zambia. He has not
       shown he could not have a reasonable private life there.  Mr  Melvin
       also submits that the respondent  is  not  integrated  into  the  UK
       despite his long residence due to his criminal history.  The  appeal
       should be dismissed.

   18. Mr Khan submits that the sentencing judge  had  commented  that  the
       respondent  was  young  and  talented  when  passing  sentence.  The
       respondent has been positively impacted by prison and has returned a
       changed man who instead of  being  the  difficult  person  whom  his
       mother chased out of the house is now wanted  and  allowed  to  live
       there and trusted with the care of his three year old sister, and is
       taking responsibility for his own children when possible. It  should
       be found that he is rehabilitated. He would  have  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in Zambia because he has only  lived  there
       for two years; he has no knowledge of that country; he was  born  in
       the UK and has lived here most of his life having  his  friends  and
       education here as well as his children  and  his  plans  for  future
       work; although there  is  a  past  growing  economy  there  is  also
       widespread poverty. It is a different type of country  from  the  UK
       with widespread corruption and a lack of the rule of law, making  it
       culturally and politically very different. The level of obstacles to
       integration mean that the appeal should be allowed.

   Conclusions - Remaking

   19. The conclusion that the  respondent's  case  does  not  fall  within
       paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules was preserved by  the
       Panel from the First-tier Tribunal  decision.  These  findings  were
       made because the respondent does not have a subsisting  relationship
       with his partner; because it was found that it would not  be  unduly
       harsh for his two children to remain here whilst he is deported; and
       because he has not lived in the UK lawfully for most of his life  as
       his stay in the UK was only regularised in 2008 when he was 13 years
       old.   The only consideration before me is whether  there  are  very
       compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those   described   in
       paragraphs 399 and 399A which outweigh the public  interest  in  the
       appellant's  deportation.  Very  compelling  circumstances  requires
       something more than mere hardship, difficulty or inconvenience.  The
       determination of the appeal and  consideration  of  very  compelling
       circumstances is done best with a balance sheet exercise.

   20. I  find  that  the  appellant  and  his  mother  are  both  credible
       witnesses. They both gave direct answers to  the  questions  put  to
       them,  and  explained  themselves   in   detail.   There   were   no
       discrepancies between their accounts, although  it  was  clear  that
       they explained the situation from their own perspectives. They  were
       consistent with their written statements and with each other.

   21. Against the respondent  is  that  there  is  a  very  strong  public
       interest in the deportation of the respondent as a foreign criminal,
       to maintain public confidence in the immigration system in deporting
       foreign criminals and to deter others from committing such acts.  He
       has been  a  persistent  offender,  who  has  been  convicted  on  7
       occasions of 15 offences between 2009 and 2016 (theft,  shoplifting,
       possession of drugs with intent to supply, driving without a licence
       and without insurance and obstructing a constable and possessing  of
       a knife in a public place). His index  offence  is  a  serious  one:
       possession of class A and class B drugs with intent  to  supply  and
       failing to comply with the  community  requirements  of  a  previous
       sentence for which he was sentenced to  19  months  in  prison.  The
       sentencing judge found that he had a significant role in selling  on
       the drugs and that the  appellant  had  a  previous  conviction  for
       possession with intent to supply class A drugs but that  he  was  in
       the lowest category because the joint weight of the drugs  was  less
       than 5 grams. The sentencing judge found that the mitigating factors
       were the respondent's age, his guilty plea, the fact that he had not
       been to prison before and his belief that he  had  promising  future
       ahead of him.

   22. In addition, it is not in the respondent's favour that he has  never
       been financially independent in  the  UK.  He  speaks  English,  the
       official language used in Zambia, and so would have language  skills
       which would assist with integration. It has been  found  not  to  be
       unduly harsh to his children if he were deported to Zambia and  they
       remained in the UK with their mother, and he has no partner  in  the
       UK.

   23. In favour of the respondent is the low risk of reoffending and  harm
       I find he poses to the public. The probation  evidence  is  that  he
       poses a medium risk of serious harm to the  public  however  I  find
       that he is now rehabilitated, as he has had no  further  convictions
       since 2016, and has been in the community for  a  year  without  any
       issues.  I found his mother's evidence of  the  salutary  effect  of
       prison on him very striking. She had so  little  sympathy  with  him
       when he was involved with  criminal  elements  and  crime  that  she
       required him to leave her home,  physically  driving  him  out  when
       trying to enlist the help of the police to address his behaviour had
       failed. She was clearly amazed and delighted that prison had  turned
       him around, and he has lived with her since his released and he  now
       cares for her three year old daughter  enabling  her  to  work.  The
       appellant also gave evidence I found credible of his  commitment  to
       not getting into further trouble as a result of his  realisation  of
       the effect of his incarceration on all his family members and  their
       need for his positive input in their lives. In these circumstances I
       find that his deportation is not needed for the  protection  of  the
       public against  further  crime,  but  I  note  that  this  does  not
       significantly diminish the public interest in  his  deportation  for
       the reasons set out above.

   24. I also find that the respondent is integrated into the UK, and  this
       is a positive factor in his favour. I find this because he was  born
       here and has lived here since he was nine years  old  and  completed
       the majority of his schooling in this country. He has a genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with  his  two  children,  who  are
       British citizens and therefore qualifying children and that it is in
       their best interests that he remains in their lives, albeit that his
       involvement has been limited in scope and at the current time he  is
       in the process of having to negotiate contact through mediation  and
       possibly  the  family  court.  He  also  has   very   close   family
       relationships with his mother and three year old step-sister. He has
       lived with his mum for the past 15 years since arriving  in  the  UK
       bar a period of months when he was  with  his  girlfriend  prior  to
       going to prison and of course  excluding  his  time  in  prison  and
       Immigration detention. Although  his  presence  is  not  needed  for
       assisting his mother with her medical issues, as her HIV  is  stable
       and controlled by medication and she is able to work,  I  find  that
       her serious medical condition makes his  presence  a  great  comfort
       given she is the single parent of a very young  child  whose  father
       plays no significant role in her life whatsoever. He cares  for  his
       three year old sister, C, alone for three hours every week day,  and
       is the only regular male figure in her life as her  father  has  not
       visited her for a year and a half  and  lives  with  his  family  in
       Nigeria.  Whilst the respondent's criminal behaviour will  have  led
       to a period when he would not have been seen as  integrated  I  find
       that this is in the past and he is now rehabilitated  and  living  a
       law abiding existence attending the gym and seeing friends  to  play
       sport, looking after his sister and when he can  his  own  children,
       and trying to make plans for the time when he is permitted  to  work
       again.

   25. The respondent has only spent two years living in Zambia between the
       ages of 2 and 5 years. He has no knowledge of that  country,  and  I
       accept his mother's evidence that when she returned there  to  visit
       her mother's grave even her mother's friends had passed away and she
       found no  connection  remained.  Her  evidence  on  this  point  was
       poignant as she clearly had not anticipated that she had  lost  this
       part of her heritage when she went back there. Her friend  who  lost
       her passport and money clearly was also in a  similar  position,  as
       she had to help her out rather than that friend turn to  friends  in
       Zambia for support. Her experience of Zambia is that it is a foreign
       country full of "alcoholics, street boys or thieves".  The  evidence
       before me is that the respondent's father came to Malawi,  and  that
       they would not assist with his integration in Zambia. I find that it
       is most unlikely that friends of friends will be persuaded to assist
       him integrate in that country. His mother could not send  him  money
       to help him: at present he contributes to the  household  income  by
       babysitting his younger sister while his mother works,  and  without
       him his mother will struggle even more to make ends meet for her and
       his sister. I find it most unlikely that his  UK  and  Russia  based
       uncles would be able to provide financial support on a  regular  and
       continuing basis given that they already helping their sister.

   26. Whilst the  respondent  speaks  the  official  language  he  has  no
       knowledge of any local languages and I find that he would stand  out
       as a foreigner, who would be a magnet for those  who  might  try  to
       exploit believing he had connection to westerners with money  rather
       than those who would help him to  establish  himself.  I  find  that
       whilst the appellant is young  and  healthy  he  has  no  worthwhile
       qualifications and few  works  skills  to  utilise  when  trying  to
       integrate himself in Zambia. He has done a small amount of work  for
       a music studio in the UK over a period of approximately a year  some
       years ago. In the BBC country profile, which Mr Melvin  provided  to
       the Upper Tribunal, it is noted that the population of  the  country
       is growing at one of fastest rates in the world and whilst there has
       been rapid economic growth and massive Chinese investment  this  has
       failed to improve the lives of most Zambians with two  thirds  still
       living in poverty. The CIA document, also  supplied  by  Mr  Melvin,
       updated in May 2019 notes that almost a quarter of those aged 15  to
       24 are  unemployed  in  Zambia  and  that  high  unemployment  is  a
       significant problem. In the CIA document, and  the  report  from  US
       State Department provided by the respondent, I could see no  mention
       of any music industry in Zambia, the economy being based largely  on
       copper production. I find that it is unlikely  that  the  respondent
       would be able to find work at all for a significant period of months
       during which time he would be destitute,  and  even  after  that  he
       would only be likely to find work  which  meant  that  he  lived  in
       significant poverty in Zambia.  I  find  that  he  would  have  very
       significant obstacles to integration in Zambia.

   27. My next question is whether the respondent has shown that there  are
       very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the  exceptions  to
       deportation, meaning something more than mere  hardship,  difficulty
       or inconvenience. I find that this test is reached for the following
       reasons. I have found that he is rehabilitated and integrated in the
       UK and would have  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  if
       returned to Zambia;  he has genuine parental relationships with  his
       own two British citizen children and it is in their  best  interests
       for him to continue these  relationships;   he  has  been  providing
       significant care for his three year old step-sister as the only male
       figure in her day to day life over the past year  and  has  a  close
       relationship with  his  mother  with  whom  he  has  lived  for  the
       overwhelming majority of his time in the UK and who  has  a  serious
       underlying medical condition; he was born in the UK  and  has  lived
       here for most of his life and had indefinite leave to remain when he
       was convicted of his index  offence  and  is  intending  to  live  a
       lawful, peaceful and constructive existence if permitted to  remain.




    Decision:

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  an  error  on  a
         point of law.

      2. The Panel set aside that decision.

      3. I remake the appeal allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.




    This decision is subject to an anonymity  direction.  That  is  in  the
    interests of protecting the identity of the respondent's  children  and
    the confidentiality of his mother's medical issues,  given  the  public
    availability of this Decision and the  future  Decision  upon  the  re-
    making, notwithstanding that there was no anonymity order in the First-
    tier Tribunal.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley

Dated: 11th June 2019


Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


  Introduction

    1. The respondent has just turned 24, having been born on 1 April  1995.
       He was born in the UK but is a citizen of Zambia. His mother held  no
       valid immigration status here when he was born, although she had been
       living here since 1989.

    2. For reasons that do not matter to  this  decision,  the  respondent's
       mother could not cope with the demands of looking after  him  in  his
       very early years. She arranged for him to move to Zambia in  1998  to
       live with her mother, his grandmother. He was able to live in  Zambia
       with his grandmother only until, in late May 2000, she sadly died  at
       the age of just 43. The claimant was only 5. He then lived  with  his
       father in South Africa until 2004, when (aged 9) he returned  to  the
       UK to live with his mother (as he has ever  since,  apart  from  time
       spent in prison  between  January  and  November  2017  and  then  in
       immigration detention until April 2018).

    3. When the respondent came back to the UK in 2004,  his  mother  was  a
       failed asylum  seeker.  However,  in  August  2008  she  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain, as was he, in  an  exceptional  grant  of
       leave outside the immigration rules.

    4. Between March  2009  and  November  2016,  the  respondent  committed
       various criminal offences, collecting 7 convictions for 15  offences,
       the most serious being convictions in November 2016 for possession of
       Class A drugs with intent to supply in January 2019 (when he was 20).
       He was sentenced in January 2017 to a total of 19 months,  comprising
       18 months for the November 2016 convictions themselves plus  1  month
       (consecutive) by way of partial activation of  a  suspended  sentence
       imposed in September 2015 for possession of a knife or bladed article
       in public.

    5. An initial deportation decision in May 2017, certified under s.94B of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') was
       reconsidered  following  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Kiarie  &
       Byndloss [2017] UKSC 42, so that in August 2017  the  respondent  was
       granted an in-country right of appeal. He  did  not  appeal,  but  in
       March 2018 further submissions were made to the  appellant  Secretary
       of State on the respondent's behalf. They have rightly  been  treated
       as an application to revoke  deportation  and  led  to  the  decision
       challenged in these proceedings, an  undated  decision  by  the  Home
       Office for the appellant, served on the respondent on 6 October 2018,
       refusing the respondent leave to remain on any basis and refusing  to
       revoke his deportation order.

    6. The respondent's appeal against that decision was allowed  by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson in a determination promulgated  on  17
       January 2019, and  the  appellant  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals
       against that decision, with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Parkes on 6 February 2019. Permission was granted on the  basis
       that it was arguable  the  First-tier  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
       concluding that there were obstacles in the  way  of  the  respondent
       relocating to Zambia amounting  to  'very  compelling  circumstances'
       such that deporting him would be disproportionate, thereby infringing
       his Article 8 rights.

    7. The matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

  Context - 'very compelling circumstances'

    8. When the respondent  was  sentenced  to  19  months  imprisonment  in
       January 2017, he became a 'foreign criminal' as defined by s.32(1) of
       the UK Borders Act 2007, so that:

        i. by s.32(4) his deportation is to be regarded as conducive to the
           public good for the purposes of s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
           1971, unless (so far as material to this case) his removal would
           infringe his Article 8 rights; and

       ii. by s.32(5) the appellant Secretary of State was bound to make  a
           deportation order in respect of him, unless (so far as  material
           to this case) the  appellant  thought  that  his  removal  would
           infringe his Article 8 rights.

    9. Part 13 of the Immigration Rules therefore provided the framework  by
       reference to which the respondent's case fell to be considered.  More
       particularly, in his case:-

        i. paragraph 398(b) applied, and therefore the Secretary  of  State
           was bound to consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applied and,
           if neither did, to assess the claim  that  Article  8  would  be
           infringed by deportation on the basis that "the public  interest
           in deportation will only be outweighed by  other  factors  where
           there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
           described in paragraphs 399 and 399A";

       ii. to similar effect, by paragraph 390A, the Secretary of State was
           bound to adopt the approach that if neither  of  paragraphs  399
           and 399A applied, "it will only be in exceptional  circumstances
           that the public interest in maintaining  the  deportation  order
           will be outweighed by other factors".

   10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly considered the  case  on  the
       basis that the respondent did not fall within either paragraph 399 or
       paragraph 399A. There is no challenge or basis for challenge to that.
       As  regards  paragraph  399(b),  the  respondent  had  no  subsisting
       relationship with a UK partner.  As  regards  paragraph  399(a),  the
       Judge concluded that the respondent did have a genuine and subsisting
       (if, as he held, somewhat limited) parental relationship with his two
       young children here, but  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
       children to remain in the  UK  without  the  respondent  if  he  were
       deported. As regards paragraph 399A,  the  respondent  had  not  been
       lawfully resident in the  UK  for  most  of  his  life,  because  his
       mother's immigration status only became regularised, and his with it,
       in 2008, by when the  respondent  was  13  years  old,  so  paragraph
       399A(a) was not satisfied.

   11. Had the respondent's mother obtained her, and his, leave to remain in
       2004 when he came back to the UK from South Africa, paragraph 399A(a)
       would have been satisfied. In that case, paragraph  399A  would  have
       given rise to  the  further  questions  whether  the  respondent  was
       "socially and culturally integrated in the  UK"  (paragraph  399A(b))
       and whether  there  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles  to  his
       integration  into  [Zambia]"  (paragraph  399A(c)).  As  it  is,  the
       respondent's social and cultural integration in the UK, likewise  any
       obstacle there may be to  his  becoming  integrated  in  Zambia,  are
       relevant, but they (and any other relevant factors present)  must  be
       assessed  in  accordance  with  paragraphs  390A  and  398   of   the
       Immigration Rules, summarised above.

   12. In the present case, the First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly directed
       himself that 'very compelling circumstances' were  required,  meaning
       there  was  "a  very  high  threshold"  that  required  there  to  be
       "circumstances which have a powerful,  irresistible,  and  convincing
       effect"; and that only "exceptionally" will that very high  threshold
       be met. The basis of the Secretary of  State's  appeal,  however,  is
       that the First-tier Judge's conclusion that the threshold was  indeed
       met is irrational, in light of the Judge's other findings.

  Submissions - Error of Law

   13. The Secretary of State thus contends that it was irrational  for  the
       First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  find  very  compelling  circumstances
       rendering  it  disproportionate  to  deport  the   respondent.   Very
       compelling circumstances  requires  more  than  mere  hardship,  mere
       difficulty, mere hurdles or mere inconvenience,  see  Treebhawon  and
       Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A -  compelling  circumstances  test)  [2017]
       UKUT 13. The respondent has an English education and  several  GCSEs,
       English is an official language in Zambia and there  are  no  medical
       issues that might prevent him  obtaining  employment  in  Zambia.  In
       short, it is said, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  rested  upon
       nothing more than the fact that the respondent has no  connection  to
       Zambia apart from his nationality, for an apparent  finding  that  he
       could not realistically establish a life for himself there  and  then
       for  the  ultimate  conclusion  that  there  were  'very   compelling
       circumstances'.

   14. Further, it is said for the  Secretary  of  State  that  insufficient
       weight was given to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  a  foreign
       criminal (as part of  which  it  is  contended  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal wrongly had regard to a view that the respondent's  sentence
       for the Class A drugs offences was not a long one).

   15. As a result, it is said, the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with
       Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and we should say that there were  no  very
       compelling circumstances justifying departure from  the  normal  rule
       that deportation is proportionate, given that the respondent did  not
       satisfy paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules.

   16. It was also said to have been irrational to find, as  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge did, that the respondent had a genuine and  subsisting
       relationship with his children, because improper  weight  was  placed
       upon a letter from their mother, although she did not  give  evidence
       at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, and inadequate weight was  placed
       upon information obtained from social services as to the  nature  and
       extent of the respondent's contact with the children. Mr  Melvin  who
       presented the case for the appellant before us realistically accepted
       that this was something of a side-issue or makeweight.  As  we  shall
       identify below, the relevant finding is in fact a careful, and rather
       limited, finding that demonstrates a fair and balanced evaluation  of
       the evidence bearing upon it.

   17. The respondent's skeleton argument was provided very late, but we did
       not prevent Mr Khan from advancing the submissions outlined in it. He
       emphasised the guidance in Hesham Ali, above, at [26],  derived  from
       Strasbourg jurisprudence,  as  to  the  range  of  factors  that  may
       legitimately be considered, when assessing either the weight  finally
       to be given, in judging an individual case, to the public interest in
       deporting  foreign  criminals  or  the  weight  to  be  afforded   to
       countervailing factors. He contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge gave a proper and balanced assessment to all  of  the  relevant
       factors present in this particular case, and he relied  on  the  fact
       that having properly directed himself as to the test  (see  paragraph
       12 above), the Judge said in terms that he had taken into account all
       of the factors he had considered, in combination.  It  could  not  be
       said that his  ultimate  conclusion,  namely  that  this  case  "just
       reaches the relevant  threshold  of  very  compelling  circumstances"
       (original emphasis) was a conclusion no reasonable judge could reach.

  Conclusions - Error of Law

   18. We do not accept the submission that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       failed to give proper weight to  the  public  interest  in  deporting
       foreign criminals. At [59], he reminded himself that it was a "strong
       public interest"; at [60] he set out  a  very  full  extract  of  the
       sentencing remarks; at [61]-[66] he considered such  evidence  as  he
       had concerning the respondent's conduct  in  custody  and  since  his
       release; it is evident that he regarded those as lessening  but  only
       marginally the weight of the public interest in deportation,  but  at
       [67] he  expressly  reminded  himself  that  it  remained  a  "strong
       interest" and a "very strong and material factor".

   19. Mr Melvin criticised reliance by  the  Judge  on  a  comment  by  the
       sentencing judge that the sentence imposed was  the  lowest  sentence
       that judge considered she could give in the circumstances.  We  agree
       the Judge should not  have  placed  any  material  weight  upon  that
       comment - any custodial sentence must  be  for  the  shortest  period
       commensurate with the seriousness of the offending,  as  assessed  by
       the sentencing judge. But we do not  read  the  First-tier  Judge  as
       doing more than noting, correctly, that the  particular  sentence  in
       this case, considered with the sentencing remarks, said something  as
       to the seriousness of the respondent's particular offending,  in  the
       scale of seriousness of Class A drugs offences.

   20. The real question,  therefore,  is  whether  the  First-tier  Judge's
       conclusion that there were countervailing factors that so  outweighed
       the strong public interest in deporting the respondent as  a  foreign
       criminal as to provide a 'very compelling' case. As to that, we agree
       with  Mr  Khan,  in  general,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       carefully considered the factors that had been suggested  to  him  as
       bearing upon that issue, and that in doing so he  made  rational  and
       balanced  assessments  of  the  evidence  available   to   him.   The
       difficulty, however,  is  that,  likewise  in  general,  the  Judge's
       respective conclusions as to those factors do not  point,  let  alone
       compellingly so, to a  finding  that,  exceptionally  in  this  case,
       deportation would be disproportionate.  Thus:-

        i. At [35]-[46], the  Judge  considered  the  evidence  as  to  the
           respondent's  parental  relationship  with  his  children.   The
           careful, and rather limited, finding  (as  we  described  it  in
           paragraph 16 above) was that the  respondent  had  some  contact
           with his children, and wished as a  loving  father  to  continue
           that involvement, that the best interests of the children  would
           be to have him in their lives and that, overall, the  respondent
           had "a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his two
           children, albeit that it is somewhat limited  in  scope  at  the
           present time".

       ii. At [47]-[53], the Judge looked at the matter from the children's
           perspective and reached  an  unassailable  conclusion  that  "it
           would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the  UK,
           were the [respondent] to be deported to Zambia".

      iii. At [58], the Judge found that the evidence did not show that the
           respondent had an established family life with  his  mother  and
           young stepsister.

       iv. At [69], the Judge rejected on the evidence  a  claim  that  had
           been advanced  by  the  respondent  that  his  presence  in  his
           mother's household was required because of her medical issues.

        v. At [70]-[71], the  Judge  accepted  on  the  evidence  that  the
           respondent had been a persistent offender,  found  that  he  had
           never been financially independent, and as a result "[his] level
           of integration into UK society to date has been limited, bearing
           in mind his offending history, which can only  be  described  as
           materially antisocial".

   21. Against that  backdrop  -  a  rather  unpromising  backdrop  for  the
       respondent - the critical reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,
       therefore, is at [72], which we should quote in full:

        i. "It is acknowledged by the [appellant] that the [respondent] has
           spent a considerable amount of his time  away  from  Zambia.  In
           fact, I would put it higher than this. The [respondent] was born
           in the UK in 1995, went to live  in  Zambia  with  his  maternal
           grandmother in 1998, when he was about 3 years old. He then left
           Zambia in 2000, when he was  about  5  years  old.  He  has  not
           returned to Zambia since then and has only spent  2  of  his  23
           years of life to date in his country of nationality, Zambia. The
           [appellant's] position is that his removal to Zambia may present
           certain challenges to him and that his  standard  of  living  in
           Zambia is likely to be less than it is in the UK but that it  is
           possible for the [respondent] to establish a  life  for  himself
           there. Such contention is clearly relevant to  the  question  of
           "very    significant    obstacles"    and    "very    compelling
           circumstances". I  find  that  the  [respondent's]  ability,  or
           otherwise, to establish a life for  himself  in  Zambia  is,  in
           fact, the central issue in that regard. I state this, bearing in
           mind that I have already indicated that I conclude that it would
           not be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's children to remain
           in the UK without him." (our emphasis)

   22. Thus, as the Judge reasoned, his preceding  findings  (summarised  in
       paragraph  20  above)  rendered  it  critical  to  say  whether   the
       respondent could establish a life for himself in Zambia.  If  so,  on
       the Judge's reasoning, there was no 'very compelling' case.  If  not,
       then on the Judge's reasoning, it became at least possible  for  that
       threshold to be crossed, although whether  in  fact  it  was  crossed
       would require a final balancing evaluation of the nature and severity
       of the obstacles held to exist to the making of a new life in Zambia.

   23. That reasoning, however, does not itself contain any finding  at  all
       on what the Judge has thus described as the "central issue". Nor,  as
       Mr Melvin emphasised in his oral argument,  does  the  Judge  grapple
       with that issue in any  detail.  When  finally  stating  his  overall
       conclusion, at [75], the Judge repeats that "the  key  question  [is]
       whether the [respondent]  can  realistically  establish  a  life  for
       himself in Zambia", adding "to which  country  he  is  in  reality  a
       stranger and where, I find, he has  nobody  at  all  to  turn  to.  I
       reiterate that it is a country where he has only ever spent  2  years
       and that that was between the ages of about 3 and 5." This  must,  we
       think,  be  intended  by  the  Judge  to  express  a  finding   that,
       realistically, the respondent cannot establish a life for himself  in
       Zambia. But in our judgment it displays  no  proper  basis  for  that
       finding. Rather, it appears to treat it as a necessary consequence of
       the fact that the respondent is a stranger to Zambia,  and  so  would
       start out upon any new life as a stranger there. Whether in fact that
       renders it unrealistic to say that  the  respondent  could  establish
       himself in Zambia and whether, if so, that makes  a  very  compelling
       case against deportation sufficient to  outweigh  the  strong  public
       interest engaged by the respondent's offending  here,  are  questions
       that arise upon, not questions that are answered by, the basic  facts
       of the respondent's life story cited by the Judge.

   24. We therefore concluded that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is
       wrong in law.  It must be set aside, in material part, and re-made in
       the Upper Tribunal.

   25. In circumstances where, in truth, the key factual  consideration  (as
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge saw it, anyway) has not been  addressed
       in proper detail at all, and it became apparent  that  at  least  the
       appellant, and it may well be also the respondent, may wish to adduce
       additional evidence on the respondent's  ability  (or  inability)  to
       make a new life in Zambia, we  further  concluded  that  it  was  not
       realistic or fair to seek to re-make the decision at this hearing.

  Decision:

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  on  the
       basis that  there  were  'very  compelling  circumstances'  rendering
       deportation disproportionate  so  as  to  infringe  the  respondent's
       Article 8 rights involved an error on a point of law.

   27. We therefore set aside that decision. To be  clear,  we  do  not  set
       aside, but affirm, the conclusion that the respondent's case does not
       fall within paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration  Rules  and,  in
       particular, we do not set aside, but  affirm,  the  conclusions  that
       each  of  paragraph  399(a)(i)(b),  paragraph  399(b)  and  paragraph
       399A(a) does not apply.

   28. We adjourn the re-making of the decision on the respondent's original
       appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against the October  2018  decision
       letter, with the following directions, namely that:

        a. The adjourned hearing shall be listed, time  estimate  2  hours,
           for the first available date not before 7 May 2019.

        b. The appellant and respondent shall file and serve  any  updating
           or other supplementary evidence upon which  they  wish  to  rely
           (which in the case of the appellant shall include a copy of  the
           US State Department country report on Zambia) no later  than  10
           days prior to the re-listed hearing date.

   29. Of our own motion, we have  anonymised  this  Decision  and  made  an
       anonymity direction in relation to these proceedings. That is in  the
       interests of protecting the identity of the respondent's children and
       the confidentiality of his mother's medical issues, given the  public
       availability of this Decision and the future Decision  upon  the  re-
       making, notwithstanding that there was  no  anonymity  order  in  the
       First-tier  Tribunal.  If  either  party  wishes  anonymity   to   be
       reconsidered, that can be raised at the adjourned hearing.


Signed:     Andrew Baker     Date:  9 April 2019
             The Hon. Mr Justice Andrew Baker

