
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/21358/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th March 2018                          |On 4th April 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                            leslie ann archibald
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - sheffield
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of the United States of America  born
    on 16th September 1982.   She applied for entry clearance to the UK  as
    the partner of a British citizen namely  the  Sponsor  David  Archibald
    under the provisions of Appendix FM of HC 395.   That  application  was
    refused on the 10th August 2016 for the reasons given in  a  Notice  of
    Refusal of that date.   The  Appellant  appealed  and  her  appeal  was
    decided without a hearing by First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  (the
    Judge).  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in  his
    Decision dated 20th March 2017.  The Appellant sought leave  to  appeal
    that decision and on 22nd January 2018 such permission was granted.



Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    Appellant.  No explanation was given for the absence of the Sponsor  or
    anyone else representing the  Appellant.   I  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had been notified of the time, place and date of the hearing,
    and I considered  it  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  proceed.   I
    therefore  heard  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant  in
    accordance with the provisions of Rule 38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4.  The  Sponsor  had  produced  voluminous  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for leave to appeal.  Permission to appeal was  granted  on
    the narrow issue that the Judge had failed  to  consider  properly  the
    savings available to the Appellant and the Sponsor.  I found  that  the
    Judge carried out a careful and thorough analysis  of  the  Appellant's
    financial circumstances in the course of concluding that  the  decision
    of the Respondent did not amount to a disproportionate  breach  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights at paragraphs 24 to 38  inclusive  of
    the Decision.  This  included  a  full  consideration  of  the  savings
    available to the Appellant and the Sponsor derived from gifts from  the
    Sponsor's grandmother.  I note that in the grant of leave to  appeal  a
    Direction was made relating to those savings with which  the  Appellant
    has failed to comply.  I am satisfied that the Judge took into  account
    all of the relevant evidence before him and that there this no material
    error of law.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.



Signed                              Date 3rd April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
