
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/21919/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On April 11, 2018                         | On April 16, 2018               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Prosper [c]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chikowore, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The respondent in these proceedings was the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  From hereon I have referred to the parties as they were
    in the First-tier Tribunal so  that,  for  example,  reference  to  the
    respondent is a reference to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

 3. The appellant is a Zimbabwean national. The appellant applied for entry
    clearance as a visitor to enable him to come  and  see  his  uncle  who
    lived in the  United  Kingdom.  His  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on July 29, 2016. His appeal came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Gillespie (hereinafter called "the Judge") on August  23,
    2017 and in a decision promulgated on September 4, 2017 the Judge found
    that the appellant had satisfied the Immigration  Rules  and  therefore
    allowed the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 4. The respondent appealed that decision  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson on January
    12, 2018 on the basis it was arguable the Judge had failed  to  address
    the issue of family life and dependency when allowing the appeal  under
    article 8 ECHR.

 5. The matter came before me on the  above-date.  I  pointed  out  to  the
    parties the recent  decisions  of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Abbas [2017] EWCA Civ 1393 and Secretary of State for the
    Home Department v Onuorah [2017] EWCA Civ 1757 in which the  Court  of
    Appeal unanimously held that short visits  to  the  UK  do  not  engage
    either family life or  private  life  within  the  meaning  of article
    8 ECHR. Mr Deller also brought to my attention the  case  of  Baihinga
    (r.22; human rights appeal: requirements) [2018] UKUT 90 (IAC).

 6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Deller invited me to deal with a matter
    that had not been raised in the grounds of appeal but  was  a  Robinson
    obvious issue.

 7. This had been an application for a visit visa and the  entry  clearance
    officer had rejected the application. The appellant had  appealed  that
    decision and the matter was then referred to a Duty Judge on  September
    23, 2016. This Judge was asked to consider whether there  was  a  valid
    appeal because an appeal  against  a  refusal  of  an  entry  clearance
    application would only generate a right of appeal if human  rights  had
    been raised at the outset. The Judge considered  the  application  form
    and directed that this issue should be argued before a Judge at a  full
    hearing.

 8. When the matter came before the Judge on August 23, 2017 the issue  was
    not considered. It was therefore a Robinson obvious issue and in  those
    circumstances I allowed Mr Deller to address me not only on the pleaded
    grounds but also the new ground.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Deller submitted that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear
    this  appeal  because  human  rights  had  not  been  raised   in   the
    application. Whilst he acknowledged the application form made reference
    to the appellant visiting his uncle who  suffered  from  mental  health
    illness he argued that this did not say article 8 was to be argued. The
    appellant stated he wished to come here to see his uncle  and  to  view
    the sights. Mr Deller pointed to the recent decision of Baihinga  which
    allows a challenge to a right of appeal at any stage. He submitted that
    on the totality of the information supplied  there  was  nothing  which
    drew the caseworker's attention  to  a  consideration  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Nowhere in  the  refusal  letter  was  human  rights
    mentioned. He submitted that the Tribunal  should  dismiss  the  appeal
    under  Rule  22  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

10. Mr Deller's second submission concerned the Judge's finding that  there
    was family life. The evidence produced  to  the  Tribunal  demonstrated
    that the appellant kept in touch with his uncle by way of social  media
    but there had been no direct contact between them since 2011. They were
    both adults and there was no evidence of any  additional  support  from
    the appellant which would engage article 8. Even if article 8 had  been
    engaged he submitted  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance
    maintained the status quo that had been  in  existence  for  over  five
    years. He submitted that the Judge had erred  by  allowing  the  appeal
    primarily on the basis that he was satisfied the Immigration Rules  had
    been met.

11. The sponsor responded to both submissions and submitted that at Q80  of
    the application form the appellant had raised article 8 and there was a
    valid appeal. If the Tribunal accepted that there was a valid appeal he
    submitted that the Judge had not made an error because  the  Judge  had
    taken into account the fact the uncle  could  not  travel  due  to  his
    mental health condition and that there was a relationship  between  the
    appellant and his uncle. He also argued that the Tribunal was  entitled
    to take into account the family life between the appellant and himself.
    He urged me not to reverse the decision.

    FINDINGS

12. This was an entry clearance application and  as  I  indicated  in  open
    court the application form does not specifically ask a  person  whether
    they are making a human  rights  application.  Case  law  and  guidance
    suggests that the entry clearance officer has to look at the  substance
    of the form and decide whether this is a human right  application  even
    if those words are not used.

13. The file was highlighted at Arnhem house which is the  clearing  office
    for all applications. An issue over validity was marked on the file and
    when Duty Judge Jones looked at the file he took the  view  that  there
    was an arguable article 8 claim based on the application  form  but  it
    was something which should be argued at court. In other words,  he  did
    not make a finding there was a  valid  appeal  but  left  that  to  the
    Tribunal to decide. Unfortunately, the issue  was  not  raised  at  the
    hearing or considered by the Judge in his determination.

14. I have considered the application form. There was  no  covering  letter
    with the application form and it therefore follows that unless the form
    highlights a human rights claim this appeal should be  dismissed  under
    Rule 22.

15. At Q74 the appellant stated that his parents were paying for  his  trip
    and that he would use his summer holiday to visit his  sick  uncle.  At
    Q76 he stated that his intention was to visit his  sick  uncle  and  to
    "sightsee". At Q80 he stated that he wanted to visit his uncle and  see
    him as part of therapy to his mental health sickness. He went on to add
    that his uncle wanted him to come and see him and that this would  help
    him recover.

16. It is a fine line as to what amounts to a human rights claim. There  is
    nothing specifically in the appellant's  answers  above  that  suggests
    this was a human rights application. The application was  for  a  short
    visit and there was nothing in the application form that explained  how
    the appellant and his uncle enjoyed family life or why a refusal  would
    breach his human rights. It is this latter point that is significant in
    this case. There are many family visits  which  start  with  a  similar
    application form and whilst I accept there  was  subsequently  evidence
    before the Tribunal to show contact between the appellant and his uncle
    I am drawn to the inevitable conclusion that the application  form  was
    simply an  entry  clearance  application  as  against  a  human  rights
    application. I therefore find the Judge materially erred by finding  he
    had jurisdiction to hear this appeal. The Tribunal had no  jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal.

17. I indicated to the  parties  that  I  would  consider  the  substantive
    grounds of appeal for which permission had been  given.  The  Court  of
    Appeal has given clear guidance on how human rights appeals arising out
    of entry  clearance  applications  should  be  handled.  Following  the
    decision of Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Abbas [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1393 it seems there are virtually  no  circumstances  where  a
    private life claim will ever succeed. The appeal before the  Judge  did
    not involve private life.

18. It is clear from the findings of fact made that the  Judge  formed  the
    view that the appellant's entry clearance application should have  been
    allowed. The Judge said as much at the beginning of paragraph 10 of his
    decision. The Judge correctly noted that the only ground of appeal  was
    if the appellant could demonstrate a breach of human rights as distinct
    from whether the appellant met the requirement of the Rules.

19. Unfortunately, the Judge does not consider or explain how article  8(1)
    is engaged. The appellant and his uncle had not seen each  other  since
    2011 and whilst they maintained contact through social media and  email
    that had been the extent of their contact. This may well have  been  in
    part due to the fact  the  uncle  had  mental  health  issues  but  the
    documents did not demonstrate  any  dependency  beyond  mere  emotional
    support.

20. In his decision the Judge failed to engage with  this  issue  and  only
    considered  the  public  interest  factors  and  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Those  factors  are  only
    relevant when considering the proportionality of  the  decision.  There
    are a number of steps that must  be  met  before  that  proportionality
    assessment is undertaken.

21. The Judge identified the case as an exceptional case but as  the  Court
    of  Appeal  in  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home   Department   v
    Onuorah [2017] EWCA Civ 1757 made clear  at  paragraph  35,  "...  the
    question whether there is "family life" for the purpose of Article 8 is
    a logically prior question and cannot depend on the purpose  for  which
    an application for entry clearance is made. Secondly, the shortness  of
    the proposed visit is, if anything, an indication that the  refusal  of
    leave to enter did not involve any want of respect for the Respondent's
    family life for the purpose of Article 8."

22. The Court of Appeal in Entry Clearance Officer and  Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA
    1511 made clear at paragraph 30 "...  the  shortness  of  the  proposed
    visit in the present case is a yet further indication that the  refusal
    of leave to enter did not involve any  want  of  respect  for  anyone's
    family life for the purposes of Article 8. A three-week visit would not
    involve a significant contribution to "family life"  in  the  sense  in
    which that term is used in Article 8. Of course, it would often be nice
    for family members to meet up and visit in this way. But a short  visit
    of this kind will not establish  a  relationship  between  any  of  the
    individuals concerned of support going beyond  normal  emotional  ties,
    even if there were a positive obligation under Article 8  (which  there
    is not) to allow a person to enter the UK to try to develop  a  "family
    life" which does not currently exist."

23. In other words, the Judge erred by failing to engage with whether there
    was an article 8(1) right and effectively considered the case simply on
    proportionality grounds. The Court of Appeal has made clear that family
    life does not depend on the purpose of the visit. The appellant  failed
    to demonstrate family life existed for the purposes of article 8(1) and
    a visit of this nature would not allow the appellant to develop  family
    life. In these circumstances the Judge erred in allowing the appeal.

24. It therefore follows that even if this had been a valid appeal I  would
    have found there was a material error and based on  the  evidence  that
    was presented to the Judge I am satisfied the only outcome  would  have
    been a dismissal of the appeal.

25. I should add the fact the Judge accepted the Rules were met may  assist
    the appellant in any future application.

    DECISION

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

27. I dismiss the appeal for want of jurisdiction  under  Rule  22  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 and direct that no further action be taken on  this
    appeal.


Signed                              Date     22/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     22/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
