

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/21215/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 December 2018                      |  On 14 January 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                          ms Iyabo Stella Olatunji
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M West, Counsel instructed by Supreme Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria  born  on  13  August  1978  who
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 25 August 2016 to refuse her application for leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on
    27  September  2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Swinnerton
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The background to the appellant's case  is  that  she  claims  to  have
    entered the UK on 25 January 1995 as a visitor  although  there  is  no
    trace of the appellant ever having been issued a visitor visa.   On  11
    May 2016 she applied for leave on the basis of her private  life.   The
    respondent was not satisfied that there were very significant obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into Nigeria if  she  were  required  to
    leave  the  UK  and  it  was  not  accepted  that  there  was  anything
    exceptional about her circumstances  that  might  warrant  a  grant  of
    leave.

 3. The appellant appeals on the following grounds:

      1) failure to assess proportionality outside of the Immigration Rules;

      2) failure to give reasons for finding that there were  no  compelling
         circumstances in the appellant's case;

      3) failure to consider the objective evidence set out at pages  31  to
         48 of the appellant's bundle.  This included evidence  relating  to
         the position of women in Nigeria.

Discussion

 4. Mr West submitted that there was error in the judge's reliance  on  the
    now superseded case of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 287 and  his  failure
    to consider Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules (as  highlighted
    in the Supreme Court  in  the  cases  of  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  UKSC  10  at  [58].
    Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of state for the Home  Department  [2016]
    UKSC 60 SC and R (Agyarko); R (Ikuga) [2017] UKSC 11 confirmed that the
    question to be determined is whether a fair  balance  has  been  struck
    using the structured approach to proportionality.

 5. However, Mr West was unable to identify what  the  materiality  of  any
    such error was.  Although he pointed to the appellant's  work  and  the
    prospects of her obtaining work in Nigeria as a single woman the  judge
    took into consideration all the factors and noted, at  [18],  that  the
    documentation provided by the appellant consisted of  a  bundle  of  50
    pages including amongst other things a number of letters of support for
    the appellant (and he specifically detailed  some  of  that  evidence).
    The judge noted that the appellant  had  made  available  the  original
    documentation that  had  been  provided  to  the  respondent  with  the
    application and noted that there was  a  letter  in  support  from  the
    Nigerian Islamic community in Essex.

 6. There was no challenge to the judge's finding at [19] that there was no
    trace of the appellant having entered the UK legally and that  she  had
    been in the UK illegally throughout her time and that  she  had  worked
    without having the right to do so and that her immigration  status  has
    always been precarious.  Although, therefore, there may not  have  been
    any specific mention when the judge gave his  ultimate  conclusions  at
    [22] in relation to private life matters, of the Section  117B  factors
    for example, it is clear that the judge had these in mind including  in
    reaching the conclusions he did at [19].

 7. Mr West was also unable to identify how a failure to specifically  cite
    or even consider Section 117B, if that is in fact what the  judge  did,
    could be a material error given that the factors considered there could
    at best only be neutral factors for  the  appellant  and  as  Mr  Avery
    pointed out the judge would have been bound to find that little  weight
    should be attached to the appellant's private life.   Although  I  take
    into account what was said in Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part  5A
    - compelling circumstances test: Mauritius) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC),  that
    a private life might conceivably  qualify  to  be  accorded  more  than
    little  weight,  reading  the  findings  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    holistically, the judge  in  this  case  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had demonstrated that hers was such a case.

 8. The judge found, at [20], that the appellant was more  than  likely  to
    have lived in the UK since 2004  and  not  in  1995  as  the  appellant
    claims, for the adequate reasons given and there  was  no  specific  or
    sustainable challenge to those findings.  The judge  also  went  on  to
    find that there was no credible evidence that the  appellant  had  been
    trafficked and the judge found this  claim  to  be  "little  more  than
    fanciful".

 9. At [22] the judge considered the appellant's ties to Nigeria  including
    that she was a member of the Nigerian Islamic community in the  UK  and
    although Mr West  submitted  that  the  evidence  in  support  was  not
    adequately considered the judge considered that the letters in  support
    of her appeal came from other members of the Nigerian community  so  it
    was clear that the judge had these in mind.  The judge notes  that  the
    appellant acknowledged she had other family members in Nigeria although
    she stated she did not contact them and was not in touch with them.

10. The judge was entitled to find as he did that the appellant  had  spent
    the majority of her  life  in  Nigeria  and  spoke  a  native  Nigerian
    language, Yoruba, as well as English.  The judge also took into account
    that she was not a partner and had no children.   The  judge  had  also
    noted that the appellant had fertility issues.  Although the judge  did
    not specifically reference the background material which was before him
    in respect of discrimination that a single woman might face in  Nigeria
    that is not a material error.  I have reminded myself what was said  in
    MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 that adequacy means no more nor
    less than that. It is not a counsel of perfection. Still less should it
    provide an opportunity to undertake a  qualitative  assessment  of  the
    reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising,  on  their
    merits. The purpose of the duty to give reasons, is in part, to  enable
    the losing party to know why he has lost.

11. I was  not  pointed  to  anything  that  might  have  made  a  material
    difference to the judge's ultimate conclusion that  there  was  nothing
    that would amount to very significant difficulties for the appellant in
    reintegrating into Nigeria and that in doing so she could  be  assisted
    with the large amount of support and friends that she  has  within  the
    Nigerian community in the UK.

12. The judge's reasoning at [22] is described by Mr West as  brief.   That
    is perhaps unfair.  Even if it were not, brevity is  not  an  error  of
    law.   The  judge  addresses  all  the  material  issues  and   reaches
    sustainable findings.  Although Mr  West  made  a  valiant  attempt  to
    persuade me otherwise he was unable to point  to  anything  substantive
    that might have led any other judge to reach a different conclusion.

13. No material error of law is disclosed.  The decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not disclose an error of  law  and  is  maintained.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.




    No anonymity direction was sought and none is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
