

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
hu/21408/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 February 2018                   |           On 16 April 2018          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Akinbolu, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
         Judge C M Phillips promulgated  on  1  June  2017.  Judge  Phillips
         allowed an appeal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
         refusing the appellant  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.  The
         appeal on these grounds was dismissed but  Judge  Phillips  allowed
         the appeal under  article  3  ECHR  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules. In this decision I will refer to the  respondent
         as the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant was born in  Kurdistan,  Iraq  on  1  July  1965.  He
         arrived in the United Kingdom  on  23  February  2000  and  claimed
         asylum on arrival. That was refused (see below) but he has remained
         in this country since then. He suffers from  serious  physical  and
         mental health problems. In brief these are that he is HIV  positive
         and has insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. He has severe PTSD,  a
         major depressive disorder with psychotic features and is suicidal.

    History

      3. There is a long and significant history and it is right that I  set
         it out in some detail. What follows is an abridged version  of  the
         chronology in the appellant's bundle.

         27 February 2004 - claim refused

         5 March 2004 - appeal lodged

         11 June 2004 - appeal allowed under article 3 ECHR

         4 November 2005

         3 May 2005 application for further LTR (it  expired  the  following
         day).

         5 October 2007 - conviction (see below)

         20 February 2008 - sentenced to 2 years 6 months imprisonment

         19 March 2008 - Liability to Deportation notice

         11 April 2008 - appellant makes representations against deportation

         26 March 2010- granted LTR for a reason outside IR 395

         10 June 2011 - LTR expires

         15 November 2011 - application for further LTR

         6 July 2016 - application refused

         7 November 2016 - appeal lodged

         28 April 2017 - appeal heard by Judge C M Phillips in FtT

      4. On 5 October 2007 the appellant was convicted  at  Southwark  Crown
         Court of six counts of being knowingly  concerned  in  fraudulently
         dealing in dutiable goods. On 20 February 2008 he was sentenced  to
         2 years 6 months imprisonment.

      5. In 2008 following  the  service  of  the  notice  of  Liability  to
         Deportation  the  appellant  made  an  application   for   assisted
         voluntary removal. That was approved  but  shortly  thereafter  the
         appellant withdrew the application.

      6. As will be seen there is a long delay between the  application  for
         further LTR made in November 2011 and  its  subsequent  refusal  in
         July  2016.  Shortly  after  the  application  was   made   further
         representations were made on the appellant's behalf. Thereafter the
         solicitors for the appellant chronicle six  requests  for  progress
         made during 2012 and  2013.  On  26  March  2013  the  Home  Office
         acknowledged receipt of the application but were unable to  give  a
         time frame. After further correspondence,  including  a  pre-action
         protocol a Judicial Review was lodged on 28 April 2016  challenging
         the delay. That was subsequently settled by consent.

    First- tier Tribunal Hearing

      7. In preparation for the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the
         appellant  lodged  a  voluminous   bundle   of   medical   records,
         correspondence and reports. I note that  six  of  the  reports  are
         dated within a year of the date of the hearing (though two are from
         the general practitioner).  I will return to this but it should  be
         noted that one of these reports expresses the opinion  that  should
         the appellant be returned to Iraq the writer feels certain that the
         appellant would end his life before deportation.

      8. All of the reports were before the Home Office prior to the hearing
         on 28 April 2017. In light of the history  of  this  case  and  the
         difficult medical issues that the appellant  has  sought  to  place
         before the Secretary of State it is  surprising  and  disappointing
         that the Secretary of State chose not  to  be  represented  at  the
         First-tier Tribunal. Judge Phillips records correspondence that the
         appellant's solicitors had with the  Home  Office  in  January  and
         February 2017 including further representations raised  by  section
         120 notice. It appears that there was no response.

    Judge Phillips' decision

      9. In allowing the  appeal  Judge  Phillips  relied  on  the  case  of
         Paposhvili v Belgium Application 41738/10,  13  December  2016.  At
         paragraph 56 he notes that with the decision  in  Paposhvili  there
         has been a change in the legal landscape post N  v  United  Kingdon
         {GC} no 26565/05. At paragraph 66 Judge Phillips says that applying
         the findings in Paposhvili to the facts in  this  appeal  he  finds
         that the appellant has adduced  sufficient,  satisfactory  evidence
         capable of demonstrating that there  are  substantial  grounds  for
         believing that if the appellant were deemed liable  to  be  removed
         and steps taken to implement his removal he would be exposed  to  a
         real risk of being subjected to treatment  contrary  to  article  3
         ECHR. Because the appellant has discharged the evidential burden on
         him he found it was for the UK authorities  to  dispel  any  doubts
         raised by the evidence. He then noted the long  delay  in  deciding
         the appellant's  application,  their  failure  to  respond  to  the
         section 120 notice or the additional grounds of  appeal  and  their
         failure to provide representation  at  the  hearing.  He  considers
         paragraphs 183 and 205  of  Paposhvili.  At  paragraph  70  of  his
         decision Judge Phillips concludes that from the principles set  out
         in Paposhvili "a finding that the appellant can return, without the
         relevant   factors   being   properly   assessed    and    answered
         satisfactorily, violates article 3".

     10. Judge Phillips then goes on to consider  in paragraphs  72  and  73
         the appeal in terms of  article  8  in  accordance  with  paragraph
         276ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules. He considers the issue to  be
         whether or  not  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration on his return. He considers the  medical  evidence  and
         expert reports along with the appellant's long absence  from  Iraq.
         He considers that on the balance of probabilities the test is  met.
         On his return he will be a vulnerable stranger. He is highly likely
         to be discriminated against as  an  HIV  positive  'foreigner'  and
         highly likely to be ostracised.

    Grounds of Appeal

     11. The Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  submit  that  Judge
         Phillips materially erred in  law  by  failing  to  follow  binding
         precedent; N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31; GS (India) and  others  v  SSHD
         [2015 EWCA Civ 40; and KH Afghanistan  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1354.  He
         further erred in allowing the appeal under paragraph 276ADE(vi)  in
         failing to apply the significantly high threshold;  Treebhawon  and
         others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A -  compelling  circumstances  test)  2017
         UKUT 00013 (IAC), at head note (iii). The first-tier  Tribunal  had
         not provided circumstances above those relied upon for  article  3.
         When taking into account the findings in GS (India)  the  appellant
         should not succeed on article 8  grounds  due  to  a  disparity  in
         health care. The Judge had not taken into account remittances  from
         abroad or family links  in  considering  whether  there  were  very
         significant obstacles to integration.

     12. In a brief submission Mr Clarke said  that  in  the  light  of  the
         decision in the Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64
         it was  clear  that  Judge  Phillips  was  in  error  in  following
         Paposhvili. However he submitted the cases cited in the grounds  of
         appeal were not really in point given  that  the  most  significant
         feature of the medical history was the suicide risk. The cases that
         were in point were J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y  and  Z  (Sri
         Lanka) v SSHD) [2009] EWCA Civ 362.

    Error of law

     13. Judge Phillips followed Paposhvili in reaching  his  determination.
         It is a careful judgement in which he analyses the medical evidence
         in some detail. Unfortunately in the light of EA & others  (Article
         3 medical cases - Paposhvili not  applicable;  Afghanistan)  [2017]
         UKUT 445 IAC and AM (Zimbabwe) the legal basis of the  decision  on
         article 3 grounds is wrong in law.

     14. Mr Clarke submitted that the case should be either remitted to  the
         FtT to be reheard, or a date set for a further hearing in  the  UT.
         That option is deeply unattractive. I  have  already  outlined  the
         long delay that this case has suffered. Moreover the  Secretary  of
         State has failed to engage with the medical evidence either at  the
         FtT or in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I considered
         that before I remitted the case I should be clear as to whether the
         error is material, or whether, applying  the  correct  law  to  the
         facts found by Judge Phillips the  decision  would  have  been  the
         same.

    Judge Phillips' findings

     15. Judge Phillips findings in fact are set out in paragraphs 34 to 71.
         I do not intend to set then narrate them in full but  it  important
         to set out the salient facts as found by the FtT Judge.

     16. The starting point is the determination of 11  June  2004  in  line
         with Devaseelan [200] UKIAT  000702.  The  Immigration  Adjudicator
         accepted that the appellant had been a victim of torture  in  Iraq,
         albeit before the  fall  of  the  regime  of  Saddam  Hussein.  The
         appellant had fled Iraq via Iran and Turkey before arriving in  the
         UK. He had been under the care of  a  consultant  psychiatrist,  Dr
         Amin since February 2001. A report from him before the  Adjudicator
         disclosed that he was severely depressed with symptoms of PTSD. His
         medical opinion was that because of his  underlying  mental  health
         problems as well as his  diabetes  the  appellant's  condition  was
         likely to deteriorate if he was returned  to  Iraq.  The  appellant
         would try to harm himself or  commit  suicide.  He  already  had  a
         history of self-harm and attempted suicide. The appellant  required
         medication and specialist psychotherapy. He was not  at  that  time
         well enough to give evidence on his  own  behalf.  The  Adjudicator
         found that there would be insufficient facilities available for him
         at that time in Iraq and that returning him then would infringe his
         article 3 rights. The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  appeal  that
         decision; the appellant was granted DLR.

     17. Since then the appellant, in addition to his  diabetes  and  mental
         health issues, had been diagnosed HIV positive  and  was  receiving
         treatment in this country for that.  The  appellant  relied  on  an
         expert report from Ms Pargeter. She set out the history of HIV/AIDS
         in Iraq. Both the Iraqi and  Kurdish  governments  provide  monthly
         salaries for people  living  with  HIV  and  the  Iraqi  government
         provides certain medical services and housing support.  However  Ms
         Pargeter was not able to confirm  that  the  stated  policies  were
         being implemented. In November 2016 there was a lack  of  medicines
         prompted by the economic crisis. Many Iraqis still believe that HIV
         carriers are dogs with rabies who should be excluded from  society.
         There is a high incidence of stigmatisation  and  openly  practiced
         discrimination against those with AIDS. A positive test result  was
         not a private matter. Patients would be outed by doctors and police
         would inform neighbours. HIV sufferers experienced  social  stigma,
         harassment, threats and in some cases death.

     18. Ms Pargeter's  conclusions,  in  the  absence  of  challenge,  were
         accepted by Judge Phillips (paragraph 45). In summary the appellant
         would face a plethora of challenges on return to Iraq. Although  he
         would be highly unlikely to face persecution at the hands of either
         the Kurdish or federal authorities it would be very  unlikely  that
         he would be able to find work. He would be highly  unlikely  to  be
         able to access proper health care and treatment  for  his  symptoms
         including HIV and his  mental  health  problems.  Both  his  mental
         health and HIV status could well result in  him  being  ostracised,
         with the latter also making him vulnerable  to  harassment,  severe
         stigma and threats.

     19. There was also a report  from  Dr  Nicola  Mackie  from  St  Mary's
         Hospital dated 26 January 2017. It confirmed the diagnoses  of  HIV
         positive, insulin dependent  diabetes  mellitus,  hypertension  and
         post-traumatic  stress  disorder.  Further  detail  is   given   in
         paragraph 46 of the determination. Dr Mackie is strongly supportive
         of the appellant's appeal on medical and psychological grounds.

     20. A letter from SHP Westminster Support confirms that  the  appellant
         is a client of the service which provides floating support to those
         suffering from debilitating mental illness. It  confirms  that  the
         appellant  requires  regular  practical  and   emotional   support,
         including maintaining  his  tenancy,  paying  bills  and  reporting
         repairs. His mental health had been unstable  during  the  previous
         year brought on by the uncertainty of his  immigration  status  and
         severe physical  health  problems.  Without  the  support  that  he
         receives he would not be  able  to  manage  his  accommodation  and
         health appointments. Without this assistance his overall well-being
         would be put at risk.

     21. The GP reports that in addition to his HIV status,  diabetes,  PTSD
         and depression the appellant reported back pain and irritable bowel
         syndrome. He is currently prescribed 16 items. He is on the waiting
         list for cognitive behaviour therapy.

     22. The appellant was referred to the Westminster Assessment and  Brief
         Treatment Team resulting from his increased fear and despair around
         the idea of his return to Iraq. In a report dated 19 March 2015 the
         writer noted that he had developed PTSD subsequent  to  periods  of
         imprisonment and torture starting in 1985. The  writer  noted  that
         the appellant is petrified at the idea of being sent back to  Iraq/
         Kurdistan. His PTSD makes him feel that his  level  of  danger  and
         potential harm is as high as it was when he was actually in  prison
         and being tortured. He has flash backs which get triggered when  he
         experiences this level of danger/fear.  The  writer  explains  that
         this is thought to be caused by a fault in the memory consolidation
         process during trauma - the memories of trauma are essentially left
         without a time tag to place them in the past.

     23. Judge Phillips also had  before  him  reports  from  the  Woodfield
         Trauma Centre. A synopsis of the report dated 7 April 2017  is  set
         out in paragraph 54. It records that  the  appellant  continues  to
         meet the criteria for severe  PTSD  as  well  as  Major  Depressive
         Disorder with psychotic features. He is significantly  impaired  by
         the nature and severity of the symptoms. The writer  expresses  the
         opinion that the appellant would end his  life  before  deportation
         (my emphasis).

     24. Even if he did not end his life prior to  removal  the  writer  was
         certain that he would not be able  to  cope  on  return.  He  would
         completely lack the mental or physical fortitude  to  relocate  and
         strands no chance of being able to care for  himself  and  function
         well enough to ensure that  he  is  housed  or  fed.  The  lack  of
         medication would see him deteriorate mentally and  physically.  The
         appellant believed that on his  return  he  will  be  captured  and
         imprisoned, tortured or killed.

     25. Judge Phillips found that the PTSD was not  solely  caused  by  the
         uncertainty over his asylum status. The cause of the trauma was the
         appellant's experiences in Iraq and a current precipitating  factor
         in his PTSD is his fear of return. While  the  Secretary  of  State
         maintained that there had been a  significant  improvement  in  the
         mental health care services in Iraq the information  did  not  show
         that these remained available at the time of the  hearing  or  that
         the treatment included  drugs  for  the  treatment  of  HIV.  Judge
         Phillips accepted that the appellant does not have family  in  Iraq
         who could assist or support him on return.

    Applicable law

     26. The appellant suffers from a complex matrix of physical and  mental
         problems. In the grounds of  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         approached the analysis of the article 3 issues that arise from the
         facts as ascertained by Judge Phillips on the basis of a number  of
         cases set out in paragraph 11 above of which N v SSHD is  the  most
         significant. However while it  is  not  possible  to  look  at  the
         individual illnesses in isolation for  these  purposes  it  is  his
         mental health issues and in  particular  the  risk  that  he  might
         commit  suicide  which  is  most  likely  to  engage   article   3.
         Accordingly while N v SSHD sets out the foundation of  the  law  on
         article 3 which must be followed in suicide cases  the  application
         is somewhat different. For these reasons I  agree  with  Mr  Clarke
         that it is the cases of J v SSHD and Y and Z  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
         that are most in point.

     27. In J v SSHD Dyson LJ giving the judgement of the court  adopts  the
         test set out by Lord Bingham in Ullah v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  26  as
         whether there are strong grounds for believing that the person,  if
         returned, faces a  real  risk  of  torture,  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment. But he goes on  to  amplify  the  test  as
         follows:

             "26.      First, the test requires an assessment to be made of
             the severity of the  treatment  which  it  is  said  that  the
             applicant would suffer if removed. This must attain a  minimum
             level of severity. The court has said on a number of occasions
             that the  assessment  of  its  severity  depends  on  all  the
             circumstances  of  the  case.  But  the   ill-treatment   must
             "necessarily be serious"  such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment":  see
             Ullah paras [38-39].

             27. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the
             act or threatened act of removal or expulsion and the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:

                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which  has as a direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).

             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka ..."

             28. Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.



             29. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).

             30. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a  real  risk  of  a
             breach  of  article  3  in  a  suicide  case,  a  question  of
             importance is whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in
             the receiving state upon which the risk of suicide is said  to
             be based is objectively well-founded. If the fear is not well-
             founded, that will tend to weigh against there  being  a  real
             risk that the removal will be in breach of article 3.

             31. Sixthly, a further question of considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."

     28. In Y and Z (Sri Lanka) the appellants were a brother and sister who
         arrived from Sri Lanka and claimed asylum.  It  was  accepted  that
         they had been  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security  forces  as
         suspected members of the Tamil Tigers. Y  had  become  increasingly
         suicidal and was terrified at the prospect of  return.  He  had  no
         family in Sri Lanka and the chances of finding a secure  base  from
         which to seek palliative and therapeutic care were remote. Although
         the evidence showed that psychiatric  care  was  available  in  Sri
         Lanka the uncontradicted expert evidence was  that  if  return  was
         enforced the likely effect of the  psychological  trauma  would  be
         suicide. Sedley LJ described the fear that both Y and  Z  exhibited
         as subjective, immediate and acute.

    The present case

     29. Applying the test in J v SSHD, first, the harm that  is  likely  to
         befall the appellant in this case is  suicide,  either  before  his
         return or on his return. If he did return he  would  be  unable  to
         access housing and medical care and generally look  after  himself.
         There  is  no  support  for  him  in  Iraq.  His  condition   would
         deteriorate physically and mentally. He would  be  the  subject  of
         discrimination and not have access to drugs. I  am  satisfied  that
         this attains the minimum of level of severity to engage article  3.
         This is not challenged. Secondly it is a foreseeable consequence of
         removal from the UK to  Iraq.  Thirdly,  although  the  regime  has
         changed the inhuman treatment which has given rise to  his  present
         mental difficulties  arises  from  the  state  authorities  in  the
         receiving state. It is significant that his flash backs are thought
         to be due to memories of trauma which he is unable to appropriately
         tag in time.

     30. Turning to the fifth test it might be argued that  the  appellant's
         fear of ill treatment on return was not objectively based. That  is
         not entirely correct as his lack of support on return, his  ability
         to access assistance and the discrimination that he may  face  from
         his HIV/AIDS diagnosis are undisputed facts. However  there  is  no
         doubt that he is unlikely to face capture,  torture  and  death  at
         state hands as he fears. Nevertheless the fear that he exhibits  is
         real and tangible. It is a very  significant  contribution  to  his
         illness. It is that fear which gives rise to the very real risk  of
         suicide. This is the real and subjective fear of the sort described
         in Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD. Indeed there are parallels with  the
         factual position in Y and Z. Finally it is clear that the receiving
         state does not have the  full  range  of  available  facilities  to
         support the appellant on return. And the appellant  does  not  have
         the physical and mental ability or the  family  support  to  access
         appropriate facilities in Iraq, even if available.

     31. It is not necessary for me to deal with the appeal in respect of IR
         276ADE(vi). Nevertheless the complaint that appears to be  made  in
         respect of this ground is a failure to  consider  remittances  from
         abroad or family links  in  considering  whether  there  were  very
         significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration. It is  true
         that there is no mention of the  possibility  of  remittances  from
         abroad but these would only be of utility to him if he was able  to
         utilise the money to access housing and other support or there were
         family members who could use the money to support him. The evidence
         is clear that the appellant struggles to cope with  the  basics  of
         life, including  accessing  supportive  facilities.  There  are  no
         family support members in Iraq. Accordingly this ground  of  appeal
         looks more like a quibble with the  outcome  than  pointing  to  an
         error of law.

     32. For these reasons I am  satisfied  that  the  appeal  falls  to  be
         dismissed. So far as Article 3 is concerned Judge Phillips  reached
         the right decision albeit by the wrong route. Had  he  applied  the
         law correctly he would have been bound to dismiss the Secretary  of
         State's appeal.




    Footnote

     33. Ms Akinbolu asked that I should  make  a  recommendation  that  the
         Secretary of State should now give the appellant unlimited leave to
         remain rather than a further period of discretionary leave.  In  my
         opinion a tribunal should be slow  to  trespass  on  the  executive
         function. All I can say is that on the evidence it appears unlikely
         that the appellant will recover sufficiently in the  near  to  mid-
         term to make return to Iraq a realistic  possibility.  It  is  also
         clear that the uncertainty over his status has contributed  to  his
         present state of ill health. In determining his present status  the
         Secretary of State will also no doubt wish to reflect on the  long,
         unexplained and frankly unconscionable delay in  dealing  with  his
         application and her failure to challenge or engage with the medical
         evidence in this case.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  respondent
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    Signed Date: 13 April 2018


    Lord Boyd of Duncansby


