
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21670/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2021                           |On 19 March 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MALLANDO MICHAeL BLAKE
                         (AKA mallando michael wray)
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Khan, Nationwide Law Associates

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appeal proceedings to date

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the in the First-tier Tribunal. The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica born on 14 September 1981. In a decision promulgated
    on 26 August 2020, I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the Appellant's appeal.

2.   The appeal was adjourned for  re-hearing  with  a  direction  that  the
    parties file skeleton arguments 14 days before the  new  hearing  date.
    Notice of hearing was sent on 14 September 2020. Neither party complied
    with that direction and there was no request for  further  time  within
    which to comply.

3.   The hearing on the 5 October 2020 was adjourned with a  direction  that
    the Appellant and the Respondent file skeleton arguments by 4pm  on  19
    October 2020 addressing the following issues:


         (i)  Whether paragraphs 399 and 390A apply;
         (ii) Whether section 117C applies;
         (iii)    Whether  Smith  is  correctly  decided,  and  if  so,  the
              Respondent to identify strong public policy reasons to justify
              continuing the deportation order;
         (iv) Whether the refusal to revoke the deportation  order  breaches
              the Appellant's rights under Article 8.

4.    In  response  to  these  directions,  Mr  Melvin,  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, submitted a skeleton argument on 7 October 2020 relying  on
    EYF (Turkey) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 592. Mr Lindsay relied on  his  own
    skeleton argument which he submitted on  the  morning  of  the  hearing
    which took place at 2.30pm. Mr Lindsay's skeleton argument expanded  on
    that submitted by Mr Melvin and specifically addressed the  issues  set
    out at paragraph 3 above.

5.   The Appellant submitted a skeleton argument on 20 October 2020  relying
    on SSHD v ZP (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 1197. Mr Khan complained about the
    late submission of Mr Lindsay's skeleton argument but he did  not  seek
    to exclude it. He did not make an application for  an  adjournment  and
    confirmed he did not require any further time to consider it.

Appellant's immigration history

6.   The Appellant came to the UK on 4 April 2002  and  was  apprehended  at
    Heathrow airport  in  connection  with  the  importation  of  10.7g  of
    cocaine. On 7 June 2002, he was convicted at Isleworth Crown Court  and
    sentenced to 18 months' detention  in  a  Young  Offenders  Institution
    [YOI]. He was made the subject of a deportation order in  the  name  of
    Mallando Michael Wray on 17 September 2002. He did not appeal  and  was
    deported to Jamaica on 3  January  2003.  The  Appellant  has  remained
    outside the UK since that date.

7.   On 1 March 2013, the Appellant married a British citizen [JPH].  On  30
    July 2014, he was refused a visit visa because he  failed  to  disclose
    his past history. On 20 October 2015, he applied for entry clearance as
    a spouse. His application  was  refused  because  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  was  not  satisfied  the  relationship  was  genuine  and  the
    Appellant was subject to  a  deportation  order.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Manager, on review, conceded the financial requirements were  met.  The
    Appellant withdrew his appeal against this decision  on  25  July  2017
    having applied for revocation of the deportation order on 23 June 2017.

8.   The Respondent refused to revoke the deportation order and refused  the
    Appellant's human rights claim on 25 June 2018. The Appellant  appealed
    and his appeal was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bibi  on  31
    December 2019. I set aside this decision because the  judge  failed  to
    demonstrate she had considered whether it would be unduly harsh for JPH
    to relocate to Jamaica or for her to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    Appellant. The judge failed to identify evidence upon which  she  could
    conclude that JPH had suffered undue hardship since  the  marriage  and
    she failed to give reasons for her finding that the Appellant satisfied
    paragraph 399(b). The following finding  of  fact  was  preserved:  The
    Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with JPH.

Relevant rules and law

9.   The following immigration rules apply to applications for revocation
    of deportation orders:


         390A
         Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of  State  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         maintaining  a  deportation  order  will  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors.

         391
         In the case of a person who has been deported following  conviction
         for a criminal offence, the continuation  of  a  deportation  order
         will be the proper course:


         a) In the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
            was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years,
            unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the deportation
            order when, if an application for revocation is received,
            consideration will be given on a case by case basis to whether
            the deportation order should be maintained, or

         b) In the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
            was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years,
            at any time,

         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention Relating to the Status of
         Refugees, or there are some other  exceptional  circumstances  that
         mean the continuation is outweighed by compelling factors.
         391A
         In other cases, revocation  or  the  order  will  not  normally  be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by change of circumstances since the order was made,  or  by  fresh
         information coming to light which  was  not  before  the  appellate
         authorities of the Secretary of State. The passage  of  time  since
         the person was deported may also of itself amount to such a  change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.

10.  Paragraph A398(b) states: These rules apply where  a  foreign  criminal
    applies for a  deportation  order  made  against  him  to  be  revoked.
    Paragraph 398(b) states: the deportation of the person from the  UK  is
    conducive to the public good and in the  public  interest  because  the
    have been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to
    a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months.


11.  Where paragraph 398(b) is applicable, paragraph 399(b) applies if:


    (b)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and who is a British citizen or settled in
         the UK; and
             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and
             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


12.  Section 117A of the 2002 Act states that [Part  V]  applies  where  the
    Tribunal is  required  to  determine  whether  a  decision  breaches  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life under Article 8.

13.  Section 117C states that the deportation of  foreign  criminals  is  in
    the public interest and the more serious the offence, the  greater  the
    public interest. In the  case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4  years  (including
    detention in a YOI),  the  public  interest  requires  his  deportation
    unless exception 1 or 2 applies. Exception 1 is not  relevant  in  this
    case. Exception 2 states that the person has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner and the  effect  of  deportation
    would be unduly harsh [the 'unduly harsh test'].

14.  In SSHD v ZP (India)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1197,  Underhill  LJ  at  [24]
    concluded that paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules did not require a
    fundamental difference in approach  when  considering  post-deportation
    revocation applications to that which is followed when considering pre-
    deportation application. The difference in drafting structure  did  not
    require a different approach as a matter of substance, since  following
    MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  the  exercise  required  by
    paragraph 398 is the same as that required by Article 8. He stated:


         "The exercise required in a case falling  under  paragraph  391  is
         thus broadly the same as that required  in  a  case  falling  under
         paragraph 390A or paragraph  398.  Decision  makers  will  have  to
         conduct an assessment of the  proportionality  of  maintaining  the
         order in place for the  prescribed  period,  balancing  the  public
         interest  in  continuing  it  against  the  interference  with  the
         appellant's private and family life; but in striking  that  balance
         they should take as a  starting  point  the  Secretary  of  State's
         assessment of the  public  interest  reflected  in  the  prescribed
         periods and should only order revocation after a lesser  period  if
         there are compelling reasons to do so."

15.  In Smith (paragraph 391(a) - revocation of  deportation  order)  [2017]
    UKUT 166 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held:


           i) In cases involving convictions for an offence for  which  the
              person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than
              four years, the Secretary of State's policy, as expressed  in
              paragraph 391(a) of the Immigration Rules, is that the public
              interest does not require continuation of a deportation order
              after a period of ten years has elapsed.
          ii) However, paragraph 391(a) allows the Secretary  of  State  to
              consider on a case by case basis whether a deportation  order
              should be maintained. The mere fact of  past  convictions  is
              unlikely to  be  sufficient  to  maintain  an  order  if  the
              'prescribed period' has elapsed. Strong public policy reasons
              would be needed  to  justify  continuing  an  order  in  such
              circumstances.
         iii) Paragraph 391(a) will only be engaged in a 'post-deportation'
              case if the person is applying for revocation  of  the  order
              from outside the UK. Nothing in the  strict  wording  of  the
              rule requires the ten-year period to be spent outside the UK.
              However, the main purpose of  deportation  is  to  exclude  a
              person from the UK. Any breach of the  deportation  order  is
              likely to be a strong public policy  ground  for  maintaining
              the order even though a period of ten years has elapsed since
              it was made.
          iv) In 'post-deportation'  applications  involving  sentences  of
              less than four years made before  the  end  of  the  ten-year
              period,   and   'post-deportation'   applications   involving
              sentences of four years or more, appropriate weight should be
              given to the Secretary of State's policy as expressed in  the
              'Conventions  exception'  and   'sweep-up   exception'   with
              reference to paragraphs 398-399A and 390A of the  Immigration
              Rules.

16.  In EYF (Turkey) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 592, the Court  of  Appeal  held
    that within the ten year period, it will be very  difficult  for  other
    factors to counterbalance the presumptive effect of  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy. That was consistent with the decision  in  ZP  (India).
    Once the ten year period had elapsed it became easier to argue that the
    balance had  shifted  in  favour  of  revocation  on  the  facts  of  a
    particular case because the presumption had fallen away; but  that  did
    not mean that revocation  thereafter  is  automatic  or  presumed.  The
    question  of  revocation  of  a  deportation  order  depends   on   the
    circumstances of the individual case.  That  was  consistent  with  the
    scheme described by the Supreme Court in Heshim Ali v SSHD [2016]  UKSC
    60 at [46].

Appellant's submissions

17.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Khan submitted that  paragraphs  398,  399
    and 399A of the immigration rules and sections 117A to 117C of the 2002
    Act applied. He submitted the refusal to revoke the  deportation  order
    breached the Appellant's Article 8 rights. The Appellant and  his  wife
    [JPH] were married in Jamaica seven years  ago  and  have  been  living
    apart since 2013. JPH has lived in the UK all her life and was in  full
    time employment. She was limited in  terms  of  annual  leave  and  had
    family in the UK. It was submitted JPH was emotionally dependant on the
    Appellant and she had suffered hardship.

18.  Mr Khan submitted that paragraphs 390 and 391 of the immigration  rules
    applied and the  Tribunal  should  consider  all  relevant  facts.  The
    Appellant had committed  the  offence  18  years  ago  when  he  was  a
    teenager. He was sentenced  to  18  months'  detention  in  a  YOI  for
    importing 10g of class A drugs. The  Appellant  was  not  a  persistent
    offender and had not breached any immigration rules. It was unfair that
    the Appellant should be punished twice for an offence he committed as a
    juvenile. There was no public interest in denying the  Appellant  entry
    into the UK. There were compassionate and exceptional  grounds  in  the
    Appellant's case. It had been well over ten years since  the  Appellant
    was deported and  his  conviction  alone  was  insufficient  to  refuse
    revocation of the deportation order. After ten years have  elapsed  the
    burden shifted to the Respondent and very strong reasons were  required
    to justify the refusal to revoke the deportation order. The  Respondent
    had failed to discharge that burden.

19.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Khan submitted that, in assessing  whether
    the  decision  strikes  a  fair  balance,  the  Tribunal  should   give
    appropriate weight to the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign offenders as expressed in the relevant rules and
    statues: Heshim Ali. It was submitted that ZP (India) made  clear  that
    differences in the wording of the provisions do not require a different
    approach as a matter of substance. Following Smith, the public interest
    did not require the Appellant's deportation after a period of ten years
    had elapsed. The Appellant's case could be distinguished from Smith  on
    its facts.

20.  In oral submissions, Mr Khan submitted the Appellant would  succeed  on
    an application for settlement. He was convicted 18  years  ago  and  he
    married more than ten years after the deportation order  was  made.  Mr
    Khan submitted Smith was authority for reversing the burden  of  proof.
    EYF was not relevant because there was no presumption.  The  Respondent
    had to assess the Appellant's application on a case by case  basis  and
    the refusal to  revoke  the  deportation  order  was  unfair.  Mr  Khan
    submitted the Appellant's relationship with JPH was formed when he  was
    not in the UK and therefore he did  not  have  to  establish  hardship.
    Section 117C did not apply. If the 'unduly harsh test' was  applicable,
    no one would be able to succeed on a revocation appeal.

21.  Mr Khan submitted paragraph 391 was the starting point.  The  Appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  and  without  deportation
    his settlement application would succeed. There was no public  interest
    in refusing revocation because of  the  genuine  relationship  and  the
    passage of time. The Appellant was a juvenile  when  he  committed  the
    offence.  The  principles  in  Smith  should  be  followed  because  it
    supported a case by case analysis.

Respondent's submissions

22.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Lindsay  submitted  the  Appellant  was  a
    foreign criminal at the date  of  decision  and  section  117C  applied
    notwithstanding  the  Appellant  was  deported  to  Jamaica   under   a
    deportation order: Williams (scope of 'liable to  deportation')  [2018]
    UKUT 116 (IAC). The Appellant's deportation was in the public  interest
    unless one of the exceptions applied  or  there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances.

23.  Paragraph A398 governed each of the rules  which  followed  (SC  (paras
    A398-339D; foreign criminal; procedure) Albania [2020] UKUT  187  (IAC)
    and paragraph 399 and 390A applied. However,  it  should  generally  be
    unnecessary for the  Tribunal  to  refer  to  paragraphs  398-399A:  CI
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [20] and [21].

24.  Mr Lindsay submitted Smith was an incorrect statement  of  law  because
    the Court of Appeal in  EYF  confirmed  the  conclusions  reached  were
    unsupported by authority. Mr Lindsay submitted paragraph  (ii)  of  the
    headnote in Smith had been overturned. Alternatively, the references in
    Smith to 'the mere fact of past convictions' and 'strong public  policy
    reasons' were misleading. Article 8 requires the Appellant's rights  to
    be balanced against the public interest which amounted to a combination
    of factors including risk or reoffending,  deterrence,  maintenance  of
    immigration control and promotion of  public  confidence.  Where  these
    factors indicate  an  ongoing  public  interest  in  deportation  being
    maintained  the  decision  will  only  be  disproportionate  if  it  is
    outweighed by the individual's rights. A weak Article 8 claim would not
    require 'strong public policy reasons'  to  outweigh  the  individual's
    rights.

25.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Lindsay submitted Smith  did  not  reflect
    the correct legal approach. It followed that the passage of time  would
    not generally be capable of constituting a compelling reason justifying
    revocation of a deportation order. The public interest of maintaining a
    deportation order would generally diminish with the passage of time  ZP
    (India). The strength of  the  public  interest  and  the  strength  of
    countervailing individual's rights will depend on the particular facts.

26.  The matter before the Tribunal was not an appeal  against  the  refusal
    to revoke a deportation order. It was an assessment  of  Article  8  in
    line with relevant statute and the immigration rules.  The  Appellant's
    appeal can only succeed if he can show that  an  exception  applies  or
    there are very compelling circumstances.

27.  It was submitted, the 'unduly harsh test' is to be  determined  without
    reference to the severity of relevant offences. It is an elevated  test
    involving more than  what  is  merely  uncomfortable,  inconvenient  or
    difficult. The Appellant established his relationship with JPH in  full
    knowledge that he was subject to a deportation order and he  might  not
    be able to enter or establish a life in the UK. It would not be  unduly
    harsh for JPH to relocate to Jamaica or for her to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the Appellant.

28.  In addition to the Appellant's previous  convictions,  he  had  a  poor
    immigration history. He was refused a visa in 2014 because he failed to
    disclose his past history. This undermined the  Appellant's  contention
    that the public interest had diminished with time. There were  no  very
    compelling circumstances and  the  decision  refusing  the  Appellant's
    human rights claim was proportionate.

29.  In oral submissions, Mr Lindsay accepted that the Appellant's  marriage
    engaged Article 8 and the public interest diminishes  as  time  passes.
    However, he submitted the passage of time in itself was not enough  and
    there had to be a change in circumstances. All the factors relevant  to
    the public interest had to be weighed against the Appellant's Article 8
    rights. There was no evidence of further  criminal  offending  but  the
    Appellant had a poor immigration history and had applied for a visa six
    years ago without disclosing his deportation order. The  Appellant  had
    been convicted of importing cocaine and the Respondent was of the  view
    that maintaining the deportation order was in the public interest.

30.   Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  section  117C  applied.  The  Article  8
    balancing exercise was important and  the  rules  on  deportation  were
    Article 8 compliant. There was no  injustice  in  the  way  the  scheme
    operated and all relevant matters had to be considered. The Appellant's
    previous convictions inform the  public  interest.  Confidence  in  the
    system of immigration control would be diminished where there had  been
    a failure to declare relevant matters and family life could continue in
    Jamaica. The Appellant and JPH had established their family life whilst
    living in different countries  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Appellant's
    deportation order. They had never actually lived together. The decision
    maintained the status quo. There was insufficient evidence to meet  the
    unduly harsh threshold.

Appellant's response

31.  Mr Khan submitted there was  no  public  interest  in  maintaining  the
    deportation order. The Appellant applied for a visit visa without legal
    assistance and most of the questions related to the past ten years.  It
    should not be assumed he had  sought  to  mislead.  The  Appellant  had
    served his sentence and had been  punished.  It  was  unduly  harsh  to
    punish him further. If the Appellant applied again  the  same  argument
    would apply. The passage of time would not make  a  difference  if  the
    Appellant had no right to be in the UK because he had never lived  with
    JPH. Ten years was significant and only an adverse immigration  history
    could justify a refusal.  In  the  Appellant's  case  the  refusal  was
    unreasonable.

32.  Mr Khan submitted the marriage was accepted and the appeal process  was
    linked with Article 8. The rules in relation  to  deportation  did  not
    apply to revocation. The Appellant was not a terrorist and the  offence
    was  committed  nearly  20  years  ago.  The  refusal  to  revoke   the
    deportation order was unfair and unreasonable. A case by case basis did
    not mean the Appellant had to show hardship. The  only  adverse  matter
    was the conviction over 18 years ago. There was no adverse  immigration
    history. The burden switched to the  Respondent  after  ten  years  had
    elapsed. The Respondent had not shown that there was a public  interest
    in maintaining the deportation order.

Conclusions and reasons

33.  Paragraph 392 of the Immigration Rules  states  that  revocation  of  a
    deportation order does not entitle the person concerned to re-enter the
    UK, it renders him eligible to apply for  admission.  This  is  not  an
    appeal against the refusal of entry clearance as a spouse. Nor is it an
    appeal against the refusal to revoke a  deportation  order.  It  is  an
    appeal against the refusal of a human rights claim. The  Appellant  has
    to show that the refusal interferes with  his  Article  8  rights.  The
    Respondent  has  to  show  that  the  interference  was  justified  and
    proportionate.

34.  Paragraph 391(a) of the Immigration Rules applies. The  Appellant  made
    an application for revocation more than ten years after his deportation
    order was signed. It is for the Secretary of State  to  consider  on  a
    case by case basis whether the deportation order should be  maintained.
    Following  Smith  and  EYF,  the  public  interest  does  not   require
    continuation of a deportation order after a period  of  ten  years  has
    elapsed.

35.  I am not persuaded by Mr Khan's argument that,  after  ten  years  have
    elapsed, the burden is on the Respondent to show strong public interest
    reasons for maintaining the deportation  order.  The  Court  of  Appeal
    confirmed in EYF that, after ten years have elapsed, the presumption in
    favour of deportation falls away. It did not follow that revocation was
    automatic or presumed. I find that there was no presumption either  way
    after ten years have elapsed and each case has to  be  decided  on  its
    merits.

36.  I find that section 117C of the 2002 Act and paragraphs  399  and  390A
    of the immigration rules apply to refusals of human  rights  claims  on
    applications for revocation  of  deportation  orders.  Mr  Khan's  oral
    argument was contradicted by his  skeleton  argument.  I  am  satisfied
    following ZP India and EYF that the 'unduly harsh test' applies in this
    case.

37.  The evidence before me was insufficient to satisfy  the  'unduly  harsh
    test'. Mr Khan referred to undue hardship, but there  was  insufficient
    evidence to support that assertion. JPH is a British  citizen  who  has
    lived in the UK all her  life.  She  is  employed  and  has  sufficient
    resources to support herself and the Appellant. She will  be  separated
    from her family in the UK if she relocates to Jamaica and she will lose
    her job. If she remains in the UK, she will continue to live separately
    from the Appellant maintaining the relationship by visits, voice  calls
    and messages as she has done since 2013. Either scenario does not  give
    rise to unduly harsh consequences.

38.  I find the Appellant is unable to satisfy  exception  2  under  section
    117C(5) of the 2002 Act and paragraph 399(b) of the immigration  rules.
    Where the exceptions do not apply,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
    circumstances that the public interest  in  maintaining  a  deportation
    order will be outweighed by other factors (paragraph 390A). There  were
    no exceptional circumstances identified in this case.

39.  Mr Khan submitted the refusal  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  was
    unfair because the Appellant satisfied the requirements of Appendix  FM
    for  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.  I  appreciate  the   Appellant's
    frustration in having to meet the 'unduly harsh test' when there is  no
    weight to be attached to the public interest  in  deportation  after  a
    period of ten years has elapsed.  Unfortunately,  the  authorities  are
    against him and it is the will of Parliament that part V  of  the  2002
    Act applies to human rights claims and section 117C applies to  foreign
    criminals.

40.  The Appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal  because  he  has  committed  a
    criminal offence and has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 18
    months. Detention in a YOI is by definition  a  term  of  imprisonment.
    Neither the Appellant's youth at the time  the  offence  was  committed
    over 18 years ago nor the passage of time exempts  the  Appellant  from
    the application of section 117C. The  Appellant  is  not  in  the  same
    position as someone who has no criminal convictions.

41.  The weight to be attached to the public  interest  is  informed  by  an
    assessment of whether the Appellant can satisfy the immigration  rules.
    Following ZP (India), decision makers have to conduct an assessment  of
    the  proportionality  of  maintaining  the  order  in  place  for   the
    prescribed period, balancing  the  public  interest  in  continuing  it
    against the interference with the Appellant's private and family life.

42.  The Appellant established his family life with JPH when he was  subject
    to a  deportation  order,  notwithstanding  more  than  ten  years  had
    elapsed. That family life has been maintained by JPH  visiting  Jamaica
    and WhatsApp voice calls and messages. The nature and  quality  of  the
    Appellant's family and private life has not changed.  The  decision  to
    refuse to revoke the deportation  order  did  not  interfere  with  the
    Appellant's family or private life giving rise to consequences of  such
    gravity so as to potentially engage Article 8.

43.  In the alternative, if I accept that preventing the Appellant  and  JPH
    from living together as a married couple  amounts  to  an  interference
    sufficient to engage Article 8, the refusal to revoke  the  deportation
    order was in accordance with the law  and  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society. I find that the refusal was proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought  to  be  achieved  for  the  following  reasons.  The
    Respondent indicates that ten years is an  appropriate  starting  point
    for  consideration  whether  to  revoke  the   deportation   order   in
    circumstances where the sentence is under four years.  The  application
    for revocation was made 15 years after the  deportation  was  made  and
    paragraph 391(a) of the immigration rules applies.

44.  In striking the  balance,  the  following  matters  weigh  against  the
    Appellant. He is a foreign  criminal  who  is  unable  to  satisfy  the
    exceptions to deportation. He has been convicted of the importation  of
    cocaine which is a serious offence reflected  in  the  sentence  of  18
    months' detention in a YOI. He married JPH whilst the deportation order
    was still in force and, the following year, he applied for  a  visa  to
    visit the UK without disclosing the deportation order.

45.  Matters weighing in the Appellant's favour are that  he  was  21  years
    old when he committed the offence and he was convicted  18  years  ago.
    The Appellant has remained outside  the  UK  since  January  2003.  The
    Appellant  married  in  2013  and  the  relationship  is  genuine   and
    subsisting. JPH supports the Appellant financially.

46.  The Appellant cannot satisfy the exceptions to  deportation  and  there
    are no exceptional circumstances or very compelling circumstances  over
    and above those exceptions. On balance,  I  find  the  public  interest
    outweighs the Appellant's right to family and private life.  I  dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.


Notice of decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances





        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

