
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21504/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2020                          |On 5 February 2020            |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                     Y B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. J. Martin, of counsel, instructed by
Samars Solicitors
For the Respondent:                   Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






ANONYMITY ORDER

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an anonymity order which reads "Unless the  Upper  Tribunal
    or a court directs otherwise, no reports of these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, the Appellant and
    the Respondent. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
    rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I make  this  order  so  as  to
    avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising to the  Appellant  from  the
    content of his claim."

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Ukraine. He  initially  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in June 2002 with leave to remain until 27 October  2002
    under the Workers' Registration Scheme.   He has not had any  leave  to
    remain since that date. He applied for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 21 December 2012, on private and family  life  grounds,  but
    his application was  refused  in  October  2013.The  Appellant  made  a
    further application for leave to remain on 26  May  2016  in  which  he
    relied on the fact that he had been convicted and  sentenced  to  three
    years imprisonment for refusing  to  attend  for  military  service  in
    Ukraine. On 28 June 2018 his application was refused and  certified  as
    being clearly unfounded. The Appellant challenged this decision by  way
    of a pre-action protocol letter, dated 17 July 2018.

2.   The Appellant's application was reconsidered but refused on  9  October
    2018. He appealed against this decision and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Norris dismissed his appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  20  August
    2019.First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien refused him permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on 22 November 2019 but Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
    granted   him   permission   to   appeal   on   16    December    2019.








ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   At the start of the hearing counsel for the Appellant  indicated  that,
    given the potential interest  of  the  Ukrainian  authorities  in  this
    appeal, it would be appropriate to make an anonymity order.  I  was  in
    agreement with this submission and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    did not object to  the  making  of  such  an  order.  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant also accepted that Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights could be characterised as a "new matter" and  was  not  in
    issue in this hearing. As I informed the parties, if I found that there
    had been an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision,
    it would be open to the Appellant to write to the  Respondent  to  seek
    her consent to this  new  matter  being  relied  upon  at  any  resumed
    hearing. Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer then made  oral  submissions  and  I  have  referred  to  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   When  the  Appellant's  application  was  reconsidered  and  a  further
    decision was reached on 9 October 2018, the Respondent  restricted  her
    consideration to Article 8 grounds. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norris
    then  restricted  her  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  appeal   to
    considering whether removing the Appellant to Ukraine would amount to a
    breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   In the grounds of appeal, it was submitted that, given the  content  of
    the Pre-action Protocol letter, it was implicit  in  the  refusal  that
    Article 3 of the ECHR was in issue. However, as noted by Upper Tribunal
    Gill when she granted permission to appeal on 16 December 2019, because
    the Respondent had not reached any decision on Article 3,  reliance  on
    this Article amounted to a "new matter" and  the  Respondent's  consent
    was needed before it could be pursued and had not been obtained.

6.   Instead, permission to appeal was  given  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that, in his assessment of:

    (i)  whether there were very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
         reintegration into the community in Ukraine  for  the  purposes  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules; and

    (ii) whether his removal  would  breach  his  Article  8  rights  claim
         outside the Immigration Rules,


    the judge may have erred in law by failing to consider  the  likelihood
    of the appellant being detained on arrival"

7.   The Appellant relied on a document said to have been issued on  10  May
    2016 by the Zboriv District Court of Ternopil Region, which stated that
    he had been convicted of avoiding military  service  and  sentenced  to
    three years in prison. He also relied  on  Summons,  requiring  him  to
    report to the District Military Commissariat on 19  February  2016,  30
    March 2016 and 20 April 2016 and a Summons to  attend  Zboriv  District
    Court on 10 May 2016. The Respondent did not seek to argue  that  these
    were not valid documents.  Instead, she had submitted in  her  decision
    letter that the Appellant could return to Ukraine to  try  and  explain
    why he had  not  reported  for  military  service  and  to  appeal  his
    conviction.

8.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norris  did  refer  to  the   Appellant's
    "potential detention" in Ukraine if returned there in paragraph 7.6  of
    her decision. But she merely noted that anyone  convicted  in  absentia
    "would probably be entitled to a retrial" on return. This  finding  was
    in keeping with the country guidance  provided  in  in  VB  and  others
    (draft evaders and prison conditions)  Ukraine  CG  [2017]  UKUT  00079
    (IAC), where the Upper Tribunal found that:

    "anyone convicted in absentia would probably be entitled thereafter  to
    a retrial in accordance with Article 412 of the Criminal Procedure Code
    of Ukraine".
    .
9.   But, in paragraph  7.7  of  her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Norris went on to speculate that, despite his conviction, the Appellant
    was more likely to be given an opportunity to  meet  the  draft  rather
    than be sent to prison for three years; [as] the latter would be  self-
    defeating. In paragraph 7.16 the Judge did note that the Appellant  may
    face imprisonment  on  return  to  Ukraine  but  again  relied  on  her
    assertion that he had not made any proper enquiries as  to  whether  he
    may now undertake  military  service  instead  of  serving  his  prison
    sentence.

10.  When doing so, she failed to take into  account  paragraph  27  of  the
    expert report by Rano Turaeva-Hoehne, dated 25  April  2019,  suggested
    that Ukraine clearly needed more conscripts at that time, as it  stated
    that:

    "[The]  local  Ukrainian  news  agency  covering  city  news  explained
    pressing issues of conscription of the concerned citizens how the three
    categories of conscripts are mobilised and stated that in the  category
    of urgent mass conscription (in the  scheduled  waves  of  conscription
    spring and autumn annually) all citizens both male and  female  between
    the 27-60 are called.."

11.  At paragraph 28 of the report, the expert also stated that:

     "The punishment for deserting or refusing  to  serve  in  the  army  is
    punishable by law. Local news reported imprisoned deserters  and  those
    who refused to serve which were sentenced from two to five years (under
    Art. 336 Criminal Code of Ukraine).
12.  The Home Officer Presenting Officer was not able to direct  me  to  any
    evidence which suggested that  those  previously  sentenced  for  draft
    evasion would simply be permitted to enlist instead  of  serving  their
    criminal sentence.

13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Norris also  speculated  that  the  Appellant
    may be able to rely on the fact that in 2000 he had been assaulted  and
    suffered a broken jaw and a deep stab wound as a reason why he had  not
    answered his draft. There was no evidence to suggest that  an  historic
    injury such as this could lead  to  a  conviction  and  sentence  being
    overturned.

14.  In any  event,  suggesting  that  a  conviction  and  sentence  may  be
    overturned in the future did not reduce the risk of the Appellant being
    ill-treated at the point of his return.  This was  because  in  VB  and
    others the Upper Tribunal also held that:

     "2. There is a real risk of anyone  being  returned  to  Ukraine  as  a
    convicted criminal sentenced to a term of imprisonment in that  country
    being detained on arrival...[and that]
     3.  There  is  a  real  risk  that  the  conditions  of  detention  and
    imprisonment in Ukraine would subject a person returned to be  detained
    or imprisoned to a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR".

15.  Whilst Article 3  was  not  in  issue  at  the  appeal,  conditions  of
    detention which met the threshold for inhuman and  degrading  treatment
    were clearly  a  factor  which  had  to  be  taken  into  account  when
    considering whether  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant re-integrating into society in Ukraine. These conditions were
    also a relevant factor  to  be  taken  into  account  when  considering
    whether on return  his  right  to  respect  for  bodily  integrity,  as
    protected by Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    would be breached.

16.  For all of these reasons, I find that  there  were  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Norris' decision.

 DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norris'  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Norris or O'Brien.


Signed                                  Date 30 January 2020



Nadine Finch



Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


