
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/21603/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 January 2018                         |On 20 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                arjun gurung
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge made on 3 September  2017  dismissing  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision on 30 March 2016 to refuse him
    leave to enter the United Kingdom pursuant to Appendix Armed Forces  of
    the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended),  as  the  adult  child  of  a
    former Gurkha soldier whose mother, his father's widow, has been living
    in the United Kingdom with indefinite leave to remain  since  September
    2010.

 2. In the decision under challenge, the First-tier Tribunal Judge reminded
    himself of the decisions in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer  (New  Delhi)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320, Ghising & Others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:
    weight) (Nepal) [2013] UKUT 567 and Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and  noted
    that it was four and a half years since the sponsor had left  Nepal  to
    come to the United Kingdom.

 3. At [32]-[38] in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  the  appellant's
    circumstances in Nepal are set out and the judge accepted  that  if  it
    had been open to the appellant's father to settle in the United Kingdom
    when discharged from the Gurkhas or any earlier stage he probably would
    have done so and the appellant would then have been born and brought up
    in this country and would now  be  a  British  citizen.   However,  the
    appellant could not  bring  himself  within  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC395 (as  amended)  and   the  appellant  relied  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR, under which he could succeed only  if  he  could
    show that he continued to have family life with his mother  as  at  the
    date of decision.

 4. The appellant's evidence before the Tribunal  consisted  of  a  witness
    statement from the sponsor, and records of telephone calls and payments
    from the sponsor to  her  children  in  Nepal.   The  sponsor,  on  her
    representative's advice, did not give evidence at the  hearing  and  so
    any inconsistency or lacuna in the evidence that she advanced  was  not
    capable of resolution in cross-examination or  by  questions  from  the
    Tribunal.  The witness statement can be given only limited weight as it
    was not tested or agreed.

 5. There was evidence of payments made to Nepal between 2012 and 2013, but
    to five different named beneficiaries, of  which  only  six  were  made
    payable to the appellant, there was no evidence of any  remittances  at
    all by the sponsor to her family in Nepal, after the  middle  of  2013.
    There was also evidence of a brief period where the sponsor  telephoned
    Nepal in 2017.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that the  evidence  of  family
    life was not strong enough to enable the  appellant  to  succeed  under
    Article 8 ECHR, without the corroborative evidence  which  the  sponsor
    could have provided had she given oral evidence at the hearing.

 7. I have heard argument by Mr Ahmed for the appellant.   He  pointed  out
    that the  sponsor  asserted  continuing  family  life  in  her  witness
    statement, and that the Judge had not made detailed findings of fact on
    the point at which family life  had  ceased.   He  contended  that  the
    sponsor was dependent on the appellant.

 8. For the respondent, Ms Fijiwala relied  on  the  respondent's  Rule  24
    Reply and noted that the appellant's representative had chosen  not  to
    call the sponsor, to resolve any outstanding issues in  oral  evidence.
    The Judge had given an impeccable self-direction on  the  case  law  at
    [24] of the decision.  The evidence of remittances covered a very short
    period and the telephone records did not begin until after the negative
    decision, for a brief period in 2017.  The sponsor's  visits  to  Nepal
    were all for less than 28 days and she visited all her sons,  not  just
    this appellant.  Ms Fijiwala argued that the findings were  sustainable
    on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I concur.  On the limited evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, I am
    satisfied that it was unarguably open to the Judge to conclude  It  was
    unarguably open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  he  could  not  be
    satisfied, to the ordinary civil standard of balance of  probabilities,
    that family life continued between the appellant and  sponsor,  nor  of
    the mutual dependence required to establish Kugathas dependency.

10. I rely in support of this conclusion on paragraphs [13] - [14] of Patel
    & Others v Entry Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17 and  Rai
    v Entry Clearance Officer (New Delhi) [2017] EWCA Civ 320 at paragraphs
    [16] - [19] and [42].  I have been referred also to  the  decisions  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Ghising & Others (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;
    weight) (Nepal) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) and the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in Gurung & Others (on the application of) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  8  but  not  to  any  specific
    passages in either of those judgments.

11. I am not satisfied that there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision  under  challenge.    The   Judge's   reasoning   is   proper,
    intelligible, and adequate to support the conclusions reached.

12. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  therefore  stands,  and  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Signed:      Judith A J C Gleeson            Date:        15 February 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
