
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21819/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd April 2019                             |On 08 April 2019              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                Amanpreet [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora of Counsel, instructed by Birmingham Law
                    Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Jessica  Pacey  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 15th  August
    2017.  The Appellant is an Indian citizen born 3rd August 1991.

 2. The Appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK  based  upon  his
    private and family life.  That application was refused on 11th December
    2014 without an in country right of appeal.  Following judicial  review
    proceedings the Respondent issued a new decision  dated  5th  September
    2016, maintaining the refusal, but conceding that the Appellant  should
    have an in country right of appeal.

 3. The Appellant's application was made on the  basis  that  he  is  in  a
    relationship with a British citizen Jacinta Rice, and he has a parental
    relationship with his son born 11th January  2013  who  is  a  British
    citizen.   The  Respondent  refused  the  application  on   suitability
    grounds.  The Appellant  had  committed  criminal  offences  which  the
    Respondent regarded as persistent offences and  therefore  refused  the
    application with reference to S-LTR.1.5.   The  Respondent's  view  was
    that the presence of the Appellant in the UK was not conducive  to  the
    public good.  The Appellant had failed to declare all  his  convictions
    in his application form and therefore the application was refused  with
    reference to S-LTR.2.2.(b).

 4. Because  the  application  was  refused  on  suitability  grounds,  the
    Respondent's view was that the Appellant was not entitled to  leave  to
    remain with reference to either Appendix FM in relation to family life,
    or paragraph 276ADE(1) in relation to private life.  The Respondent did
    not find that the  application  raised  any  exceptional  circumstances
    which would justify granting leave to remain with reference to  Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appeal was heard on 7th August 2017.  It was conceded on behalf  of
    the Appellant that he could not satisfy the requirements for  leave  to
    remain as the partner of a British citizen or the father of  a  British
    citizen under the Immigration Rules.  It was contended that his  appeal
    should be allowed with reference to Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950   Convention)   outside   the
    Immigration Rules, based upon his family life with his British  partner
    and his British child.  It was also contended that  the  Appellant  had
    established a private life in the UK since his arrival at 10  years  of
    age on 25th April 2002.

 6. The judge noted the absence of the Appellant's partner at  the  hearing
    and the lack of evidence from the partner to confirm that she  and  the
    Appellant were in an ongoing relationship.  The judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's removal would not be disproportionate and would not  breach
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 7. The Appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal.

Error of Law

 8. On 17th January 2019 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law.  The Respondent contended there was no material error.
     On behalf of the Appellant it was submitted that the judge  had  erred
    in law  primarily  by  failing  to  consider  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 9. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my  conclusions
    are contained in my decision dated 21st  January  2019  promulgated  on
    28th January 2019.  In brief summary I found that the judge  had  erred
    in law and set aside the FtT decision.  I set out below paragraphs  13-
    19 of my decision, which contain my conclusions and reasons for setting
    aside the FtT decision;

         "13.     I find that the judge did not err in  law  in  considering
             the relationship between the Appellant and his  partner.   The
             judge at paragraph 22 was entitled to note  that  the  partner
             was not present at the hearing to support the  Appellant,  and
             had not submitted  any  witness  statement  to  confirm  their
             relationship.

         14.  In my view the  judge  did  err  in  law  in  considering  the
             Appellant's family life with his son.  It  was  accepted  that
             the  son  is  a  British  citizen  born  11th  January   2013.
             Therefore the best interests of the  son  must  be  a  primary
             consideration.  This does not mean a  paramount  consideration
             or the only consideration.  The best interests of a child  can
             be outweighed by other considerations.

         15.  However in this appeal the judge  does  not  make  a  specific
             finding as to the best interests of the child.  The judge also
             materially erred by not undertaking an adequate  consideration
             of the factors contained in section 117B of the 2002 Act.   In
             particular it was a material error of law to fail to  consider
             section 117B(6).  As it was  accepted  that  the  child  is  a
             qualifying child, the judge should have made  findings  as  to
             whether the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with his son, and whether it would be  reasonable
             to expect the child to leave the UK.

         16.  SR (subsisting parental relationship, section 117B(6))  [2018]
             UKUT 334 (IAC) (which was decided after the  FtT  decision  in
             this case) confirms the question of whether it  would  not  be
             reasonable to expect a  child  to  leave  the  UK  in  section
             117B(6) of  the  2002  Act  does  not  necessarily  require  a
             consideration of whether the child will in fact or in practice
             leave the UK.  Rather, it poses  a  straightforward  question,
             would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?

         17.  For the reasons given above I find that the  FtT  decision  is
             unsafe and must be set aside.  The findings that the Appellant
             cannot satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  in
             relation to family and private  life  are  preserved.   Having
             considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  at
             paragraph 7, I do not find  it  appropriate  or  necessary  to
             remit this appeal to the FtT.  The decision will be remade  by
             the Upper Tribunal.

         18.  It is a matter for the Appellant as  to  whether  any  further
             evidence will be called.  It is understood that no interpreter
             will be required.  If that is not the case the Upper  Tribunal
             must be informed immediately.

         19.  The purpose of the next hearing will be to consider Article  8
             outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  in  particular   the   best
             interests of  the  child,  whether  there  is  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship between the Appellant and his
             child, whether it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to
             leave the UK, and there will be consideration  of  the  public
             interest."



Remaking the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 2nd April 2019

10. I ascertained that I had  all  documentation  upon  which  the  parties
    intended to rely,  and  each  party  had  served  the  other  with  any
    documentation upon  which  reliance  was  to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-B, which had been  before  the  FtT,
    and the Appellant's bundle which had been before  the  FtT,  comprising
    301 pages.  In addition the Appellant had submitted a  further  bundle,
    comprising 123 pages, and Mr Toora submitted a skeleton argument.

11. The Appellant attended  the  hearing.   Mr  Toora  explained  that  his
    partner who had submitted a witness statement,  could  not  attend  the
    hearing as she had to travel abroad in connection with her  employment,
    at short notice, on 29th March 2019.  Mr Toora did  not  apply  for  an
    adjournment and was content  to  proceed  without  the  partner  giving
    evidence.

12. Mr Mills applied for an adjournment on the  basis  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal on 12th March 2019 had heard two linked cases dealing with  the
    issue that was relevant in this appeal, that being the approach  to  be
    taken when considering whether it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  a
    British child to leave the UK.  The current Home Office guidance is not
    in line with Upper Tribunal case law, such as SR Pakistan and the  more
    recent decision of JG  (section  117B(6):  "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)
    Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC), which Mr Mills advised was the  subject
    of an appeal by the Respondent.  Mr Mills submitted that  it  would  be
    helpful if the Court of Appeal judgments  were  published  before  this
    appeal was decided.  Mr Toora opposed the application.

13. I considered the adjournment application on the  basis  that  if  there
    could not be a fair hearing,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  grant  an
    adjournment.  In my view there could  be  a  fair  hearing  without  an
    adjournment.  It was unclear when the Court of  Appeal  judgments  were
    going to be published.  It was unclear what the decisions would be.  In
    my view it would, at the present time, be appropriate to  consider  the
    existing Upper Tribunal case law.  I therefore refused the  adjournment
    application.

14. The Appellant was called  to  give  oral  evidence  which  he  gave  in
    English.  He adopted his witness statement dated 26th March 2019.   The
    Appellant was questioned by both representatives.  I have recorded  all
    questions and answers in  my  Record  of  Proceedings  and  it  is  not
    necessary to reiterate them here.  If relevant I will refer to the oral
    evidence when I set out my findings and conclusions.

15. I then heard oral submissions from Mr Mills.  I was asked to find  that
    there was very little evidence to prove a parental relationship between
    the Appellant and his son, other than the Appellant's evidence.  I  was
    asked to note the absence of any live evidence from the partner.

16. Mr Mills accepted that if I found a genuine parental relationship, then
    following the guidance in JG, it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    British child to leave the UK.  Mr Mills' point was that JG was wrongly
    decided.

17. I then heard submissions from Mr Toora who  relied  upon  his  skeleton
    argument.  I was asked to find that there is ample  evidence  to  prove
    the parental relationship between the Appellant  and  his  son,  and  I
    should therefore follow the guidance in JG, and find it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the British child to leave the UK.  Therefore  the
    appeal should be allowed with reference to section 117B(6) of the  2002
    Act.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. This is an appeal that cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules  that
    relate to Article 8.  That was accepted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
    before the FtT.

20. The factual matrix is that  the  Appellant  is  also  known  as  Dillon
    Mendez.  He arrived in the UK as a visitor with  his  mother  in  April
    2002.  I found that the  Appellant  and  his  mother  remained  without
    leave.

21. An application for indefinite leave to remain as the dependant  of  his
    mother was made on 3rd August 2009 and refused on 10th  November  2011.
    The Appellant continued to remain in the UK  without  leave.   He  then
    applied for leave to remain based upon his family and private  life  in
    July 2014, which application was refused on 11th December 2014, without
    a right  of  appeal.   Following  judicial  review  proceedings  a  new
    decision was made by the Respondent dated 5th September 2016,  refusing
    the application, and which brought about the appeal.

22. There is DNA evidence that proves the Appellant is the  father  to  his
    British son who was born on 11th January 2013.  The son is now 6  years
    of age.

23. The son lives with the Appellant's partner and his half-sister  who  is
    10 years of age.  I accept that the Appellant lives with them some  of
    the time, but does not give his address  as  their  family  home.   The
    Appellant gives his address as that of his mother and I  find  that  is
    his main residence.

24. I am satisfied that Article 8 is engaged.  It is  engaged  because  the
    Appellant has established a private life in the UK, and it  is  engaged
    because I am satisfied that he has family life with his son.

25. I find that there is a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    between the Appellant and  his  son.   I  make  this  finding  for  the
    following reasons.

26. I  accept  the  oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant  that  he  spends  a
    considerable amount of time with his son.  I accept that he very  often
    takes him to and  picks  him  up  from  school.   There  is  supporting
    evidence to confirm the extent of the Appellant's relationship with his
    son.  For example at page 11 of the Appellant's bundle prepared for the
    Upper Tribunal  hearing  there  is  a  letter  dated  15th  March  2009
    addressed to the Appellant, making reference to  the  Football  Academy
    attended by his son.  There is reference  to  the  Appellant  attending
    training sessions with his son.

27. At page 12 of the same bundle there is a letter dated 25th  March  2019
    addressed to the Appellant making reference  to  his  son  attending  a
    fight club and having attended  for  the  last  two  years.   There  is
    reference to the Appellant attending every week with his son.

28. In addition there are numerous photographs of  the  Appellant  and  his
    son.

29. I therefore conclude that the Appellant is the biological father of his
    son, and I am satisfied  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with him.

30. The best interests of the Appellant's son are a primary  consideration.
    I find that his best interests  would  be  served  by  maintaining  the
    status quo.  His mother is his  primary  carer,  but  he  has  frequent
    contact with the Appellant.  The son is a British citizen, born in this
    country.  It is clear that his best interests would be to remain in the
    UK, the country of which he is a citizen.

31. I set out below section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act;

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where  -



             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.'

32. The Appellant's son is a qualifying  child  because  he  is  a  British
    citizen.  I have found that the Appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with him.  I therefore need to consider  whether
    it would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's son to  leave  the
    UK.

33. In my view the correct legal approach is as outlined in SR Pakistan  to
    which I have referred earlier in  this  decision.   That  approach  was
    confirmed in JG, in which it was decided that section  117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act requires a court or Tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in
    question would leave the UK, even if this is not likely to be the case,
    and ask whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to do so.

34. It is clear that the Appellant's son would not have to  leave  the  UK.
    If the Appellant had to leave, the son would remain with his mother  in
    the UK.  However I must consider whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect a British child to leave the UK, even though in practice he will
    not do so.  It was conceded by Mr Mills that it would not be reasonable
    to expect the Appellant's son to leave the UK and I find that to be the
    case.  I have taken into account that the Appellant  does  not  satisfy
    the suitability criteria in order to be granted leave to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules.  The behaviour of the Appellant does not however
    mean that it would be reasonable to expect his son to leave the UK.

35. In conclusion, as I find there is a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the Appellant and his son, the best  interests  of
    the son would be to remain in the UK, and it would not be reasonable to
    expect him to leave the UK, I find that  the  appeal  must  succeed  by
    reason of section 117B(6) which states that in the case  of  a  person,
    such as the Appellant, who is not liable  to  deportation,  the  public
    interest  does  not  require  his  removal  when  section  117B(6)   is
    satisfied.  The appeal therefore is allowed with reference to Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

There has been no  request  for  anonymity.   I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 3rd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Tribunal which was not before the initial decision  maker.



Signed                              Date 3rd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

