
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21304/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 January 2018                          |On 6 February 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                              mrs naba ali raza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel instructed by Nasim &
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and her date of birth is  5  May
    1985.  She made an application for leave to enter the UK as a spouse of
    a British citizen, Mr Ali  Raza  (date  of  birth  5  May  1981)  ("the
    Sponsor").  The couple married in 2014.  The Sponsor is severely  sight
    impaired.  The application was refused by the ECO in a decision  of  11
    August 2016.  The ECO was not satisfied that the Appellant demonstrated
    a sufficient level of contact to show that her  relationship  with  the
    Sponsor has continued beyond their wedding and  that  the  relationship
    was genuine and subsisting.

2.   The Appellant appealed and  her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raymond following a hearing on 6  September  2017.   The
    decision was promulgated on 13 September 2017.  Judge Raymond dismissed
    the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8.   The  Judge
    concluded that the marriage was not genuine or subsisting.

3.   The Appellant was granted permission  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes on 2 November 2017.

The Decision of the FtT

4.   The judge heard evidence from the Sponsor and Mr Abdul Rauf Butt.   The
    salient findings were made between  paragraph  65  and  108.   For  the
    purposes of this decision it is necessary for me to quote the following
    paragraphs:-

         "57. Because their joint witness statements say nothing  in  effect
             how each as individuals see their marriage I asked the sponsor
             how his wife saw her future as a professional  woman  who  has
             married a man who will never work and is partially sighted; he
             replied that basically she says that her parents  arranged  it
             and she accepted it - people get old and lose  their  sight  -
             Asked to explain this because the  appellant  is  an  educated
             young woman and she would not  be  looking  after  an  elderly
             partner; the sponsor replied that the appellant  says  she  is
             happy whatever decision her parents made - I asked the sponsor
             whether he had discussed these issues with his wife as a woman
             who has an educated and professional past; he replied that she
             is happy with him and does not have any problems.  -  I  asked
             the appellant whether he had discussed with the appellant what
             kind of father  he  would  be  to  their  children  given  his
             disability; he replied that they had never  discussed  this  -
             they both want children - and his children will see him  as  a
             disabled father.  - I asked the sponsor whether he  had  never
             thought about this; he replied that until  now  he  had  never
             thought about this - his father is old and disabled - everyone
             will be like that.  -  I  put  it  to  the  sponsor  that  the
             Secretary of State was  in  doubt  whether  the  marriage  was
             genuine and should the Tribunal be surprised that he  and  his
             wife as adults had never discussed this; he replied that their
             marriage was genuine - he gets feelings about  being  disabled
             but his wife reassures him -  whatever  he  is  she  is  happy
             because her parents arranged it - his own parents arranged  it
             - and in his culture that is how they arrange marriage  -  the
             appellant says that she has never had objections and she wants
             to spend all her life with him - I put it to the sponsor  that
             as an example of the circumstances of his marriage had he ever
             discussed with his wife that he would never  be  ale  to  play
             football with a son if they ever have one and  they  are  both
             adults after all; he replied that until now  they  have  never
             discussed these things - but they were trying  their  best  to
             have children - and his wife always reassures him that she  is
             there to cover his deficiencies - that she will  always  cover
             the gap - and will be always with him (ps7-8)

         ...

         62.  Mr Butt [the Appellant's maternal Uncle] was asked in evidence-
             in-chief why the  appellant  as  a  young  woman  would  marry
             someone who had the disability of the sponsor; he replied that
             their family are friends - both sides knew each other.  -  The
             question was repeated and pointed out that it related  to  the
             appellant and not her parents; he replied that they had  known
             each other for years - and his loss of eyesight did not matter
             to them. - His sister had given him the contact details of the
             sponsor - and he had gone to see him before the  marriage  and
             approved - Mr Butt was very happy with his character  and  the
             way he talked - he thought this is what we need - his niece is
             a very caring woman by nature.  To my  questions  the  witness
             confirmed that he was himself a father, and his  daughter  was
             getting married.  I asked how he would feel  if  his  daughter
             married someone with the disabilities of the sponsor  and  who
             could not for example play football with a son if he had  one;
             he replied that someone has to do that - he will  be  able  to
             look after his kids with the help of his wife  (ps9-10  of  my
             notes)."

         ...

         65.  The core feature of this claimed  marriage  is  that  a  young
             university  educated  woman,  who  worked  professionally   in
             Pakistan as a teacher, has married a man who is almost  blind,
             who as a result cannot work, and will never  be  ale  to  work
             together with his wife in providing for their family.

         66.  His day to day existence will have to be  managed  because  of
             his disability for the rest of her life, according to his  own
             evidence, and her own statement in her VAF.

         67.  Thus, for example,  he  cannot  go  shopping  alone;  and  his
             ability to make ATM cash withdrawals are to a  certain  extent
             limited.

         68.  His role as a father in the lives of their  children  will  be
             limited as a result of his  disability,  such  as  in  playing
             games  with  children  that  require  an  obvious  degree   of
             dexterity of eye, whether board games or physical  games  such
             as football or tennis, or throwing or catching of  a  ball  of
             whatever size, which little boys and girls may  like  to  play
             with their father,  or  possibly  even  just  leapfrogging  or
             larking about in a part in all safety.

         ...

         70.  It is not  a  question  of  whether  a  person  with  severely
             impaired sight, or totally blind, should be able to  marry  or
             possibly found a family, with a person who does not share that
             disability, or even with a partner who does.

         71.  It is not a question of whether the couple in such a case have
             looked  together  as  responsible  adults,  entering  upon   a
             marriage relationship, at the obvious and necessary  questions
             that would not arise for any other couple in whose lives  such
             a feature, impacting upon many ordinary and routine aspects of
             their  married  life  into  the  foreseeable  future,  is  not
             present.

         72.  But the evidence of the sponsor himself  is  that  the  couple
             have  never  asked  themselves   such   questions,   and   his
             explanation for this is that everything is  in  order  because
             the marriage was arranged by their respective families, as  is
             the norm in their culture, which they have accepted, and it is
             the same as if his wife would  be  looking  after  an  elderly
             relative (see paragraphs 33, 50 & 57 above).

         ...

         74.  But this appeal is about a young educated woman in making this
             choice.

         75.  Whereas there is nothing from the appellant herself in  regard
             to these questions.

         ...

         81.  I consider that the following are such countervailing factors,
             in addition to the sponsor not  having  apparently  given  any
             thought as to what feature he could offer his  wife,  and  any
             possible children, given his severe sight disability, and  how
             he should consider the position of his wife in such a context,
             but considering instead that these are matters which could  be
             left to their respective families.

         87.  The evidence of  the  sponsor  and  his  witness  Mr  Butt  in
             emphasizing that the marriage was principally the result of  a
             negotiated compact  between  the  families,  with  no  genuine
             reflection having been given to the future of the appellant as
             a university educated teacher in marrying  a  virtually  blind
             unemployed man, rather than a contract of marriage between the
             couple, does give credence to this as having been the  primary
             motive.

         88.  It is telling in this context that the  appellant  herself  in
             her VAF refers only to coming to the UK to take  care  of  the
             appellant who needs daily help, and there is no  reference  to
             what she would bring to the future of the marriage in  the  UK
             as an educated woman who has worked as a teacher, with her VAF
             inaccurately asserting in fact that she has  never  worked  in
             the public service (q64).

         89.  It is only the evidence at the hearing of the sponsor, and  Mr
             Butt who purports to have played a  role  in  negotiating  the
             family agreement for  the  marriage,  which  brought  out  her
             background.

         90.  Whereas, her statements, replicating that of the sponsor,  and
             as has already been noted, does not provide any insight at all
             on why she would consider  the  marriage  to  be  genuine  and
             subsisting.

         ..."



The Grounds of Appeal

5.   The grounds of  appeal  argue  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    consideration a letter from the DWP supporting  that  the  Sponsor  had
    been awarded a backdated disability payment covering a period  of  four
    and a half years which accounted for a payment into his  bank  account.
    Mr Richardson representing the Appellant was not  able  to  locate  the
    letter from the DWP in the Appellant's bundle.  He contacted  with  his
    instructing  solicitors  who  were  unable  to  assist  him.   He   was
    responsible for the grounds of appeal and believed  that  he  has  seen
    such evidence but accepted that  he  was  unable  to  locate  this.  He
    abandoned this ground of appeal.

6.   Mr Richardson submitted that the judge showed a  lack  of  empathy  and
    prejudice towards the Sponsor's disability  rendering  his  conclusions
    irrational.   It was wrong of the judge to refer to his  disability  as
    the core feature of the appeal.  He described the  judge's  finding  at
    [68] as "outrageous" because  the  suggestion  by  the  judge  is  that
    someone with a disability cannot be a proper father.  It is clear  from
    the decision read as a whole, in particular [81], that the main  reason
    the judge found the marriage was not genuine and subsisting was because
    of the Sponsor's disability which was a matter that the Respondent  had
    not raised

7.   Mr Melvin accepted that the Sponsor's disability played a part  in  the
    findings but argued that the judge was entitled to find that money  had
    changed hands and this was an arranged marriage purely for the purposes
    of obtaining a visa for the Appellant.

Error of Law

8.       The judge focussed on the Sponsor's disability.  A  proper  reading
    of the decision, set out at length above, makes it clear that he  found
    the Sponsor's disability a  core  feature  of  the  case  and  that  it
    undermined the evidence that the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting.
    His findings are subjective and speculative. He  considered  immaterial
    matters; namely preconceptions about disability and disabled people and
    their ability to marry and raise children. The judge's  questioning  of
    Mr Butt supports this conclusion. The judge concluded  that  a  payment
    had been made by the Appellant to the Sponsor. The decision  that  this
    was a payment made by the Appellant to facilitate her entry to  the  UK
    was one that may have been open to him. There were  other  problems  as
    found by the judge with evidence (including the lack of  evidence  from
    the Appellant and the unexplained payment of a large sum of money  into
    the Sponsor's bank). However, I cannot  conclude  with  any  degree  of
    certainty that had the judge not taken into account immaterial  matters
    he would have reached the same conclusion.

9.   The judge materially erred. I set aside the  decision  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.  The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing.   There are no preserved findings.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam          Date 28 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
