

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/21018/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At Field House                        |           Decision promulgated and  |
|                                      |sent                                 |
|On 17.05.2017                         |           On 25.05.2017             |


                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                                Crescencia NGA CHE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:  in person
For the respondent: Mr S Kotas

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.     This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Lindsey Moan), sitting at  Birmingham  on  10  November
    2016, to  an appeal by a citizen of the Cameroons, born  in  1983.  The
    appellant had been refused indefinite leave to remain on 24 August,  so
    by this time had a right of appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds
    only.

 2. The appellant had arrived in this country as a student on 7  May  2006,
    and had had leave to remain on that basis till 22  October  2015.  That
    same day she made a private and family life application,  resulting  in
    her leave continuing under s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971  till  the
    end of the time (14 days)  allowed  for  her  to  appeal  any  negative
    decision made on her application. That  was  done  on  29  March  2016,
    giving her an out-of-country right of appeal. The  appellant  said  she
    received that decision on 4 April, and produced the envelope  in  which
    it arrived, which was seen and accepted by Mr Kotas.

 3. On 30 April the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain, which
    was refused under paragraph 276B (v) of the Rules, on the  ground  that
    she had been here unlawfully for more than 28  days  since  23  October
    2015 when she made the application. This ignored the effect  of  s.  3C
    (2) of the Immigration Act 1971: since the  appellant  had  another  14
    days to appeal the decision, her leave  to  remain  continued  till  12
    April, even without taking account of the date she received  her  copy,
    and so her application of 30 April was less than 28 days out of time.

 4. It will be remembered that the 30 April application was  valid,  if  in
    time: see again s. 3C

        (4) A person may not make an application for variation of his leave
           to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  while  that  leave  is
           extended by virtue of this section.
        (5) But subsection (4)  does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
           application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).
    Subsection (5) refers in this case to the  application  of  22  October
    2015, which is to be treated as varied by the one of 30 April.

 5. All this was agreed by Mr Kotas, who helpfully went on to refer  me  to
    the combined effect of the Immigration (Continuation of Leave)  Notices
    Regulations 2006, and the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order
    2000. Since that too is common ground, it is enough for me to note that
    the 14 days for appealing the 30 March decision did not  start  running
    till 4 April, when the appellant actually received it. It follows that,
    by the time she made her  30  April  application,  she  had  been  here
    without leave for only 12 days, and her application  should  have  been
    treated as in time.

 6. At one time I could simply have allowed the appeal on  the  basis  that
    the decision was contrary to the law and the Rules, and that would have
    been that. However, now that rights of appeal have been  restricted  to
    asylum and human rights grounds, it is not  so  simple.  The  appellant
    complained that there was nothing in the decision under appeal to  warn
    her that she could only appeal on such grounds.

 7. It is true that the  'information  notice'  which  went  out  with  the
    decision did say she had a right of appeal "... against the refusal  of
    your human rights claim on the ground that  the  decision  is  unlawful
    under s. 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998". However,  especially  as  she
    hadn't made a human rights claim in the first place, but relied on  the
    Rules, this was hardly calculated to  be  clear  even  to  an  educated
    person like her, but one who was acting without legal advice.  Nor  did
    the heading to the box (no. 3) she filled in on her  appeal  form  make
    things any clearer, simply referring to the same statutory provision.

 8. Under the present legislative scheme, it has been clear at least  since
    MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  that  proper  establishment  of  the
    position under the law and the Rules is  an  absolute  prerequisite  of
    proper determination of a human  rights  claim.  Here  there  has  been
    nothing to put someone in  this  appellant's  position  effectively  on
    notice that such a claim was required for her right of appeal to be  of
    any real use; and so no human rights decision by the respondent.



 9. I need to make an order which will allow  both  those  things  to  take
    place, if necessary. If I were to order a fresh hearing, either  before
    myself or a first-tier judge, then the respondent would need  first  to
    make a fresh decision for it  to  be  effective.  It  seems  preferable
    simply to set aside the decision under appeal, and to declare that  the
    30 April application for indefinite leave to  remain  is  still  to  be
    decided by the respondent, on the basis that  the  appellant  had  been
    here without leave for less than 28 days when she made it.

10. If on further consideration the respondent grants the application, then
    there will be no more to be done; if not, then this time the  appellant
    will know that she needs to put forward a valid human rights  claim  in
    her notice of appeal, if she is to succeed  in  challenging  the  fresh
    decision. If it came to that, then she might wish to take advice on it;
    but that would be up to her.

Appeal : decision under appeal set aside
Application for indefinite leave to remain to be reconsidered by  respondent


                               [pic]                                (Judge
                                   of the Upper Tribunal)
                                          Decision signed:
                                 18.05.2017
