
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/21895/2016
                                                               HU/21899/2016
                                                               HU/21900/2016
                                                               HU/21903/2016
                                                               HU/21906/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2018                 |On 12 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MS
                                     RC
                                     DEC
                                     DIC
                                     DOC
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Claimant: Ms N Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Ferguson (Counsel), instructed by Solomon
                    Shepherd Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of  State  For  the  Home  Department  (SSHD)  appeals
       against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Behan  (the
       judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 18th  March  2018,  allowed
       the human rights appeals of MS, RC, DEC, DIC and DOC (hereafter  the
       claimants) against  the  SSHD's  decision  dated  5  September  2016
       refusing their human rights claims.

    2. The claimants are citizens of Brazil. The first and second  claimants
       are partners, the remaining claimants are  their  children.   At  the
       date of the judge's decision the third claimant was 15 years old  and
       had been in the United Kingdom for nine years and three  months.  The
       fourth claimant was almost 13 years old and had  also  lived  in  the
       United Kingdom for nine years and three months.  The  fifth  claimant
       was born in the United Kingdom in January 2014.

    3. The judge set out the immigration history, which is not  in  dispute.
       The second claimant entered the United Kingdom in  January  2005  but
       was then removed in July 2008.  The first claimant entered the United
       Kingdom in June 2006 as a visitor  and  she  overstayed.  The  second
       claimant married a Portuguese national in Brazil  with  the  specific
       intention of returning to the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  the
       relationship. The second claimant accepted that this was  a  marriage
       of convenience.   The  second  claimant  and  the  third  and  fourth
       claimants entered the United  Kingdom  on  23rd  September  2008.  On
       entering the UK, the  first  and  second  claimants  continued  their
       relationship with their children living with them as a family unit.

    4. After previous human rights claims were refused the claimants made an
       application for leave  to  remain  on  4th  August  2016.   This  was
       considered by the SSHD as a  human  rights  claim.   The  judge  very
       briefly summarised in his decision the reasons given by the SSHD  for
       refusing the human rights claims.   Essentially,  the  SSHD  did  not
       accept that  any  of  the  claimants  met  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules and that it was  reasonable  for  the  children  to
       leave the United Kingdom with their parents.

    5. Grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  essentially  contended
       that the third and fourth claimants met  the  criteria  in  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and   additionally   made
       reference to the fifth  claimant's  diagnosis  that  he  was  on  the
       Autistic Spectrum (ASD).

    6. At a hearing on 8th January 2018 the judge heard  evidence  from  the
       first and the second claimants and briefly from the third and  fourth
       claimants.  In his decision the judge correctly directed  himself  as
       to the applicable burden and standard of proof. The judge found  that
       the third and fourth claimants had been truthful and there  has  been
       no challenge to this finding.

    7. The judge then found, for the most part, that the  first  and  second
       claimants had been truthful. The  judge  commented  that  the  second
       claimant had been extremely frank about his marriage to a  Portuguese
       national which was contracted for the singular purpose of re-entering
       and remaining in the United Kingdom.

    8. The judge rejected the 1st claimant's claim that she was  unaware  of
       the false marriage plan.  Nor did the judge accept the evidence  from
       the  first  and  second  claimant  relating  to  the  proficiency  in
       Portuguese of the third and fourth claimants.  The judge  found  that
       they would be able to speak Portuguese but accepted that  they  would
       not read or write the language to the same standard as  if  they  had
       been brought up in Brazil.

    9. The judge then considered the appeal  under  Article  8.   The  judge
       appreciated that the Article 8 human rights claim  had  to  first  be
       considered through the prism of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge
       correctly noted that both the third and fourth claimants had lived in
       the United Kingdom for more than seven years and that the issue under
       the Immigration Rules for the judge to  decide  was  whether  it  was
       reasonable to expect them to leave the UK.

   10. The  judge  then  identified  a  number  of  relevant  decisions  and
       authorities relating to the best interests of the  children  and  the
       correct approach to take when weighing up those best interests in  an
       Article 8 proportionality assessment.  The  judge  specifically  made
       reference to the Court of Appeal decision  in  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
       EWCA Civ 705.  At paragraph 23 the judge  correctly  noted  that  the
       best interests of the children were a primary consideration and  that
       their parents' immigration history  was  not  relevant  to  the  best
       interests assessment.

   11. The judge then noted the ages of the children when they  entered  the
       United Kingdom and their length of residence. The judge noted that  a
       period of seven years from the age of 4 onwards was likely to be more
       significant to a child when it came to the assessment of  the  impact
       of removal on their wellbeing, this reflecting the decision in Azimi-
       Moayed and Others [2013] UKUT 00197.

   12.  At paragraph 25 the judge noted that the third and fourth  claimants
       were at secondary school, and that they had  formed  friendships  and
       interests outside of the family unit. The judge noted that  they  had
       put down roots and developed cultural, social and educational  links.
       With reference  to  the  evidence  given  by  the  third  and  fourth
       claimants the judge noted in particular the third claimant's  anxiety
       about his safety should he be required to return to Brazil.

   13. The judge found at paragraph 26 that the  third  claimant  was  at  a
       crucial point in his education, that he was  some  months  away  from
       taking his GCSEs and BTech exams. The judge then noted that both  the
       third and fourth claimants had wider family in  the  United  Kingdom.
       The judge concluded, at paragraph 28, that the best interests of  the
       third and fourth claimants was for  them  to  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom with their parents and their younger brother.

   14. The judge then undertook an assessment of the  evidence  relating  to
       the fifth claimant. The judge noted that it was not suggested that  a
       change of home would and of itself be particularly difficult for  the
       fifth claimant, and that the main issue raised on his behalf was that
       therapeutic and educational interventions had already  commenced  and
       that, if moved to Brazil, there would  be,  at  the  very  least,  an
       interruption with those educational  and  therapeutic  interventions.
       The  judge  concluded  that  it  was  reasonable  for  the  preferred
       interventions  to  continue  uninterrupted  and,  for  this   reason,
       concluded that it was in the fifth claimant's best interests also  to
       remain in the United Kingdom.

   15. The judge then  reminded  himself  at  paragraph  37  that  the  best
       interests of children may be  outweighed  by  the  need  to  maintain
       immigration control. The judge proceeded to consider various  factors
       that  were,  in  his  view,  capable  of  ameliorating  some  of  the
       disruption that would face the third and  fourth  claimants  if  they
       were required to leave the UK.  The judge  set  out  several  factors
       that were capable of ameliorating the impact on the third and  fourth
       claimants.  The judge noted that they had extended family  in  Brazil
       who would be capable of being a source of support.  The  judge  noted
       that there would be a home available for the claimants and  that  all
       the children spoke Portuguese.  The judge noted  that,  although  all
       the children had been socialised in the UK,  they  lived  with  their
       Brazilian parents and  had  frequent  contact  with  other  Brazilian
       relatives and would  therefore  have  some  familiarity  with  Brazil
       culture. With respect to the fifth claimant, the judge noted that his
       parents had  the  benefit  of  advice  and  training  on  autism  and
       additionally observed that it was not unknown for  families  to  take
       the decision to move countries for work or life experiences or indeed
       for children to move schools.

   16.  The  judge  satisfied  himself  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
       claimants' human rights claims was lawful and made for  a  legitimate
       purpose, and then, at paragraph 39, commenced  his  consideration  of
       the issue of proportionality. In so doing the judge made reference to
       Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and
       the various requirements and factors contained therein.

   17. At paragraph 40  the  judge  expressly  stated,  when  assessing  the
       reasonableness of removal, that the immigration history of the  first
       and second claimants was relevant.  "Their history is a matter to  be
       taken into account and to do  so  is  not  the  same  as  blaming  or
       punishing the children for the actions of their  parents  over  which
       they have no control."

   18. At paragraph 41 the judge stated, "The adult claimants have very poor
       immigration histories.   They  are  not  just  overstayers  but  have
       deliberately used or been a party to deception to keep  their  family
       in the UK."  The judge noted that  the  second  claimant  had  worked
       illegally for a number of years and  that  there  had  been  repeated
       applications for leave to remain which had been  refused.  The  judge
       additionally noted, at paragraph 41, that the family had  been  using
       hospitals, schools and other services paid for  by  the  UK  taxpayer
       when they had no right to be in the country, and  finally  noted  the
       first claimant's lies at the hearing. The judge  additionally  noted,
       at paragraph 42, that, as the claimants had resided in  the  UK  with
       illegal or precarious statuses, their private  lives  carried  little
       weight.  However, this primarily impacted upon the adult claimants.

   19. The judge explained at paragraph 43, "If this case concerned only the
       adult claimants and the fifth  claimant  I  would  have  refused  the
       appeal as I find the effect on him  based  on  the  evidence  I  have
       before me to be proportionate for the need  to  maintain  immigration
       control." Then at paragraph 44 the judge stated, "However, in all the
       circumstances, giving  due  weight  to  the  need  [sic]  the  public
       interest in the maintenance of immigration control  and  taking  into
       account the adult [claimants']  history  I  do  not  consider  it  is
       reasonable to expect [the third and fourth claimants]  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom."    Having so concluded, and by reference to  Section
       117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the judge found that the public interest did
       not require the first, second or fifth claimants  to  be  removed  as
       they were part of the same family unit. The judge  therefore  allowed
       the appeals.

   20. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   21. In his grounds the SSHD submitted that the judge had  considered  the
       best interests of the children essentially  as  a  'trump  card'  and
       failed to  carry  out  a  proportionality  exercise  balancing  their
       interests against the public  interest.   Ms  Kenny  reiterated  this
       ground in her submissions. The  grounds  further  maintain  that  the
       judge listed numerous reasons as to why it  would  be  reasonable  to
       expect the family unit to return to Brazil  such  as  the  children's
       ability to speak Portuguese, the familiarity with Brazilian  culture,
       the fact that there was a home there and they had extended family who
       would be able to support them and the existing provision for autistic
       children in the country. It was claimed that the judge failed to give
       adequate reasons why the public  interest  was  outweighed  in  these
       circumstances.  The grounds contend that the judge attached weight to
       the education of  the  third  and  fourth  claimants  but  failed  to
       consider that this, as well as NHS treatment, had been gained at  the
       public  expense.  The  grounds  finally  note  that  the  family  had
       established their private lives by means of  deception  exercised  by
       the parents and that the judge failed to give adequate reasons why it
       would now be unreasonable for  the  Brazilian  national  children  to
       return to that country.

   22. In granting permission Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cruthers
       stated, "In my assessment it is arguable, as per the grounds in which
       the respondent seeks  permission  to  appeal,  that  [in  law]  these
       appeals were not properly allowable.  In  particular,  when  deciding
       these appeals in the [claimants'] favour the judge  may  have  wholly
       left out of  account  the  duplicity  of  the  adult  [claimants]  in
       relation to the UK's immigration laws [see the judge's  paragraphs  5
       on] and it seems to me arguable that the approach is contrary to  the
       principles explained by the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
       EWCA Civ 705.  As the respondent's grounds  suggest  reference  might
       usefully be made to the  principals  explained  in  EV  (Philippines)
       [2014] EWCA Civ 874."

   23. In her submissions Ms Kenny reiterated that the essence of the appeal
       was that the judge used the best  interests  of  the  children  as  a
       'trump card' without carrying out a full proportionality  assessment.
       She drew my attention to all the factors that  would  ameliorate  the
       impact on the third and fourth claimants if  they  were  returned  to
       Brazil. She submitted that the judge was not rationally  entitled  to
       conclude that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
       return to Brazil having full regard to the  public  interest  factors
       and, in particular, the very serious immigration history of the adult
       claimants.

Discussion

   24. It is simply not correct to state that the judge wholly left  out  of
       account, as referenced by the First-tier Judge  granting  permission,
       the duplicity of the first and second claimants  in  relation  to  UK
       immigration laws, or that the judge failed to appreciate the relevant
       public interest factors at play.  The judge made  specific  reference
       to the second claimant's deception and his extremely poor immigration
       history at paragraphs 4, 5, 16, 20 (where the  judge  refers  to  the
       first and second claimants "very bad immigration histories"), and  at
       paragraph 40 and at paragraph 41, where the judge again  referred  to
       and  took  into  account  ,when  determining   the   issue   of   the
       reasonableness, the "very poor immigration histories"  of  the  first
       and second claimants and the second claimant's  illegal  working  and
       his failure to leave.  it is abundantly  clear  that  the  judge  was
       acutely aware of the adult claimants' poor  immigration  history  and
       gave it its due weight.

   25. The judge also made specific findings that  the  first  claimant  was
       lying about her knowledge of the marriage of  convenience,  and  that
       both the first and the second claimants were not telling the truth in
       respect of their children's proficiency in Portuguese. These were all
       matters specifically identified and referred to by the judge  in  the
       course of his decision and, indeed, in his assessment of the issue of
       reasonableness. Nor is it correct to say that  the  judge  failed  to
       consider the children's education and  any  NHS  treatment  that  was
       gained at public expense.  At paragraph  41  the  judge  specifically
       referred to the family using hospitals, schools  and  other  services
       paid for by the UK taxpayer.  It is quite clear that  the  judge  was
       fully aware of these public interest point  and  that  he  gave  full
       consideration to these factors in his assessment.

   26. In my judgment it is simply not tenable that the judge approached the
       children's best interests as a  'trump  card'.   The  judge  properly
       directed himself in respect of the best interests  of  the  children,
       noting that they were a primary consideration only,  and  that  their
       parents' immigration history was not relevant to the  best  interests
       assessment. For reasons given by him at  paragraphs  24  and  27  the
       judge was unarguably entitled to conclude that the best interests  of
       the third and fourth claimants were to remain in the  United  Kingdom
       with their parents.  In  so  doing  the  judge  applied  the  factors
       identified  in  EV  (Philippines).   At  paragraph   31   the   judge
       specifically and properly  noted  that  the  best  interests  of  the
       children can be outweighed by public interest  factors.  Bearing  all
       these factors in the round, I am satisfied that  the  judge  did  not
       treat the best interests as a trump card.

   27. The judge also properly directed himself as to the legal test for the
       assessment of reasonableness under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
       Immigration Rules and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. In particular,
       in his assessment  of  the  issue  of  reasonableness  under  Section
       117B(6) the judge specifically took into account the relevant  public
       interest factors, as required by MA (Pakistan). These were identified
       in detail by the judge from paragraphs 32 to 42.  They  included  the
       fact that the children had extended family in Brazil, they had a home
       available, that the older children spoke Portuguese, that  the  older
       children would have some  familiarity  with  Brazilian  culture,  the
       parents' very poor immigration history and the use of  public  funds.
       Nor is there any merit in the ground contending that the judge failed
       to give adequate reasons to support his conclusion that it  would  be
       unreasonable for the children to return to Brazil.  At  paragraph  24
       the judge noted the ages of the third and fourth claimants when  they
       entered the United Kingdom and their length  of  residence  and  that
       they had both resided in the UK for more than seven years  since  the
       age of 4. The judge's assessment  is  consistent  with  the  approach
       taken by the Court of Appeal in  MA  (Pakistan)  where  Lord  Justice
       Elias stated, at paragraph 49, "However, the fact that the child  has
       been in the UK for seven years would need  to  be  given  significant
       weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons.
       First, because  of  its  relevance  to  determining  the  nature  and
       strength  of  a  child's  best  interests,  and  second,  because  it
       establishes a starting point that  leave  should  be  granted  unless
       there are powerful reasons to the contrary."

   28. At paragraph 25 the judge noted that both the third  and  the  fourth
       claimants  were  at  secondary  school,  and  that  they  had  formed
       friendships and interests outside of  the  family  unit.   The  judge
       essentially found that  the  third  and  fourth  claimants  had  both
       established identities that were moulded by their experience  in  the
       UK and by the culture and social links that they had developed.

   29. At paragraph 26 the judge properly noted that the third claimant  was
       at a crucial point in his education, and was undoubtedly entitled  to
       this conclusion. The judge additionally noted the existence of  wider
       family links in the UK. At paragraph 44 it is readily  apparent  that
       the judge balanced these reasons against the factors he  had  already
       identified as ameliorating the effects of  removal,  including,  once
       again, the parents' very bad immigration history (which  I  note  the
       SSHD specifically declined to hold  against  them  as  a  Suitability
       point in the Reasons For Refusal Letter).

   30. Having rejected the contention that the judge  failed  to  take  into
       account relevant considerations or  to  give  adequate  reasons,  the
       remaining challenge, as accepted by Ms Kenny, is essentially  one  of
       perversity. The judge's conclusions, whilst perhaps generous,  cannot
       on any reasonable view be regarded  as  being  perverse.   The  judge
       heard oral evidence from the third and fourth claimants and was  best
       placed to make an assessment of their  evidence  and  the  extent  of
       their integrative links. The judge gave cogent and clear reasons  for
       his conclusions, which were supported by  the  documentary  evidence.
       The judge clearly considered the best  interests  of  the  third  and
       fourth claimants as a primary consideration only  and  weighed  those
       against what he clearly identified as the relevant public  interests.
       In my judgment, the judge's decision was well  within  the  range  of
       decisions rationally open to him.

   31. In these circumstances, and for these reasons, I find that  there  is
       no material error of law and  I  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
       appeal.

Notice of Decision

The SSHD's appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimants and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]    5 October 2018
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


