
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21496/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2019                   |On 24 October 2019                   |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                           TERRENCE MARK ROBINSON
                          (ANOYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. J. Plowright, of counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL


1.   The Respondent is a national of  Jamaica  and  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom, as a visitor, on 11 August 1999. He married a British  citizen
    on 29 January 2000 and was granted leave to remain as her spouse  on  8
    February 2000. He was then granted indefinite leave  to  remain  on  28
    February 2001.


2.   On 3 March 2004  he  was  convicted  of  wounding  with  intent  to  do
    grievous bodily harm and was sentenced to four years  imprisonment.  He
    was served with a notice of a decision to make a deportation order  and
    lodged an appeal but he had become appeal rights exhausted by 24  April
    2006.


3.   The Appellant refused to revoke his deportation  order  on  4  December
    2006 and he was  detained  pending  removal  on  8  January  2007.  The
    Respondent then applied for asylum. He was released from detention  but
    absconded. He was encountered on 28 July 2008 and applied for leave  to
    remain on compassionate grounds and this was treated as an  application
    to revoke his deportation order.


4.   The deportation order was revoked on 29 July 2011 and on  21  September
    2011 his further submissions were refused but he  was  granted  an  in-
    country right of appeal. He appealed and his appeal was allowed  on  25
    June 2012. He was granted six months limited leave to remain which  was
    due to expire on 29 March 2013. He made a human rights claim on 24  May
    2014.


5.   He made a further application for leave to remain on 31 March 2017  and
    on 5 February 2018 the Respondent was served with a second decision  to
    make a deportation order and his 2014 human rights claim  was  refused.
    The Respondent appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rastogi  allowed
    his appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  20  June  2019.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly refused  to  grant  the  Appellant  permission  to
    appeal on 16 July 2019 but Upper Tribunal Judge  Kekic  did  grant  her
    permission to appeal on 12 September 2019.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING


6.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the  Respondent
    made oral submissions and I have taken these into account when reaching
    my findings below.





ERROR OF LAW DECISION


7.   Paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules states that:


         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the  public
         interest to deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007".


8.   Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules states that:


         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and


             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of less than four years but at least 12 months...


         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors".


9.   Paragraph 399 states that:


         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and


                  (i)  the child is a British citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and


                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported".


10.  Paragraph 399A states that:


         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if-


             (a)  the person had been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
             of his life; and


             (b)  his is socially and culturally integrated  into  the  UK;
             and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported".


11.  Section 117A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that:


         "(1) This part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b)  as a result, would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and


             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals
             to the considerations listed in section 117C".


12.  Section 117C states:


         "Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals


         (1)  The deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is  in  the  public
         interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         that greater is the interest in deportation of the criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,


             (b)  C's socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner or a genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2".


13.  Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic granted permission to appeal on  two  basis.
    The first was that it  was  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rastogi's reasoning on whether there were very compelling circumstances
    over and above those cited in paragraphs 399 and 399A was inadequate.


14.  In paragraph 40 of  her  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rastogi
    found that the Appellant and his wife were in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship and in paragraph 63 she found  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the Respondent's partner to move to Jamaica with him as
    it would be unconscionable to her to desert her sister to whom she  was
    the primary carer and appointee.


15.  However, in paragraph 65 of her decision, when she  considered  whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the Respondent's wife  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without him, she said:


         "I have reservations as to whether this situation, harsh as  it  no
         doubt it, is capable of being described as 'unduly harsh'".


16.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that, therefore,  she  had
    not reached a finding on an element which she had  to  consider  before
    proceeding to find whether there  were  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above the exceptions to deportation to allow an appeal.


17.  Counsel for the Respondent relied on the fact that First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rastogi had  continued  in  paragraph  65  by  finding  that  the
    question of whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Respondent's
    partner to remain here without him, "needs to be set in the context  of
    what both she  and  the  [Respondent]  would  have  understood  of  his
    position here having regard to the 2012 letter". However, the Judge did
    not explain why this letter gave rise to a situation which  was  unduly
    harsh. This was clearly a lacuna in her reasoning which amounted to  an
    error or law.


18.  The second basis upon which permission  was  given,  was  that  it  was
    arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi  had  placed  too  much
    emphasis on Respondent's rehabilitation.


19.  The Appellant did not seek to challenge the finding made by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rastogi in paragraph 44 of her  decision  that  she  was
    satisfied that the appellant had  been  effectively  rehabilitated  and
    presented with a very low risk of reoffending.


20.  However, in paragraph 15 of OH (Serbia) v Home  Secretary  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 694, Wilson LJ, as he then was, found that:


         "(a) The risk of offending is one facet of the public interest but,
         in the case of very serious crimes, not the most important facet.


         (b)  Another important facet is the need to deter foreign nationals
         from committing serious crimes by leading them to understand  that,
         whatever the other circumstances, one consequence of them may  well
         be deportation.


         (c)  A further important facet is the role of a  deportation  order
         as an expression of society's revulsion at serious  crimes  and  in
         building public confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens who
         have committed serious crimes".


21.  It is also the case that in paragraph 21 of  Taylor  v  Home  Secretary
    [2013] EWCA Civ 845, Moore-Bick LJ held:


         "I  would  certainly  not  wish  to  diminish  the  importance   of
         rehabilitation in itself, but the cases in  which  it  can  made  a
         significant contribution to  establishing  the  compelling  reasons
         sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation  are
         likely to be rare...Moreover, as was recognised in SU  (Bangladesh)
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA  Civ  427
         rehabilitation is relevant primarily to the reduction in  the  risk
         of re-offending.  It  is  less  relevant  to  other  factors  which
         contribute to the public interest in deportation".


22.  In RA (s117C: "unduly harsh"; offence; seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
    00123 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal also found that "rehabilitation will not
    ordinarily bear material weight in favour of a foreign criminal".


23.  This case law was reflected  in  the  approach  adopted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rastogi in paragraph 70 of her decision, in  so  far  as
    she reminded herself that "whilst, in general terms, rehabilitation  is
    not a factor which carries a great deal of weight".


24.  However, she then continued: "I find that I  can  properly  distinguish
    the appellant's case". The basis of this finding was, in part, based on
    the fact that the Respondent had been sent a letter by  the  Appellant,
    dated 29 September 2012, which stated that:


         "I am writing to inform you that the Secretary of State  has  taken
         note of your conviction dated 3 March 2004 at Southwark Crown Court
         for wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm. The  Secretary
         of State takes a serious view of your conduct and, in light of your
         conviction, she has given careful consideration to your immigration
         status and the question of our liability to deportation.


         In all the circumstances,  however,  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         decided not to take any deportation  action  against  you  on  this
         occasion but you should clearly understand that, the provisions  of
         the Immigration Act 1971 as amended by the Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 1999 continue to apply to you. Under these provisions a  person
         who does not have a right of abode is liable to deportation if  the
         Secretary of State deems his deportation conducive  to  the  public
         good or if he is convicted of an offence  and  is  recommended  for
         deportation by a court.


         I should warn you therefore that if you should come to the  adverse
         notice in the future, the Secretary of State  will  be  obliged  to
         give further consideration to the question of whether you should be
         deported. If you commit a further offence, the Secretary  of  State
         would also need to consider the automatic deportation provisions of
         the UK Borders Act 2007.  You  should  be  aware  that  under  such
         circumstances, the Secretary of State may  be  legally  obliged  to
         make a deportation order against you".


25.  This decision post-dated the previous decision by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    to uphold the Respondent's appeal against the decision  to  deport  him
    but it was also a stand-alone decision by the Appellant that it was not
    in the public interest to deport the Respondent.


26.  Counsel for the Respondent relied on the third paragraph of the  letter
    and submitted that this amounted to a decision that  he  would  not  be
    deported if he did not re-offend. However, I accept,  as  submitted  by
    the Home Office Presenting Officer, that in the second  paragraph,  the
    Secretary of State had informed him that "a person who does not have  a
    right of abode is liable to deportation if the Secretary of State deems
    his deportation conducive to the public good".  Therefore,  as  someone
    who had been sentenced to prison for more than four years, he  remained
    potentially liable to deportation.


27.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also relied on  the  fact  that  the
    factual matrix relied upon by the Respondent in relation to his Article
    8 rights was different to that relied upon at his last  appeal.  In  my
    view, First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi recognised this  and  addressed
    the present facts appropriately.


28.  But I note that in paragraph 15 of OH Wilson LJ found that:


         "(d) Primary responsibility for the public interest, whose view  of
         it is likely to be  wider  and  better  informed  than  that  of  a
         tribunal resides in the  [Appellant]  and  accordingly  a  tribunal
         hearing an appeal against a decision  to  deport  should  not  only
         consider for itself all the  facets  of  the  public  interest  but
         should weigh, as a linked but independent feature, the approach  to
         them adopted by the [Appellant] in the context of the facts of  the
         case...."


29.  Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi was obliged to  take  into
    account all three separated  features  of  the  public  interest,  even
    though she was also entitled to take the contents of  the  letter  into
    account, as a linked but independent feature.  Her  failure  to  do  so
    meant that the only aspect of the public interest which she  explicitly
    addressed was that of rehabilitation. This amounted to another error of
    law in the context of the relevant case law.


30.  However, the Appellant did not seek to  challenge  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rastogi's finding in paragraph  68  of  her  decision  that  "the
    effect of the 2012 letter was setting out the [Appellant's]  view  that
    she (at the time) no longer considered it to be in the public  interest
    to deport the appellant...".


31.  It would have assisted the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal
    if the Appellant had provided detailed and cogent reasons for coming to
    the conclusion that, although it was not  in  the  public  interest  to
    deport the Respondent in 2012, it was now in  the  public  interest  to
    deport him in the light of the length of time he had  lived  here,  his
    relationship and the fact that he  had  not  offended  since  2003.  In
    particular, it would have been useful for the Appellant not  to  simply
    state that it was in the public interest to deport the  Respondent  but
    to refer to how such  a  deportation  would  meet  the  three  separate
    elements of that public interest.


32.  The failure to do so made it very  difficult  for  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rastogi to properly address the public interest and it  is  hoped
    that the Appellant will make her position clearer before the appeal  is
    heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.


DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


(2)  Most of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi's decision is set  aside  but
    her  finding  in  relation  to  the  Respondent  being  in  a   genuine
    relationship with his partner and the finding that it would  be  unduly
    harsh for the  Respondent's  partner  to  move  with  him  Jamaica  are
    preserved.


(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing on all but the preserved findings in paragraph (2) above.


(4)  The hearing should not be  listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Rastogi or Kelly or Designated Judge Wilson.


Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 21 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

