
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/21757/2016
     hu/21759/2016
     hu/21763/2016
     hu/21767/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st August 2018                           |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 Rafaela [P]
                                 Marcos [S]
                         k1 (their eldest daughter)
                         K2 (their second daughter)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss N Karbani, Counsel, Sterling & law associates
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge L K Gibbs promulgated on 22 February 2018 following a hearing  on
    19 January 2018.  The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    resulted in her  refusing  dismissing  the  appeal  of  four  Brazilian
    citizens against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  them
    further leave to remain.

 2. The circumstances of the case are a matter of history which  I  do  not
    consider can properly be omitted.  The weight that is to be attached to
    them is of course a matter for further consideration in this  decision,
    but as a matter of history, the father entered the United Kingdom on 18
    November 2005.  He is now aged  36.   The  mother  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 1 June 2006.  She is now aged 28.  They  not  only  remained
    unlawfully from the moment of their arrival but they entered unlawfully
    because the  judge  properly  found  that  it  had  always  been  their
    intention to enter and remain in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  and
    eventually to seek settled status in the United Kingdom.

 3. The appellants have remained in the United Kingdom and  three  children
    were subsequently born.  K1 was born on 7 May 2009.  She is now 9 years
    old but was 8 years old at the time of the decision by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  K2 was born on 14 February 2012 and  is  now  aged  6.
    Although K3 is not a party to this application she too  is  a  relevant
    consideration.  She was born in July of 2016 and is now  aged  2.   The
    judge therefore had to grapple with the situation  as  to  whether  the
    presence of these children in the United Kingdom  (notwithstanding  the
    absence of any right to remain under other  parts  of  the  Immigration
    Rules) was such as to render their removal unlawful.

 4. In doing so, the judge set out in paragraph 10 the immigration  history
    but then in paragraph 11 said in terms

         I must however at this stage put aside my  concerns  regarding  the
         conduct of the first and second  appellants  and  review  the  best
         interests of their children as a primary consideration.

 5. It said that that statement was tainted by the fact that  there  was  a
    reference to the parents' poor  immigration  history.   I  reject  that
    submission.  It was an inevitable part  of  the  consideration  of  the
    claim that the family history in immigration terms had to be looked at.
    Indeed, had they entered lawfully and  remained  lawfully  for  such  a
    period of time, that  would  have  been  material  and,  by  parity  of
    reasoning, the converse.  Consequently, it cannot be said that a  judge
    is not permitted even to mention the immigration history.  It  becomes,
    if only in chronological terms, a crucial element  of  the  description
    that any judge is required to make  as  to  the  situation  the  family
    faces.

 6. Furthermore the consideration of the family's situation as a whole is a
    matter which has been considered significant in that,  as  McCloskey  J
    observed and is referred to in paragraph 40  of  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, it would  be  absurd  to  consider  the
    child's position entirely independently of, and in isolation from,  the
    position of the parents given that  the  child's  best  interests  were
    usually required that he or she lives as part of the family  unit.   It
    does not seem to me to be tenable to argue that the judge was wrong  as
    a matter of law from reciting the immigration history of  the  parents.
    It was inevitable that she should do so.  Even if she had  been  wrong,
    the judge correctly stated in paragraph  11  that  she  must,  at  that
    stage, put aside her concerns regarding the conduct of  the  first  and
    second appellants and review the best interests of the children as  her
    primary consideration.  It cannot therefore be said that the judge  was
    not entirely aware of what her approach should be.

 7. In paragraph 12 of the determination the judge properly finds  (and  it
    is accepted that the contents of paragraph 12 are correct) that,  as  a
    matter of common sense, the children's best interests are to remain  in
    their current family unit.  That may be something that was self-evident
    but, nevertheless, it was important for the judge to say it.  It led on
    to the judge then saying in paragraph 12, and correctly saying, that as
    the respondent was seeking to remove the family as a unit, the question
    for her was whether it was in the children's  best  interest  for  this
    family unit to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   That  was  a  correct
    approach in law and then that was immediately taken up by the judge  in
    paragraph 13 when the judge said that K1 was 8 years  old  and  K2  was
    then 5 years old.  The judge clearly had in mind the fact that  K1  was
    then enjoying schooling and after school activities and  that  she  was
    doing well.  She also accepted that the girls were happy but the  judge
    concluded that they are not at a crucial stage of  their  education  or
    social development.  In my judgment that was an entirely proper comment
    to make in relation to a child who is 8 years old.

 8. The focus of this appeal has inevitably centred upon K1 because K1  has
    been in the United Kingdom for a period in excess of seven years.   But
    what the judge said in paragraph 13 was factually correct: they are not
    at a crucial stage of their education or social development.   It  goes
    without saying that a child for the first four or  five  years  of  her
    life spends most of that  time  within  a  domestic  setting  with  her
    parents and the quality of the  private  life  that  a  child  develops
    during those four or five  years  of  her  life  before  going  off  to
    schooling is qualitatively different from the position of one  who  has
    been in the United Kingdom for a period of seven  years,  say,  between
    the ages of 10 and 17 where the education and  social  development  has
    reached a very different stage.  That is something which  we  will  see
    developed when we come to consider the second decision which is  relied
    upon by the appellant in this appeal.  This is the decision made in the
    case of MT and ET (Nigeria) [2018] UKUT 88 a decision of the  President
    and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley.   It  cannot  in  my  judgment  be
    suggested that the judge was wrong in saying that  these  children  had
    not reached a crucial stage of their education or social development.

 9. The judge properly directed herself as to the relevance  of  the  seven
    year period by making reference to the case of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT
    197 in which in the headnote at sub-paragraph (iii)  that  the  lengthy
    period of residence is not clear-cut but past and present policies have
    identified seven  years  as  a  relevant  period.   It  was  inevitable
    therefore that the judge should draw a distinction between  K2  who  at
    the age of 5 did not meet the seven year period and K1 who at  the  age
    of 8 had done so.  However, the judge sensibly made the point that,  as
    K1 had been resident in the United Kingdom since birth, the early years
    carry less weight  in  terms  of  a  consideration  of  the  impact  of
    education and social development than the years accrued since  the  age
    of about 4.

10. The judge then went on to consider the position overall.   It  is  said
    that the judge's consideration of the family's circumstances was skewed
    by reference to the situation in Brazil and not by proper reference  to
    the situation in the United Kingdom.  That, it is said, amounts  to  an
    error of law.  Yet, looking at paragraph 16, I  do  not  consider  that
    that criticism is sustainable.

11. The judge first of all acknowledged  that  K1  was  familiar  with  the
    United Kingdom but placed weight on the fact  that  her  parents'  oral
    evidence was that she had grandparents and aunts and uncles who live in
    Brazil with whom the family are in contact.  I do not consider that the
    judge had acted in error in mentioning what was a material factor.  The
    judge went on to say that there was a reference to a close bond between
    the children and the mother's sister who is in the United  Kingdom  but
    also drew attention to the fact that that sister  did  not  attend  the
    appeal hearing in  support  of  the  claim  a  factor  which  was  also
    factually accurate.  The judge also placed weight on the fact  that  K1
    and K2 spoke Portuguese.

12. In the course of the evidence,  K1  demonstrated  a  positive  attitude
    which could in the judge's opinion make the move to Brazil a beneficial
    experience for the children.  She  repeated  the  children's  excellent
    progress at school, reached a  sustainable  conclusion  that  they  are
    bright, motivated individuals and that there was no evidence that  they
    would not be able to adapt and thrive  in  another  school  in  Brazil.
    Those  findings  are  not  challenged.   Nor  could  they  properly  be
    challenged.  They were facts which were properly  open  to  the  judge.
    The criticism that is made is  that  the  judge  was  paying  too  much
    attention, such that it amounted to an error of law, to  the  situation
    in which the children would find themselves in Brazil.  I  reject  that
    criticism because, on any view, the reception facilities  for  children
    when they are removed from the United Kingdom must be a  relevant  and,
    indeed,  an  important  consideration.   If   those   conditions   were
    unsatisfactory, the appellants would be the first to  claim  that  that
    situation was unsatisfactory and was a  reason  why  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to return them to Brazil.  In contrast  it  cannot  be  said
    that if the situation in Brazil would be a positive  one,  it  must  be
    available to the judge to make that finding.

13. The judge pursued that point  by  consideration  of  the   second-named
    appellant.  The father is a highly skilled man.  He  is  a  watchmaker.
    He  had  worked  in  that  capacity  in  Brazil  and,  again  factually
    correctly, the judge found that there was no evidence that he would  be
    unable to find such work again on return.

14. The first and second appellants have  obtained  qualifications  in  the
    United Kingdom.  All of those factors  would  benefit  them  when  they
    returned  to  Brazil  but,  here  again,  the  judge  starts   out   by
    acknowledging the task before her.  The first  and  second  appellants'
    case was that life for them and their children was better in the United
    Kingdom and  that  included  the  standard  of  education.   The  judge
    acknowledged that this might well be true, although accurately  stating
    that there was no country background information about it.   But,  even
    if it were true, she came to the conclusion that the children, by being
    able to speak Portuguese and coming from educated, resourceful  parents
    with access to family in Brazil, would be able to make that process  of
    relocation without harm to them.   I  use  the  word  'harm'  advisedly
    because what we, of course, are looking at are the disadvantages -  the
    harm - or even the inconvenience that the children  might  suffer  when
    considering whether it is in their best  interests  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Where one is looking at the impact upon the  children,
    the impact is going to include the impact  that  they  will  experience
    when they return to their native country.

15. The judge went on to consider paragraph 276ADE.  In relation  to  this,
    it is said that the judge failed in his reference to paragraph 40 of MA
    to set out the entirety of the relevant passage.  Paragraph 40  of  the
    decision in MA continues after  the  passage  cited  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 19:

         But the focus on the family does not sit happily with the  language
         of s. 117B(6).  Had Parliament intended to  require  considerations
         bearing upon the conduct and immigration history of  the  applicant
         parent to be taken into consideration, I would have expected it  to
         say so expressly, not for the matter to have to be inferred from  a
         test which in terms focusses on an assessment of what is reasonable
         for the child.  This does not in my view mean that the wider public
         interests have been ignored.  It  is  simply  that  Parliament  has
         determined that where the seven-year Rule is  satisfied  and  other
         conditions  in  this  section  have  been  met,  those  potentially
         conflicting public interests will not suffice to justify refusal of
         leave if, focussing on  the  position  of  the  child,  it  is  not
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

16. In my judgment that is exactly what the judge was doing without express
    reference having been made to this second part of paragraph 40  of  the
    decision in MA.  The judge was, indeed, focussing on whether  it  would
    be reasonable for the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The  whole
    tenor  of  this  judgment  deals  with  the  reasonableness   of   that
    conclusion.  She expressly avoids allowing the sins of the father to be
    visited on the child.  So much  is  clear  from  paragraph  20  of  her
    determination.  She then considers the voluntary work which the parents
    are conducting  but  balances  that  against  their  disregard  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the fact that they never acknowledged  that  what
    they did was  in  breach  of  those  Rules.   It  may  not  be  greatly
    significant that  somebody  who  is  an  immigration  defaulter  should
    acknowledge wrongdoing but it is a relevant factor,  particularly  when
    one is considering matters of public interest.

17. In summary, the judge concluded  in  paragraph  33  that  the  evidence
    before her was that they maintained contact with relatives  in  Brazil;
    are fit and healthy; have reasonable job prospects on return and it was
    therefore open to her to conclude that  neither  the  parents  nor  the
    children met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

18. The  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  focussed  to  a
    considerable degree on the recent decision of the Tribunal in the  case
    of MT and ET (child's best interest, ex tempore pilot)  Nigeria  [2018]
    UKUT 88.  The gravamen of the  submissions  was  that  nowhere  in  the
    decision of the Tribunal is there any reference at  all  to  the  seven
    year period being a  seven  year  period  which  should  be  looked  at
    differently in the case of a child who is 8 years old compared  with  a
    child who is older.  In other words, the simple submission is  asserted
    that, once the seven years have  been  established,  there  had  to  be
    compelling reasons why the child should not  be  permitted  to  remain:
    seven years is seven years, irrespective of the period of life in which
    that seven year falls in the child's development.  In my judgement that
    is a misreading both of the Tribunal's decision in MT and  of  previous
    decisions.

19. There is a material difference in the  impact  upon  a  child  and  the
    deleterious situation in which that child may be faced where the  child
    has reached a stage in her development that the removal would  be  more
    damaging than in other periods of her life.  That is obvious  when  one
    is considering the case of a child who is born in  the  United  Kingdom
    and who has spent four or five years within the domestic setting of her
    home and  has  limited  experience  of  education  and  further  social
    development within the community at large.  So much is clear  from  the
    decision in MT itself because the Tribunal made specific  reference  to
    the fact that one of the appellant's in that appeal  was  14  years  of
    age.  She had arrived in the United Kingdom when she was only  4.   She
    was well advanced in her education in this country having  spent,  from
    four. some ten years in education and, as a 14 year-old, can plainly be
    expected to have  established  significant  social  contacts  involving
    friends, at school and  outside,  such  as  the  church.   Indeed,  the
    materiality of looking at these cases on a case-by-case basis  is  made
    plain by the reference in paragraph 30 of the decision to the fact that
    ET had embarked upon a course of  studies  leading  to  the  taking  of
    GCSEs.  It would be extremely disruptive for that child  to  have  been
    removed from the United Kingdom, and thereby  unreasonable.   The  same
    cannot be said where the judge makes a  sustainable  finding  of  fact,
    which is not challenged in the grounds  of  appeal,  that  K1  had  not
    reached a crucial stage of her education or social development.

20. These cases are fact-sensitive and there has to  be  a  balance  struck
    between the inevitable impact that removal has  upon  a  child  who  is
    entirely innocent of her parents' wrongdoing and the  consideration  of
    whether, if the Immigration Rules had been complied with,  the  parents
    would have left the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  the  terms  of
    their permission to enter.  There is a  public  interest  which  cannot
    simply be omitted from this consideration.   Any  suggestion  that  the
    seven year period is, in essence, determinative of the case  where  the
    child has spent more than seven years in the United Kingdom  is  wrong.
    The judge looked at all the relevant factors including  the  fact  that
    these children, K1 and K2, were doing well in the  United  Kingdom  and
    might well have benefited from a  continued  education  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He therefore paid due attention to their position, treated it
    as a primary consideration but was not persuaded, ultimately,  that  it
    was unreasonable to require them to be removed.  I  conclude  that  the
    judge  properly  applied  the  law,  that  that  law   has   not   been
    significantly altered by the more recent decision by  the  Tribunal  in
    the case of MT and ET and that the case law has consistently  remained,
    that it is for the judge to make a fact-sensitive decision  based  upon
    all of the material but paying express and necessary attention  to  the
    primary consideration of the best interests of the children.   That  is
    what the judge did.  I find no error of law in  her  determination.   I
    therefore dismiss the appeal of the appellants.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                         21st September 2018



