
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21680/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                SAIFUR RAHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr L Kennedy, Advocate, instructed by Taj,
Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant currently identifies himself in the above name and  gives
    his date of birth as 1 January 1989.  He appears to have entered the UK
    in that identity in 2010, but to have  applied  to  the  respondent  in
    another identity in 2014 (a matter which he  inadvertently  brought  to
    light while making the application which leads to these proceedings).

 2.  This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Sorrell,
    promulgated on 25 March 2019,  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  His grounds of appeal to the UT are attached  to
    his application for permission  dated  24  May  2019.   Permission  was
    granted on 24 June 2019.

 3. In a rule 24 response  to  the  grant  of  permission,  the  respondent
    maintains that the FtT at [33] gave clear and sustainable  reasons  for
    holding that the  appellant  did  not  have  a  relationship  with  his
    partner's children of the nature claimed.

 4. Mr Kennedy provided the UT with a  written  outline  submission,  which
    focuses  on  the  aspect  of  parental  relationship.   As  Mr  Kennedy
    correctly acknowledged, that was the only issue by which the  appellant
    had a realistic prospect of success.

 5. Mr Kennedy said that the appellant had brought with him  evidence  that
    he married his partner on 26 July 2019, and that he is now on record as
    a school contact for the children.

 6. There has been no application, as required by rules and directions,  to
    admit further evidence, but, in any event, there was no  need  nor  any
    legal  scope  to  go  into  those  matters.   The  genuineness  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and his partner was  not  in  doubt.
    Both matters post-dated the hearing in the FtT, and were irrelevant  to
    whether it made an error of law.

 7. Having heard the oral submissions, I reserved my decision.

 8. The submission for the appellant at [7] says that  from  his  residence
    with his partner and the  children  "as  a  family  unit  -  while  the
    children's father was no longer exercising residence or any  meaningful
    contact with the children - it might be reasonably  inferred  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  partner's
    children".

 9. Residence with children and their mother is of course an indication  of
    a possible parental relationship.  However,  the  submission  pre-empts
    the issue by using the phrase "family unit", and the  proposition  that
    the children's father has no meaningful contact with them was not shown
    quite to reflect the findings of the FtT or the evidence before it.  He
    has at least telephone contact, and is named as  parent  and  carer  on
    some of the documentation.

10. The matter does not appear to have been brought out by the appellant in
    evidence as clearly as it might have been.  For example, there  was  no
    statement from the children's father, and no information on whether one
    had been sought.

11. At [10] the submission again goes beyond the findings  or  evidence  in
    contending that the appellant "is performing duties that are not  being
    done - and have not been  done  for  some  time  -  by  the  children's
    biological father".

12. I raised with representatives at the end of submissions whether  it  is
    possible for children to have parental relationships with more than two
    persons.  They were not aware of any authority, but both accepted  that
    such is possible.  I take it for present purposes that a child may have
    genuine and subsisting  parental  relationships  with  both  biological
    parents, and with someone else.  This case did not depend on  excluding
    the children's biological father from their lives.

13. It is clear from the decision that although the  appellant  established
    the fact of his relationship with his partner since January 2017, there
    were strong reasons for not accepting his evidence in  other  respects,
    including the time that relationship began, which he claimed to  be  in
    January 2016.  The judge also noted  the  peculiar  fact  that  in  his
    applications to  the  respondent,  even  as  late  as  July  2018,  the
    appellant did not rely upon relationships with the children.

14. The argument for the appellant, orally and at [8 - 9]  of  the  outline
    submission, goes further than that a parental relationship  might  have
    been inferred.  Such a finding is said to  have  been  "inevitable  and
    inescapable"  and  "logically  mandated";  in  other  words,  the  only
    conclusion rationally open to the FtT.

15. On the crucial issue I prefer the submissions for the  respondent.   It
    was rationally open to the judge to conclude one way or the other.  She
    had good reasons to be sceptical of other parts of the evidence for the
    appellant.  At [33] she noted the  lack  of  corroborative  independent
    evidence.  She found some  evidence  tending  against  a  relationship,
    including the other contacts noted for the children on  the  documents,
    and the absence of reference to the appellant in the  Child  and  Young
    Person's Multi-Agency Plan.  She noted the explanation  about  why  the
    appellant had not met the social worker, and found some plausibility in
    it, but  rejected  it  for  inconsistency  with  other  evidence.   The
    decision explains clearly and sensibly why the judge resolved the issue
    as she did.

16. The grounds and submissions for the appellant  do  not  show  that  the
    making of the decision of the FtT involved the making of any error on a
    point of law.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      8 August 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




