
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21580/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2020                      |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                UTTAM GURUNG
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                           Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                             Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Wilford of counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Nepal. His  father  had  served  in  the
    Brigade of Gurkhas in the British Army and had died on 15  March  2005.
    His mother had been granted indefinite leave as  the  wife  of  an  ex-
    Gurkha soldier on 27 August 2014 and had entered the United Kingdom  on
    17 October 2014.

2.   On 17 June 2018 the Appellant applied for entry clearance as her  adult
    son.  His application was refused on 10 September 2018.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Monson dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 22  July
    2019.  The Appellant also appealed against  this  decision  and  on  18
    November 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien refused  to  grant  him
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  However,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Stephen Smith did grant him permission to appeal  on  13  January
    2020.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Counsel for the Appellant made detailed oral submissions based  on  the
    first two grounds of appeal. The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  then
    replied and accepted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson had not made
    clear findings about the financial support provided  to  the  Appellant
    via his uncle and had introduced an  additional  test  in  relation  to
    emotional dependency which was not to be found  in  the  relevant  case
    law.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   The Respondent had accepted the Appellant's  nationality  and  that  he
    was related to his parents as claimed. The  Appellant  did  not  assert
    that he was entitled to entry clearance as his mother's adult dependent
    under paragraph EC-DR.1.1. of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  but
    did rely on Annexe K of  Chapter  15  of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions. However, to fall within this policy, the Appellant  would
    have had to show that he was between the ages of 18 and 30 at the  date
    of his application, which he could not. He would also have to show that
    his father "as the former Gurkha parent has been or is in  the  process
    of being granted settlement under the 2009 discretionary arrangements".
    He was not able to do this as his father had died  without  making  any
    application for settlement.

6.   Therefore, the appeal fell to be  determined  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

7.   The first questions to be determined for  the  purpose  of  R  (on  the
    application of Razgar) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27 was whether refusing the Appellant entry clearance would
    interfere with his exercise of his right to enjoy a  family  life  with
    his mother and whether the consequences of this interference  would  be
    of such gravity as to potentially engage Article 8.

8.   At paragraph  19  of  Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 Sedley LJ noted that:

         "...  Neither  blood  ties  nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
         ordinarily go with them, are, by  themselves  put  together  in  my
         judgment, enough to constitute family life. Most of us  have  close
         relatives of whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit,  or  who
         visit us from time to time; but none  of  us  would  say  on  those
         grounds alone that we share a family life with them  in  any  sense
         capable of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8".

9.   At paragraph 25 Arden LJ added "because  there  is  no  presumption  of
    family life, in my judgment a family life is not established between an
    adult child and his surviving parent or other siblings unless something
    more exists than normal emotional ties...".

10.  At paragraph 24 she also found that "the court has  to  scrutinise  the
    relevant factors. Such factors include identifying  who  are  the  near
    relatives of the appellant, the nature of the links  between  them  and
    the appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he  has
    resided in the past, and the forms of contact he  has  maintained  with
    the other members of the family with whom he claims to  have  a family
    life".

11.  In his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson failed to  take  into
    account the fact that the Appellant was unmarried and had not formed  a
    family unit of his own. He also failed to take into  account  that  the
    Appellant continued to live in the family home in Nepal.

12.  In paragraph 41 of his decision he  also  stressed  the  need  for  the
    Appellant to show that he was emotionally dependent upon his mother and
    she on him. However, I note that in paragraph 17 of Kugathas Sedley  LJ
    found:

         "Mr Gill says that none of this amounts to an absolute requirement
         of dependency. That is clearly right in the economic sense. But  if
         dependency is read down  as  meaning  "support",  in  the  personal
         sense, and if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
         "real" or "committed" or "effective" to the word "support", then it
         represents in my view the irreducible minimum of what  family  life
         implies...".

13.  In paragraph 40 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Monson  also
    found  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  establish  that  he   was
    emotionally dependent upon his mother at the time that she came to  the
    United Kingdom in 2014. This finding ignored the  fact  that  they  had
    lived and worked together on a continuous basis up until that point and
    that the Brief note on Gurkha Family noted that in  the  Nepali  family
    system members are "deeply dependent on one another  for  survival  and
    opportunity" and that "even for Nepalese who have left Nepal the family
    tie remains strong".

14.  In paragraph 41 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson  also
    found that "the fact that the sponsor chose to leave all  her  children
    and go to the UK to live there  on  her  own  in  2014  undermines  the
    proposition that she was emotionally dependent on her  children  then".
    However, when reaching this finding, he failed  to  take  into  account
    that it was her oral evidence that "she was told that  she  would  have
    enough money in the UK so that she would be able to support her sons in
    Nepal".

15.  He also failed to take into account  that  in  Rai  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320, Lindblom LJ found at paragraph 38 that the
    Upper Tribunal had erred in law when concentrating on the  decision  by
    the parents of the appellant in that  case  to  leave  an  adult  child
    behind in Nepal in order to settle in the United Kingdom.  He  went  on
    to find in paragraph 39 that the "real issue was whether as a matter of
    fact the appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life with  his
    parents which had existed at the time of their departure to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom and had endured  beyond  it,  notwithstanding  their
    having left Nepal when they did".

16.  As a consequence, I find that there were  material  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson's decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Monson or O'Brien.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 6 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

