
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21925/2018
                                                               HU/21934/2018
                                                               HU/21940/2018
                                                               HU/21944/2018
                                                               HU/21952/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th August 2019                |On 16th September 2019             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                 RATIBA [F]
                                  TAHAR [M]
                                    [M M]
                                    [H M]
                                    [N M]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Themselves
For the respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The first appellant is married to the second appellant. The remaining
       appellants are their children. All are nationals of Algeria. The
       children were born in the United Kingdom. [MM] was born on 3 May
       2011; [HM] was born on 12 September 2012 and [NM] was born on 5
       November 2014.

    2. The respondent sets out their immigration history. The first
       appellant states she came to the United Kingdom on a visit Visa on 3
       November 2007.This cannot be confirmed. It is known however that in
       January 2008 the first and second appellants unsuccessfully claimed
       protection in the Republic of Ireland. This was refused. They then
       returned to the United Kingdom in May 2008. They went back to the
       Republic of Ireland in 2012 and made a further unsuccessful claim for
       protection. At that stage the third appellant had been born and was
       with them. They then returned to the United Kingdom. In May 2015 a
       claim for protection was made in the United Kingdom which was
       unsuccessful. Then, on 12 July 2018 applications were made for leave
       to remain on the basis of the family's article 8 rights. Those
       applications were unsuccessful. Their appeal against that decision
       was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard and dismissed.



The Upper Tribunal

    3. Permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard
       to the Upper Tribunal has been granted. This is on the basis it was
       arguable the judge erred in law for not making specific findings
       about the best interests of the children, particularly the
       reasonableness of expecting them to leave the United Kingdom and
       section 117 B6.

    4. The appellants were not represented in the First-tier Tribunal
       hearing nor are they represented now. They submitted their own
       application for permission to appeal and have attended at the
       hearing.

    5. The application for permission to appeal did not identify any
       particular suggested errors of law. Rather, it repeats that the
       family want to stay in the United Kingdom and their life was stable
       here and their children can benefit from education. It states that
       Master Nazim has autism and requires special attention.

    6. Mr Bates opposed the appeal. He relied upon the decision of KO
       (Nigeria) [2019] UKSC 53, stating the best interests of the children
       were to be with their parents. In relation to the reasonableness of
       the return of the qualifying child he pointed out that the Supreme
       Court had endorsed the respondent's Guidance. He said the judge's
       decision was based on cumulative factors. The judge had noted that
       the family were being removed as a unit. They were being removed to
       their country of nationality. There were no language issues. The
       judge had regard to the ages of the children. Only one of the
       children was a qualifying child. The children were at primary school
       level. The judge found they would undoubtedly receive an education in
       Algeria. Whilst Nazim would not receive the level of support set out
       in his care plan in Algeria the judge saw no evidence he would suffer
       disproportionately if returned. The judge had pointed out that his
       paternal uncle was in Algeria and had mental disabilities and there
       was no suggestion he has suffered as a result.

    7. At page 7 of the decision the judge set out the factors considered.
       The judge acknowledged that to remove them would be highly disruptive
       and that the children did not have any significant connection with
       Algeria, having been born and raised in the United Kingdom. Their
       only connection was through their parents. The judge did not accept
       the children were unaware of Arabic. At page 8 of the decision the
       judge referred to the respondents published Guidance and the
       reasonableness of expecting a qualifying child to leave.

    8. The judge acknowledged that on return to Algeria a greater burden
       would be placed upon his parents for his care but that did not render
       the decision disproportionate.

    9. The first appellant emphasised that her eldest child been in the
       United Kingdom over seven years and the children have developed
       connections here. She said that in Algeria the educational system
       operates through Arabic and French and they only speak Arabic. She
       said that the family were self-sufficient and not a drain on public
       funds.



Consideration

   10. The appellant's have not engaged legal representatives in either the
       First-tier appeal or for the Upper Tribunal hearing. The grant of
       permission refers to the application apparently being drafted by the
       appellants in person. They did not specifically plead any error of
       law. Permission was granted on the basis there were Robinson obvious
       points: thus it could be argued the First-tier Tribunal judge had not
       made specific findings in relation to the best interests of the
       children and the reasonableness of expecting the eldest child to
       leave for the purposes of section 117 B6 (see Nixon (permission to
       appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC))

   11. The first appellant has indicated an awareness that if a child has
       been here seven years then this is a relevant factor. Before me she
       pleads basically to remain on the basis their lives are better here
       than in Algeria and the children can benefit from education. The
       youngest child has autism and there is a care plan in place.

   12. It should be born in mind that where it is contended that the duties
       enshrined in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
       Act 2009 have been breached, the onus rests on the appellant and the
       civil standard of the balance of probabilities applies. There is no
       onus on the Secretary of State. (MK (section 55 - Tribunal options)
       Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC))

   13. The first appellant has not disputed the factual accuracy of the
       First-tier Tribunal decision and in particular, the immigration
       history. Because she was unrepresented the judge took her through the
       material aspects of her claim and invited her to expand. Following
       the presenting officer's submissions the judge discussed with the
       appellant the appeal being made. There is nothing to suggest any
       procedural unfairness in the way the hearing was conducted.

   14. The judge sets out the immigration history. Notably, at paragraph 12
       it was recorded that the first and second appellants are from large
       families with siblings living in Algeria.

   15. The judge at paragraph 14 noted that the adults did not have lawful
       status and there was no evidence of employment. The focus in the
       claim was upon the children. At paragraph 15 the judge noted the
       eldest child was a qualifying child and she and her sister are both
       at school and doing well. The judge was told that the children did
       not speak Arabic but in the course of the hearing the first appellant
       addressed her daughters in Arabic and they appear to respond.

   16. At paragraph 16 the judge refers to the youngest child being autistic
       and the subject of a care plan. The judge refers to the most recent
       draft plan whereby his needs can be addressed in a mainstream school.
       He is involved with the speech and language therapy service and the
       plan envisages various ways to support him with a view to his
       achieving a degree of independence.

   17. Under the heading `Findings' the judge recorded that whilst the
       family had not claimed public funds they had nevertheless been a
       burden on the public purse by recourse to services, principally
       accommodation and healthcare and education for the children.

   18. The judge found that the immigration rules were not met and
       considered the appeal on the basis of freestanding article 8 rights.
       The judge found that article 8 was engaged particularly in relation
       to the children. The judge accepted that the two older children have
       established a private life outside the family and that private life
       was established in relation to the youngest child because of his
       special needs. The judge then considered the proportionality of the
       decision particularly in relation to the children.

   19. The judge specifically refers to section 117 B. The judge went on to
       consider in the balancing exercise the weight to attach to the
       private life established by the children. The judge referred to MA
       (Pakistan) and others [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and the comments there
       about a child who has lived in the United Kingdom for seven or more
       years. The judge comments that the disruption caused by removal may
       be less with the child is very young. In the present appeal at the
       time of hearing the eldest child was approaching her eighth birthday.
       She had spent all her life in the United Kingdom. The judge accepted
       that the eldest child could not be characterised as very young. The
       judge sets out the guidance at paragraph 48 of that decision on
       factors relevant in determining the child's best interests. This
       includes age and how long they had been in the United Kingdom and how
       long they have been in education.

   20. The judge at page 7 applies those considerations to the appeal. None
       of the children had completed their primary education. The judge
       referred to jurisprudence to the affect that where a child gets older
       their private lives extend beyond the boundaries of the family unit.
       The judge acknowledged that to remove them would be highly
       disruptive. The judge also acknowledged that the children did not
       have a connection was Algeria beyond through their parents. However,
       on return they will continue to be with their parents. The judge
       rejected the claim that the children could not speak Arabic and makes
       the point that in Arabic speaking household they would have learnt
       the language.

   21. The judge specifically deals with the youngest child. He was at the
       very beginning of his education and the special needs plans have been
       preparatory. The judge found that his private life outside the family
       was very limited. The judge acknowledged that the facilities for his
       needs may not be the same in Algeria as here but did not believe he
       would suffer as a result.

   22. The judge pointed out that the adults had been here unlawfully at
       best since shortly after their arrival. The judge referred to what
       Lord Hope said at paragraph 44 of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UK SC 4 about
       the tensions between the need to maintain immigration control and the
       best interests of the children as a primary consideration. The
       quotation comments on the conduct of parents and states that
       considerations of that kind cannot be held against the children and
       that it would be wrong in principle to devalue what was in their best
       interests by something which they could not be held responsible for.

   23. The judge then went on to consider the wider public interest in the
       proportionality of the decision. The judge referred to the guidance
       in place and the reasonableness of expecting the child to leave the
       United Kingdom quotation refers to a qualifying child.

   24. At the end of paragraph 23 the judge is clearly influenced by the
       fact that the intention is for the whole family to be returned to
       Algeria. The extent to which the eldest child is engaged with her
       education is limited. The judge thought she would undoubtedly receive
       an education in Algeria. The youngest child would not receive the
       level of support reflected in the care plan drawn up here but there
       was no evidence he would suffer disproportionately.

   25. I do note that the judge has not referred to KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC
       53 which disapproved the reasoning in MA (Pakistan) & Others [2016]
       EWCA Civ 705 in so far as the immigration history of the parent being
       relevant. The question of whether it is reasonable to expect a child
       to leave the UK was to be decided without considering the immigration
       history of the parents.  The immigration history is relevant however
       as to whether the parents will be leaving the UK.  To that extent
       their record becomes indirectly material because it may lead to them
       having to leave the UK.  It is only if, even on that hypothesis, it
       would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the provision may
       give the parents a right to remain.

   26. The fact a child has been here seven years does not mean their
       appeal. and through them their parents appeals. must necessarily
       succeed. Insofar as section 117 B(6) is a factor the consideration is
       the reasonableness of expecting the child to leave.

   27. At times in the decision the position of the children is rolled up
       with the consideration of the proportionality of the decision.
       However, the judge clearly focused upon the best interests of the
       children. The key issue in relation to removal is the question of
       reasonableness. I do not see any were in the decision where the
       consideration of the children's best interests has been prejudiced by
       their parent's immigration history. What influenced the judge was the
       intention that they would be returned as a family unit to Algeria. As
       a starting point it is in the best interests of children to be with
       both parents and if both parents are being removed so should
       dependent children who form part of their household unless there are
       reasons to the contrary. There was nothing to suggest that the
       parents, absent the children had any right to remain.

   28. The judge evaluated their interests in the context of them being
       returned to Algeria with their parents. In doing so the
       reasonableness of expecting them to leave was considered. The judge
       evaluated the different stages the children were at. The judge
       commented that the eldest child was still in primary education and
       could transit to education in Algeria. She was a qualifying child.
       The youngest child had not started school. He would lose out on the
       benefit of the preparatory educational plan. However the test is not
       a simple comparison of the relative facilities in different
       countries.

   29. It is my conclusion that notwithstanding specific reference to
       section 117 B (6) and KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 the principles
       there and in the earlier jurisprudence has been adequately
       considered.



Decision

I find no material error of law established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Howard. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeals
shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly    Date: 15 September 2019

