
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21172/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 20th June 2019                  |On 15th July 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MR ASHWANI [K]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal is brought by the Secretary of State against a decision
         by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Peter Grant-Hutchison allowing
         an appeal on human rights grounds by Mr Ashwani [K] (hereinafter
         referred to as "the claimant").

      2. The claimant is an Indian national.  He came to the UK in 2011 as a
         student.  Later the same year his leave was curtailed because of
         non-attendance.  In 2015 the claimant was encountered working
         illegally and was served with a notice of liability to detention
         and removal.  Subsequently the claimant was given leave until 24th
         February 2018 as a spouse.  His relationship with his wife broke
         down and in 2017 he entered a new relationship with his current
         partner (referred to hereinafter as "AF").

      3. In November 2017 the claimant's leave was curtailed.  He was
         detained for a period.  Following an application on human rights
         grounds and a judicial review, the claimant was refused leave on
         5th October 2018.  The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was
         brought against this decision.

      4. In his decision the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that
         AF has mental health issues and is heavily emotionally dependent
         upon the claimant.  The judge found that the claimant lived in
         India until the age of 25 and he has family there.  He is described
         as having had a reasonable education.  He would be able to arrange
         accommodation for his partner and himself in Punjab, where English
         is widely spoken.  He would be able to assist his partner in facing
         what the judge referred to as "cultural difficulties".  The reasons
         given by AF for not wanting to accompany the claimant to India had
         "some little merit" but, according to the Judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal, they did not justify a refusal to accompany the claimant
         to India.

      5. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal might have ended his findings
         at this point.  Instead the judge went on to find that
         "notwithstanding the availability of some medical facilities in
         India given the particular severity of [AF's] mental health issues
         and the intensity of the medical treatment that she requires it
         cannot reasonably be expected that she returns with the
         [claimant]".The judge then added: "This is particularly true given
         that she is now pregnant."  The judge concluded that there were
         "indeed insurmountable obstacles" to the claimant's return to India
         and the claimant was "successful under the rule."

      6. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal then purported to allow the
         appeal under the Immigration Rules, instead of allowing it on human
         rights grounds, although in this context, as Mr Govan observed,
         nothing material turned on this mistake.

      7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on the
         basis, first, that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal misdirected
         himself over the application of the test of "insurmountable
         obstacles" in paragraphs EX.1.(b) and EX.2 and, secondly, that the
         judge did not give adequate reasons for finding that the
         requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM were met.  It was not
         clear why pregnancy would be an obstacle to carrying on family life
         in India.  There was no evidence of any complications and the
         pregnancy was not so far advanced as to restrict travel.  There was
         no evidence that AF's treatment for her mental health could not
         continue in India.  The emotional support provided for AF by the
         claimant could continue in India because the claimant and AF would
         be together there.  It was further submitted that the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal was perverse.

      8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable
         that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not properly direct
         himself on the issue of "insurmountable obstacles" and his reasons
         appeared to be brief and were possibly contradictory.

Submissions on error of law

      9. At the hearing Mr Govan addressed me in relation to the application
         for permission to appeal.  He pointed out that although the Judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal referred to paragraph EX.1, he did not
         refer to the definition of "insurmountable obstacles" in EX.2.  At
         paragraph 16 the judge found that there were "insurmountable
         obstacles" to the claimant's return to India on his own, but this
         was not the correct test.  Although the judge referred to AF's
         medical treatment and the support she receives from the claimant as
         reasons for allowing the appeal, the judge did not explain how
         these amounted to "insurmountable obstacles".  There was a medical
         report on AF before the First-tier Tribunal but no evidence from
         AF's own psychologist or from her GP.  There was no evidence about
         the availability of medical facilities in India.

     10. Mr Govan submitted that if it was accepted that the Judge of the
         First-tier Tribunal erred in law in the way that he contended then
         the decision was perverse.  The decision could be re-made on the
         basis of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

     11. For the claimant Mr Winter submitted that the argument was about
         form rather than substance.  It was not necessary for the judge to
         have set out the terms of paragraph EX.2 if the judge was in
         substance aware of these.  The judge had directed himself to EX.1
         and EX.2 and referred to the refusal letter, which contained the
         relevant rules.  The judge also referred to the skeleton argument
         for the claimant.  In substance the judge recognised the test he
         was applying.  In terms of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 the issue was one
         of "reasonable expectations" - could the couple be reasonably
         expected to move?

     12. Mr Winter continued by submitting that as far as the mental health
         of AF was concerned, it was not settled that there were no suitable
         medical facilities in India but her health was likely to
         deteriorate.  At Annex H of the Home Office bundle there were
         letters dating from November 2017 from AF's key worker and at Annex
         I was the psychologist's report.  The decision made was open to the
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and clear and adequate reasons
         were given.  Reliance was placed upon MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49
         to the effect that the Upper Tribunal should be cautious in finding
         an error.  The Secretary of State was not able to point to
         convincing reasons leading to contrary conclusions, as referred to
         in MS YZ [2017] CSIH 41.  The judge set out the submissions for
         each side and had regard to the refusal letter, the skeleton
         argument for the claimant and the medical reports.

     13. Mr Winter pointed out that in terms of R(Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982
         there was a high threshold for perversity.  The judge's decision
         was not outwith the range of reasonable responses.

Decision on error of law

     14. It is an indication of the difficulty the judge had in giving
         reasons for his decision that he did not differentiate properly
         between the requirements of the Immigration Rules and the
         application of Article 8.  The starting point for the judge should
         have been the Immigration Rules.  If the relevant requirements of
         the Rules were satisfied, then the public interest would not weigh
         against the claimant in the balancing exercise under Article 8.  Mr
         Govan rightly acknowledged that the judge's mistake in purporting
         to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules was not material
         but in my view it was a sign of the judge's difficulty in
         identifying and analysing the issues.

     15. In terms of paragraph EX.1.(b) it was for the claimant to show that
         he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is
         in the UK and, so far as this appeal is concerned, is a British
         citizen and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with
         that partner continuing outside the UK.  "Insurmountable obstacles"
         are defined in paragraph EX.2 as meaning "the very significant
         difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner
         in continuing their family life together outside the UK and which
         could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
         applicant or their partner."

     16. As was said by the Supreme Court in Agyarko at paragraphs 44-45,
         paragraphs EX.1.(b) and EX.2 mean that leave would not normally be
         granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain under the
         partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless
         the applicant or their partner would face very serious difficulties
         in continuing their family life together outside the UK, which
         could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship.

     17. With this in mind it is puzzling that at paragraph 16 of his
         decision the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal should have written
         that there were insurmountable obstacles to the applicant returning
         to India alone and that he could not be expected to leave behind
         "his seriously ill and pregnant wife" for whom he was the major
         support.  As Mr Govan pointed out, this is not the test under
         paragraphs EX.1.(b) and EX.2.  The issue is whether the couple can
         continue their family life together outside the UK, not whether the
         claimant can be expected to return to his country of origin alone.
         The judge finds that AF would be deprived of the claimant's support
         by the claimant returning without her but this is not be a part of
         the test of insurmountable obstacles, which applies to return
         together.

     18. Mr Winter argued that the judge did not err at paragraph 16 where
         he stated that AF could not be "reasonably expected" to return with
         the claimant.  In support of his argument he relied on paragraphs
         42-44 of the decision in Agyarko.  I have to say, however, that
         nowhere in Agyarko did I find the test of "insurmountable
         obstacles" equated to one of "reasonable expectations".

     19. In paragraphs 42-44 of Agyarko the Supreme Court considered the
         meaning of the term "insurmountable obstacles" under the case law
         of the European Court of Human Rights and expressed the view that
         the definition in EX.2 was not incompatible with the Strasbourg
         case law.  In paragraphs 45-48 the Supreme Court went on to point
         out that it was the Secretary of State's policy that the test of
         "insurmountable obstacles" should be used to determine whether
         removal was justified, whereas under European case law other
         factors might also be taken into account.  The Secretary of State's
         policy was nevertheless not incompatible with Article 8 as
         exceptional circumstances could be taken into account where the
         test of insurmountable obstacles was not met.  According to the
         Secretary of State these would be circumstances in which refusal
         would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual
         such that refusal would be disproportionate.

     20. Mr Winter submitted that the judge did not need to set out in
         explicit terms the test of "insurmountable obstacles" as he was
         clearly aware of it.  It was referred to for instance at paragraph
         14 of the decision.  Mr Winter's submission on this point would
         have more weight if the judge had properly applied the test, which
         he did not. At paragraph 16 the judge not only attempted to apply
         the test to the claimant returning to India on his own but equated
         the test with what the claimant and AF could reasonably be expected
         to do.  This is not the correct test and amounts to a clear error
         of law, as contended by the Secretary of State.

     21. The reason given by the judge for allowing the appeal was that AF
         could not relocate to India because of her mental heath
         difficulties and her pregnancy.  As was submitted for the Secretary
         of State, neither of these grounds for not relocating would stand
         up to scrutiny.  There was no medical evidence to support the
         proposition that AF could not travel because she was pregnant.
         There was no medical evidence to show that medical treatment would
         not be available for her in India.  It was further submitted that
         she would be with the appellant, who was described as her main
         source of emotional support.

     22. The reasons given by the judge as to why AF could not relocate to
         India do not stand up to scrutiny.  They are inadequate and are not
         founded upon the evidence.  It is not necessary for me to decide if
         the decision was also perverse.  The Judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal misdirected himself as to the test to be applied and did
         not give adequate reasons.  He thereby erred in law and the
         decision must be set aside and re-made.

Submissions for re-making the decision

     23. In re-making the decision Mr Winter asked me to rely upon the
         skeleton argument for the claimant which was before the First-tier
         Tribunal.

     24. For the Secretary of State Mr Govan referred me to the reasons for
         refusal letter and the "insurmountable obstacles" test in paragraph
         EX.1.(b) and EX.2.  The onus of showing this test was satisfied was
         on the claimant, who would not succeed under the Immigration Rules.
          Attention should then be directed to sections 117A-D of the 2014
         Act and, in particular, section 117B.  the claimant was an
         overstayer.  He could speak English and there was some evidence of
         integration.  His relationship with AF did not start when the
         claimant was in the UK illegally but arguably he had been in breach
         of his visa.

     25. Mr Winter responded by pointing out that in re-making the decision
         I was in a position to make findings on the existence of obstacles
         for the couple which had been rejected by the Judge of the First-
         tier Tribunal.

Re-making the decision

     26. The skeleton argument for the claimant is based upon the
         proposition that there are insurmountable obstacles to the couple
         carrying on family life in India or that it would be
         disproportionate to expect them to do so.  The factors to be taken
         into account in this regard were, first, AF's mental health issues,
         including self-harm in the past.  AF was pregnant by the time of
         the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  She and her partner
         relied on the support of her family, all of whom were in the UK.
         The couple's accommodation was in the UK.  AF had no ties to India.
          She did not speak Punjabi and would face cultural difficulties and
         an adverse climate.  There would be a lack of access to health
         facilities and limited employment opportunities.  There was a high
         level of violence against women in India.  There was no guarantee
         of permanent residence.

     27. A major issue among these factors is the health of AF. There was a
         psychologist's report dated 7th August 2018 before the Tribunal.
         This states that AF suffers from PTSD consequent upon sexual
         assault as a teenager.  She is described as "extremely vulnerable"
         if she were to be separated from her husband, who is a significant
         source of support for her.  The report stresses the adverse
         consequences of AF being separated from the claimant.  This is not,
         however, the issue I am being asked to consider, which is whether
         there are insurmountable obstacles to the couple carrying on family
         life together in India.

     28. There are two letters dated 22nd November 2017 from AF's key
         worker.  One of the letters is a quite formal medical report and
         the other is a more personal letter of support.  The first letter
         confirms the diagnosis of PTSD.  It states that separation from her
         partner would adversely affect her condition.  The second letter
         refers to the importance of her relationship with the claimant.

     29. So far as health care in India is concerned, I was referred by Mr
         Winter to a report by an Indian advocate on the conditions the
         couple were likely to encounter were they to relocate.  It is
         stated that AF would not be entitled to free health care.
         Healthcare standards overall are lower than in the UK.  It is said
         that because of this AF would be "disadvantaged" in India.  The
         report also sets out the type of cultural, employment and
         accommodation issues AF would face.

     30. Although this report makes detailed contrasts between life in the
         UK and life in India, there is nothing in the report which would
         amount to an "insurmountable obstacle", as defined in EX.2, to the
         couple carrying on family life together in India.  Indeed, the
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal recognised this at paragraph 15 of
         his decision, where he pointed out that the claimant has a
         reasonable education and has family in India.  He could be expected
         to arrange accommodation and assist with cultural difficulties.
         English is widely spoken in Punjab.  It would be possible for AF to
         obtain permanent residence if she was prepared to give up her
         British citizenship and take Indian nationality.  It is pointed out
         in the advocate's report that if AF did not become an Indian
         national she would have to rely on a restricted visa renewable
         every 5 years.  The report also refers to crime against women,
         including sexual crime against foreign women.  In addition, I was
         referred to a Home Office report of April 2015 on gender-based
         violence in India.  The evidence does not show, however, that a
         woman in AF's circumstances, with an educated, English-speaking
         partner, faces a real risk of being a victim of sexual or gender-
         based violence in India.

     31. I note, however, that at the time the reports were prepared AF had
         never been outside the UK, although the couple were contemplating
         taking a holiday in Spain.  She is clearly accustomed to having her
         family around her and it would be a considerable wrench for her to
         leave her family.  It is, however, difficult to see how this
         separation from her family, as an adult with a partner, would
         entail very serious hardship.  It is implied by the medical reports
         that AF relies upon her partner for support more than her family.

     32. I am not satisfied that the factors relied upon by the claimant to
         show insurmountable obstacles to carrying on family life in India
         amount either individually or cumulatively to very significant
         difficulties which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the claimant or for AF.  Accordingly the
         claimant has not shown on the balance of probabilities that he
         satisfies the requirements of paragraph EX.1.(B) and EX.2 of
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

     33. As is pointed out in Agyarko, the claimant may still show that
         there are exceptional circumstances which are sufficiently
         compelling to outweigh the public interest in maintaining effective
         immigration controls and which would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences such that the interference with private or family life
         in the UK of the claimant and AF would be disproportionate.  In
         this regard I was referred by Mr Govan to section 117B of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

     34. It is not disputed that the claimant and AF have family life
         together as a couple.  Mr Govan acknowledged that the claimant can
         speak English and that there is evidence of his integration in the
         UK.  He formed his relationship with AF in March 2017, when he was
         lawfully in the UK with a visa as a spouse, although his
         relationship with his wife had broken down.  As his visa was for a
         limited period, his immigration status was precarious and this
         reduces the weight to be given to his private life in the balancing
         exercise, although not to his family life.

     35. The question I must ask therefore is whether there are
         unjustifiably harsh consequences arising from the removal of the
         claimant from the UK.  Were the couple to be permanently separated
         as an inevitable consequence of this, then an argument might be
         constructed, giving full weight to the medical evidence, that this
         would be unjustifiably harsh.  It has not, however, been shown that
         permanent separation would be an in inevitable consequence.  On the
         contrary, there is the possibility of the couple carrying on their
         family life together in India.  Difficult though this might be for
         AF, who would have to leave her family in the UK, it has not been
         shown that it would entail very serious hardship or unjustifiably
         harsh consequences.  Accordingly the appeal by the claimant will
         not succeed.

Conclusions

     36. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
         making of an error of law.

     37. The decision is set aside.

     38. The decision is re-made by dismissing the appeal.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I see no reason of substance for
doing so.


M E Deans   9th July 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
