

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: HU/21855/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|On 14 November 2017                          |On 15 December 2017            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Priya Radia
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Fletcher instructed by Marks & Marks Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's   appeal   against
    deportation to India, of which she is a citizen.  The  claimant  has  a
    British citizen husband and a 1-year-old child from her  that  marriage
    who is also a British citizen.

 2. The claimant has previously been convicted  of  entering  into  a  sham
    marriage (not to her the current husband, but her  first  husband)  and
    was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment for that  offence,  triggering
    the automatic deportation provisions of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  at
    sections 32 and 33.







    Background

 3. The claimant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  February  2010  as  a
    student.  At some point shortly thereafter, she  entered  into  a  sham
    marriage with her first husband, who has  learning  difficulties.   The
    sham marriage was discovered, her husband  gave  evidence  against  the
    claimant, and she was convicted at Isleworth Crown Court  on  6  August
    2013.  The sentencing guidelines for an offence of this type suggests a
    sentence of 6-12 months but the claimant  received  a  sentence  of  16
    months, engaging the automatic deportation provisions in the 2007  Act,
    by reason of what the sentencing judge described as a  'deliberate  and
    dishonest scheme' to undermine immigration control.  The  claimant  had
    not pleaded guilty and the judge  took  a  very  serious  view  of  her
    actions.

 4. On 4 September 2013 the claimant was served with  notice  of  liability
    for deportation and on 13 November 2013 a deportation order  was  made,
    against which she had a full right of  appeal  and  was  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 23 June 2014.  The claimant did not embark.  Less  than  a
    week later, on 29 June 2014, the claimant applied for leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules.  The claimant  made  a  similar  application  on  16
    September 2014.

 5. On 27 October 2014, the claimant met the man  who  is  now  her  second
    husband.  On 6 May 2015 she made a family and private life  application
    and on 27 July 2015 she married her present husband.

 6. The Secretary of State served the claimant with a Section 120 notice on
    26 May 2016 and 11 July 2016.  On 17 July 2016, the claimant gave birth
    to a daughter who by reason of her husband's citizenship is  a  British
    citizen.  The starting point, applying  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
    Court in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2011] UKSC 4, is that it is  not  reasonable  for  that  child  to  be
    expected to leave the United Kingdom as she has the right to grow up in
    the United Kingdom because she is a British citizen.

 7. On 14 September 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  claimant's
    human rights claim and maintained her deportation  decision.   That  is
    the decision under challenge in these proceedings.

    First-tier Tribunal proceedings

 8. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that her second husband
    was always aware of the deportation order, both  at  the  time  of  the
    marriage and before their child was born.   However,  at  the  date  of
    hearing the claimant's child was just 1 year old.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal set out the relevant tests although it did  not
    engage expressly with section 117C(5) of Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended). Section 117C sets out the
    regime for the deportation of foreign criminals.  Where  a  person  has
    been sentenced upon conviction to more than  12  months'  imprisonment,
    section 117C provides two Exceptions, Exception 2 being one where there
    is a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner or a
    qualifying child such that the effect of the claimant's deportation  on
    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

10. It is not suggested that the claimant can rely on her relationship with
    her partner in this context.  The claimant relies on the effect on  her
    1-year-old daughter, who as a British citizen, is  a  qualifying  child
    under section 117D.  The claimant says that it  would  be  unreasonably
    harsh for the child to go to India with her mother, or to remain in the
    United Kingdom without her.  Similar considerations apply in  paragraph
    399A of the Immigration Rules.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal for  the  reasons  set
    out at [55]-[59] in his decision, finding as a fact that for the  child
    to live in India would be unduly harsh because she would not  have  the
    benefit of the British education system and health service,  and  would
    be separated from and deprived of close contact with  her  father,  who
    has lived in the United Kingdom  all  his  life  and  who  has  elderly
    parents here who are unwell, and need him to help them attend  hospital
    appointments.  The father has two jobs in the United Kingdom, has never
    lived or worked in India, and has no family or property there.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also accepted that the claimant had  been
    disowned by her family in India, because of her illegal first marriage,
    and could not look to them for help with bringing up her  child  alone.
    The claimant and the child would be alone and isolated in India,  which
    'would place them in a potentially perilous situation'.

13. The Judge considered it unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without her mother at the age of 1.  Her mother  is  her
    primary carer and  he  had  regard  to  the  child's  section  55  best
    interests, which lay in having her mother with her.  The child's father
    would have to keep working and his parents were  too  old  and  ill  to
    provide any meaningful assistance to him in bringing her up.   He  held
    that although the claimant was a 'foreign criminal', her  sentence  was
    less than 4 years and she was not required  to  show  'very  compelling
    circumstances' in order to resist deportation.  The claimant was highly
    unlikely to repeat her offence, being now in a happy and genuine second
    marriage.

    Discussion

14. I have been referred to the guidance given by Lord Justice Laws  in  MM
    (Uganda) & Anor v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 617 and in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  Beginning with MM (Uganda),  at  [23]-
    [24] Laws LJ, with whom Lord  Justice  Vos  and  Lord  Justice  Hamblen
    agreed, said this:

         "23. The context in these cases invites emphasis  on  two  factors,
             (1) the public interest in the removal  of  foreign  criminals
             and (2)  the  need  for  a  proportionate  assessment  of  any
             interference with Article 8  rights.   In  my  judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors.  The first of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by Parliament in  Section  117C(1).   Section  117C(2)
             then provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):

                  'The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.'

         24.   This  steers  the  Tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the public interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.   Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   'unduly   harsh'
             provisions  from  their  context.   It  would  mean  that  the
             question of undue hardship would  be  decided  wholly  without
             regard to the force of the public interest in  deportation  in
             the particular case.  But in that case the  term  'unduly'  is
             mistaken for 'excessive' which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history."

15. In SS (Nigeria), at [43], Laws LJ, with whom Lady Justice Black and  Mr
    Justice Mann agreed, stated that the interests of the child or children
    are  a  primary  consideration  and  that  there   was   no   Rule   of
    exceptionality.   Having   summarised   the   relevant   national   and
    international authorities, at paragraph 47 Laws LJ  drew  together  his
    general considerations:

         "47. It is worth drawing these general considerations together:

             (1)  The principle of minimal interference is the  essence  of
                  proportionality:  it  ensures  that  the  ECHR  right   in
                  question is never treated as a token or a ritual, and thus
                  guarantees its force.

             (2)  In a child case the right in question (the  child's  best
                  interests)  is  always  a  consideration  of   substantial
                  importance.

             (3)  Article 8 contains no Rule of 'exceptionality',  but  the
                  more  pressing  the  public   interest   in   removal   or
                  deportation, the stronger must be the claim under  Article
                  8 if it is to prevail.

             (4)  Upon  the  question  whether  the  principle  of  minimal
                  interference is  fulfilled,  the  primary  decision  maker
                  enjoys a variable margin of discretion,  at  its  broadest
                  where the  decision  applies  general  policy  created  by
                  primary legislation.  This approach strikes two  balances:
                  the balance between public interest and private right, the
                  search for which 'is inherent in the whole of  the  [ECHR]
                  ...' ... and the constitutional balance  between  judicial
                  power  and  the  power  of  elected  government,  and   in
                  particular the power of the legislature."

16. Laws LJ then went on to consider at [48]-[55] the principles concerning
    the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  concluding  at  [54]-[55],  as
    follows:

         "54. I would draw particular attention to the  provision  contained
             in  Section  33(7):  'Section  32(4)   applies   despite   the
             application of Exception 1...', that  is  to  say,  a  foreign
             criminal's deportation remains conducive to  the  public  good
             notwithstanding his successful reliance on Article 8.  I  said
             at paragraph 46 that while the  authorities  demonstrate  that
             there is no Rule of exceptionality for Article  8,  they  also
             clearly show that the more pressing  the  public  interest  in
             removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim  under
             Article 8 if it is to prevail.  The  pressing  nature  of  the
             public interest here is vividly informed by the fact  that  by
             Parliament's  express  declaration  the  public  interest   is
             injured if the criminal's deportation is not effected.  Such a
             result could in my judgment only be justified by a very strong
             claim indeed.

         3)   SUMMARY

         55.  None of this, I apprehend, is  inconsistent  with  established
             principle, and the approach I have outlined is  well-supported
             by the authorities concerning the decision maker's  margin  of
             discretion.  The leading Supreme Court  cases,  ZH  and  H(H),
             demonstrate that the  interests  of  a  child  affected  by  a
             removal decision are a matter of substantial  importance,  and
             that the court must proceed on a proper understanding  of  the
             facts which illuminate those interests.  ...  At the same time
             H(H) shows the impact of a powerful public interest  (in  that
             case extradition) on what needs  to  be  demonstrated  for  an
             Article 8 claim to  prevail  over  it.   Proportionality,  the
             absence of an 'exceptionality' Rule, and  the  meaning  of  'a
             primary consideration'  are  all,  when  properly  understood,
             consonant with the force  to  be  attached  in  cases  of  the
             present kind to the two drivers of the decision maker's margin
             of discretion: the policy's source and  the  policy's  nature,
             and in particular to the  great  weight  which  the  2007  Act
             attributes to the deportation of foreign criminals."

17. The judgment then moves on to deal with the particular case, which  was
    that of a father convicted of serious offences of dealing  in  class  A
    drugs who continued to have the potential to present  a  real  risk  to
    members of the public and society in general and but who had a  5-year-
    old British citizen son who would not need to move to Nigeria,  because
    he would be able to remain in the United Kingdom with his mother.

18. The facts in this appeal invert that analysis.  The claimant's child in
    this appeal was the 1-year-old daughter of a  non-British  citizen  who
    would in practice have been obliged to leave the United Kingdom if  her
    mother were removed, as she is too  young  to  be  separated  from  her
    mother, her primary carer.  The judge found as a fact that the  child's
    father could not successfully bring her up at that  young  age  without
    the assistance of the mother and it is not suggested by  the  Secretary
    of State that he erred in concluding that the husband's  parents  could
    not provide any assistance available in the United Kingdom to help him,
    should he attempt to do so.

19. The Secretary of State's challenge in the grounds of appeal is that the
    First-Tier Tribunal did  not  have  proper  regard  to  the  claimant's
    criminal and immigration history, which was related to  her  offending,
    when determining that the deportation would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    child.  I am not satisfied  on  the  basis  of  the  reasoning  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal that such a submission is  arguable
    here.  The judge was aware of the provisions of  the  statute  and  the
    Rules and set out matters which were sufficient to enable him to  reach
    the conclusion he did. The grounds  of  appeal  are  unarguable  and  I
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                             Date: 14  December
2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
