
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21510/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On Friday 24 January 2020               |On Friday 31 January 2020          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                BISHWARAJ RAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge G Mitchell  promulgated  on  18  July  2019  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  an  entry
       clearance officer dated 19 September 2018 refusing his human  rights
       claim.  That claim was made in the context of an application made by
       him, his mother and his two adult sisters to settle in the UK as the
       widow and adult dependent children of a former Gurkha soldier.   The
       entry clearance  officer's  decision  was  confirmed  by  the  entry
       clearance manager.


    2. The Appellant's mother was granted indefinite leave to enter by  the
       Respondent.  She has since come to  the  UK.   The  appeals  of  the
       Appellant's sisters were allowed by Judge Mitchell and they too have
       been granted settlement and have since arrived here.  The  Appellant
       remains in Nepal.


    3. Judge Mitchell did not accept that the Appellant's Article 8  rights
       were engaged.  He concluded that the Appellant no longer  enjoyed  a
       family life with his mother and siblings.  He was  born  on  6  June
       1991 and is now aged twenty-eight years.  As is pointed out  on  his
       behalf, one of his sisters whose appeal was allowed was born in 1988
       and is therefore older than him.  The other is younger.  The crucial
       difference as far as Judge Mitchell was  concerned,  as  I  come  to
       below, is that the Appellant had  left  the  family  home  in  Nepal
       between 2012 and 2016 to work in Saudi Arabia.


    4. I emphasise that it is of course not  disputed  that  the  Appellant
       enjoys a family relationship  with  his  mother  and  sisters.   The
       crucial  issue  here  though  is  whether  that  is  sufficient   to
       constitute a continuing family life as a matter of law in  order  to
       engage Article 8 ECHR where that relationship is one  between  adult
       family members.


    5. I also note that Ms Jaja made clear that the Appellant does not  and
       did not before Judge Mitchell rely  on  the  Appellant  meeting  the
       Gurkha policy for settlement.  It would not  be  necessary  for  the
       Appellant to do so in any event.  As Mr Jarvis fairly  conceded,  if
       the Judge was wrong to find that Article 8 was not engaged and  that
       it  therefore  was,  there   could   be   no   argument   based   on
       proportionality for refusing the Appellant entry and  therefore  the
       appeal would have to be allowed.


    6. I will come to the substance of the Decision below.   The  Appellant
       has raised two grounds of challenge to the Decision.  The  first  is
       that the Judge failed  to  consider  material  evidence  namely  the
       Appellant's witness statement which was not part of the  Appellant's
       bundle but was filed separately and is dated 26 June 2019  (the  day
       before the hearing before Judge Mitchell).   The  second  ground  is
       that the Judge materially misdirected himself as to the law.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  JM
       Holmes on 5 November 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:


            "... 3.    It is arguable that the Judge's approach to  whether
           'family  life'  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8(1)  had  been
           recreated between the Appellant, his mother and  his  two  adult
           siblings upon his return to Nepal from Saudi Arabia in 2016  was
           flawed, because it is arguable the Judge introduced  a  test  of
           financial necessity  [34]  when  he  should  have  been  focused
           entirely upon the nature  of  the  relationships  between  these
           adult family members, reminding himself that there  is  no  high
           threshold of engagement.


            4.   All the grounds may be argued."


       Although the reasons given by Judge  Holmes  relate  to  the  second
       ground of appeal, he has  not  limited  the  grounds  which  may  be
       argued, and I therefore need to consider both grounds.


    8. The matter comes before me  to  decide  whether  the  Decision  does
       contain any error of law and, if I so conclude,  either  to  re-make
       the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-
       making.  As I have already noted, if the  Judge  has  erred  in  his
       conclusion that Article 8 is not  engaged,  the  Respondent  accepts
       that the Appellant is entitled to succeed.


    9. The Appellant submitted an "Addendum Bundle" on 15 January 2020.  No
       application was made  to  adduce  additional  evidence  (under  Rule
       15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008).
       Insofar as that bundle contains  additional  evidence,  I  therefore
       disregard it.  It could not in any event be relevant as  to  whether
       the Decision contains an error of law as the additional evidence was
       not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION


      GROUND ONE


   10. The Judge dealt with the Appellant's witness statement at [8] of the
       Decision as follows:


           "The evidence within the witness statements  of  the  Appellants
           has also not been challenged by the  Respondent.   However,  Mrs
           Rai said in her oral evidence the Appellants speak only a little
           English and the Appellants all indicated  in  their  application
           forms that if they needed to be interviewed in  connection  with
           their applications they wanted to be  interviewed  in  Nepalese.
           In light of this, it is of concern that the Appellants'  witness
           statements do not contain  a  declaration  confirming  that  the
           statements were translated to them before they signed them.   In
           light of this, and in light of the failure to make  arrangements
           for the Appellants to give oral evidence, I have attached little
           weight to the evidence within these witness statements."


   11.  I  begin  by  observing  that  the  Judge  did  not  disregard  the
       Appellant's evidence altogether.  He said that  he  attached  little
       weight to it for the reasons he gave.  He also took into account the
       oral evidence of the Appellant's mother which  dealt  with  much  of
       what was said in the statements and therefore any error could not be
       material.  As I come to  below,  there  are  however  two  areas  in
       particular with which the Appellant deals in his statement which the
       Appellant says the Judge has disregarded because he  has  not  given
       weight to the statement.


   12. I start with the reasons identified in the grounds for  the  Judge's
       refusal to give weight to the statement.  It is said that there  are
       three reasons given: first, the Appellant asked to be interviewed in
       Nepalese if needs be and his mother said he spoke only some English;
       second, it is said  that  the  document  was  not  in  Nepalese  and
       therefore did not require a translation; third, it is submitted that
       the failure to make arrangements for witnesses to give oral evidence
       is not usual in entry clearance cases.


   13. I deal with each  of  those  reasons  in  turn.   The  Appellant  is
       resident in Nepal.  There is no evidence that he has ever  lived  in
       the UK.  There is no evidence that he has ties to the UK  (at  least
       not before his mother came here).  He has worked in Saudi Arabia but
       there is limited evidence about that period as I will come  to.   It
       is not said that he has any grasp of English  from  his  time  spent
       there.   The  evidence  which  the  Judge  did  have  was  from  the
       Appellant's  mother  that  the  Appellants  "speak  only  a   little
       English".  The grounds say that further  enquiry  should  have  been
       made because that he speaks only a little English does not mean that
       the Appellant could not read and understand English.  However, there
       was no reason that he would.  The Appellant's mother does not  speak
       much  if  any  English  herself.   She  gave  evidence  through   an
       interpreter.

   14. As the Judge notes and the Appellant does not dispute, he  asked  to
       be interviewed in Nepalese if needs be.  Of course, a person  facing
       an interview or court hearing may well ask to give evidence  in  his
       or her mother tongue due to the stress of the situation and  greater
       familiarity with that language.  However, I am here  concerned  with
       whether there was an error of law in the  Judge's  reliance  on  the
       evidence he was given about the Appellant's language ability.  There
       is nothing in the evidence which undermines his reasoning.   He  was
       entitled to rely on that reason.


   15. The Appellant misunderstands the second reason.  The  point  is  not
       that the document was in Nepalese and needed to  be  translated  but
       whether the Appellant had read and understood a document written  in
       English when signing it.  It is not uncommon for a statement  to  be
       signed on the basis that it has been read back to an appellant by an
       interpreter where that person is not  conversant  with  the  English
       language  whether  the  appellant  is  in  the  UK   or   not.    In
       circumstances where the Appellant was living in  Nepal  and  on  the
       evidence spoke only some English, the Judge  was  entitled  to  give
       less weight to the written evidence where he could not be  satisfied
       that the Appellant understood the written evidence he was giving.


   16. In relation to the Appellant's attendance, I accept that it  is  not
       unusual for entry clearance appeals to proceed without oral evidence
       from an appellant who is living abroad.  As  the  Appellant  submits
       and I accept, the  Respondent  would  be  unlikely  to  grant  entry
       clearance for a visit to give evidence.   The  Appellant  recognises
       that video-link evidence is now a greater possibility than it was in
       the past.  It does however remain expensive.  However, the Judge was
       not holding against the Appellant any non-attendance.  The Judge had
       concerns about the Appellant's understanding of his written  witness
       statement and for that reason could give it less weight.   The  fact
       that the Appellant was not present was relevant to weight  given  to
       written evidence when combined with the  other  evidence  about  his
       understanding of English but not otherwise.


   17. The Judge was entitled to give less weight to the statement for  the
       reasons given.  The weight to be given to evidence is a  matter  for
       the Judge dealing with that evidence absent a misdirection,  failure
       to give reasons or misunderstanding of the  evidence  on  which  the
       attribution of weight depends.  None of those factors applies  here.




   18. In any event, there is  an  issue  as  to  the  materiality  of  the
       evidence in the Appellant's  written  statement  and  therefore  the
       weight attributed to it. The  Judge  sets  out  at  [21(d)]  of  the
       Decision, the Appellant's mother's evidence  about  the  Appellant's
       circumstances as follows:


           "As for Bishwaraj, who as 27  years  old  at  the  date  of  the
           applications, Mrs Rai says his circumstances were  the  same  as
           Anjana and Sabita save in the following respects.  He had tried,
           unsuccessfully, to enrol in the British Army.  Then he secured a
           job in a bakery in Saudi Arabia from  2012  to  2016.   Mrs  Rai
           helped to finance his travel to Saudi Arabia by borrowing money,
           which Bishwaraj repaid out of his wages.  While he was in  Saudi
           Arabia, Bishwaraj spoke to Mrs Rai most weeks.  He also returned
           to visit his mother in Nepal on  several  occasions.   In  2016,
           Bishwaraj returned to Nepal because he did not like the  working
           and living conditions in Saudi Arabia. Since returning to Nepal,
           Bishwaraj had moved back in with Mrs Rai and her daughters.  Mrs
           Rai says he has been unable to find further employment  and  she
           provides him with financial support.  I have set out my findings
           in relation to this part of Mrs  Rai's  account  in  section  D,
           below."


   19. The recitation  of  Mrs  Rai's  evidence  is  consistent  with  what
       Bishwaraj himself says about his circumstances.  I will come to  the
       Judge's findings about that evidence when dealing  with  ground  two
       below. For present purposes, I note that there are  two  aspects  of
       the Appellant's evidence which Ms Jaja  said  were  ignored  in  the
       Judge's finding or undermined  by  the  Appellant's  statement:  his
       earning capability in Saudi Arabia and his employment  prospects  in
       Nepal.  She did not accept on  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
       family life with his mother and siblings had come to an end when  he
       went to work in Saudi Arabia and, even if it had, it had, she  said,
       been resumed when he returned to Nepal because of his dependency  on
       his mother thereafter.  It is relevant to consider the evidence  and
       the Judge's reasoning and findings in the context of ground  two  to
       which I now turn.


    GROUND TWO


   20. The relevant paragraphs of the Appellant's statement which relate to
       the Judge's findings under challenge read as follows:


            "3.  I have had no development in my life.  I  tried  to  enrol
           into the British Army but was not selected.   I  did  travel  to
           Saudi Arabia for work from 2012 until 2016.  During this time, I
           was working in a bakery as a food packager.  I returned to Nepal
           as the living condition was very harsh  and  the  working  hours
           were dire.  I was in regular contact with my mother while I  was
           in Saudi Arabia.  I was earning money, but it was barely  enough
           for my living expenses. I also had to send back money as  I  had
           borrowed money from other people when I went to Saudi Arabia.
            4.   Since I returned to Nepal in 2016, I have been relying  on
           my mother and will continue to do so.
            5.   Since migrating to the UK, I have been in regular  contact
           with my mother at least 2-3 times a week.  I speak to her  about
           our wellbeings.  I miss her during holidays and festivals.
            6.   As for financial support, my mother sends my sister Sabita
           money as per  our  need.   Sabita  then  distribute  this  money
           amongst the appellants.   We  also  have  access  to  my  mother
           pension account in Nepal. I can use that money  for  our  living
           expenses.
            ...
            8.   I am in a miserable position without my mother.   I  speak
           to my mother in order to get the emotional  support  I  need.  I
           spend my time in Nepal preparing for the time  when  I  will  be
           reunited with my mother in the UK.  We  are  communicating  over
           the phone, but it is not working out for us.  My mother  is  not
           educated.  She needs assistance in day to day affairs in the UK.
            She found it difficult to make a simple call to me from the  UK
           at the beginning.
            9.   I am single and I have never been in employment in  Nepal.
           There is no employment for me in Nepal.  I will remain dependent
           on my mother."


   21. Ms Jaja made  no  submissions  about  the  evidence  concerning  the
       Appellant's mother's dependency on him  (rather  than  vice  versa).
       She of course now has the benefit of her daughters to look after her
       in the UK.  It is though relevant to  record  what  the  Judge  says
       about the family circumstances since the separation  caused  by  the
       Appellant's mother coming to the UK:


            "23. Since her arrival in the UK, Mrs Rai  says  she  has  left
           Sabita in control of the account into which her widow's  pension
           is paid and she allows Sabita and the other  Appellants  to  use
           this income to support themselves.  Mrs Rai says she relies upon
           Jobseeker's  Allowance  and  Housing   Benefit   to   fund   her
           accommodation and subsistence needs in the UK.  She says she has
           also sent a small  amount  of  money  to  the  Appellants  since
           arriving in the UK.  Mrs Rai's evidence  about  this  is  to  an
           extent corroborated by the bank statements  and  money  transfer
           receipts she produced.  Mrs Rai's evidence about  this  has  not
           been challenged by the Respondent and I accept it.


            24.  Since arriving in the UK, Mrs Rai says she speaks  to  the
           Appellants several times each week.   The  documentary  evidence
           adduced by Mrs Rai in an attempt to corroborate this is  in  the
           form of chat records from a smartphone app,  but  these  are  of
           little assistance as they do  not  identify  the  other  caller.
           Nonetheless, I accept Mrs Rai's evidence about this.   I  do  so
           because it is consistent with the rest of her evidence about the
           strength of her ties with Sabita and Anjana in  particular.   In
           addition, it has not been challenged by the Respondent.


            25.  While Mrs Rai is described in the  evidence  as  'old  and
           frail', no evidence has been adduced to indicate Mrs Rai suffers
           from any significant physical or mental impairment.  Her receipt
           of Jobseekers' Allowance indicates she is well enough to work."


   22. Having directed himself in accordance with  the  Court  of  Appeal's
       judgment in Rai v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320
       ("Rai"), and  determined  that  the  Appellant's  siblings  met  the
       necessary conditions to engage the test, the  Judge  turned  to  the
       Appellant's case and made the following findings:


            "30. The position in relation to Bishwaraj is different.   This
           is because he lived an independent life in Saudi Arabia  between
           2012 and 2016.


            31.  Ms Jaja submitted the Respondent's decision letter did not
           refer to this period.  However, the decision letter  made  clear
           the Respondent was not satisfied that  article  8  was  engaged.
           The Entry Clearance Manager's Review then expressly referred  to
           this period as one of the reasons for the Respondent's position.


            32.  I acknowledge Mrs Rai assisted in  enabling  Bishwaraj  to
           take up the  job  offer  in  Saudi  Arabia.   However,  once  he
           established himself  in  Saudi  Arabia,  he  became  financially
           independent.  I also acknowledge he stayed in contact  with  Mrs
           Rai while he was in Saudi Arabia.  However,  this  was  no  more
           than a manifestation of the normal, emotional  ties  between  an
           adult child and their  parent.   Consequently,  I  am  satisfied
           there was no article 8 family life between Bishwaraj and Mrs Rai
           during this 4 year period.


            33.  Where article 8 family life between an adult child  and  a
           parent has ended, it is not impossible for there to be article 8
           family  life  between  them  subsequently.    However,   it   is
           significantly harder to establish there is article 8 family life
           in that situation as compared with  the  situation  as  compared
           with the situation where there has been no interruption.   If  a
           resumption of article 8 family life is  asserted  on  the  basis
           cohabitation and family support has resumed, it is  relevant  to
           ask why has it resumed?


            34.  Bishwaraj did not return to live with Mrs Rai because  she
           needed his support.  He returned because she would  provide  him
           with a roof over  his  head  and  subsidise  his  living  needs.
           However, I am not satisfied this was  necessary.   There  is  no
           evidence before me about whether  he  was  able  to  save  while
           working in Saudi Arabia and could have used those  savings  upon
           his return.  I am also not satisfied he  was  unable  to  secure
           further employment, whether in Nepal or further  afield.   Given
           Bishwaraj resumed living with Mrs  Rai  after  the  2015  policy
           change, I infer his return to living with Mrs Rai was  at  least
           in part in order  to  try  to  keep  alive  the  possibility  of
           resettling with her in the UK.  I am also satisfied that it  was
           only ever likely to be a temporary arrangement.


            35.  As a result, when Bishwaraj's application was  determined,
           I am not satisfied there was a level of committed and  effective
           support between Bishwaraj and his  mother  necessary  to  engage
           article 8. This  is  also  my  conclusion  in  relation  to  the
           relationship between  Bishwaraj  and  his  sisters,  Sabita  and
           Anjana.  There have been no  changes,  material  to  this  issue
           since  Bishwaraj's  application  was  rejected.   As  a  result,
           Bishwaraj's appeal fails."


   23. Before I turn to examine the Judge's reasoning, it is  necessary  to
       look at the case-law relating to the issue of engagement of  Article
       8 as the Appellant's ground two is  premised  on  the  Judge  having
       materially misdirected himself as to the law.  The Appellant  relies
       on the cases of Rai, Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas.BOCs:  historic
       wrong: weight) [2013]  UKUT  567  (IAC)  and  Gurung  and  others  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 18.   The
       Judge directed himself on the case of Rai and Ms Jaja's  submissions
       focussed on what is said in that case.  That case  refers  to  other
       relevant case-law. It is therefore only necessary to set out what is
       said in that case about Article 8 engagement as follows:


            "16. The legal  principles  relevant  to  this  issue  are  not
       controversial.


            17.  In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
           [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in  paragraph  17  of  his
           judgment) that 'if dependency is read down as meaning 'support',
           in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing  the  Strasbourg
           jurisprudence, 'real' or 'committed' or 'effective' to the  word
           'support', then it represents ...  the  irreducible  minimum  of
           what family life implies'. Arden L.J. said (in paragraph  24  of
           her judgment) that the 'relevant factors ... include identifying
           who are the near relatives of the appellant, the nature  of  the
           links between them and the appellant, the age of the  appellant,
           where and with whom he has resided in the past, and the forms of
           contact he has maintained with the other members of  the  family
           with whom he claims to have a family life'. She acknowledged (at
           paragraph 25) that 'there is no  presumption  of  family  life'.
           Thus 'a family life is not established between  an  adult  child
           and his surviving parent or other siblings unless something more
           exists than normal emotional ties'. She added that '[such]  ties
           might exist if the appellant were dependent  on  his  family  or
           vice versa', but it was 'not ... essential that the  members  of
           the family should be in the same country'. In Patel and others v
           Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley  L.J.
           said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with which  Longmore  and
           Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that 'what may constitute an extant  family
           life falls well short of what constitutes dependency, and a good
           many adult children ...  may  still  have  a  family  life  with
           parents who are now settled here not by leave  or  by  force  of
           circumstance but by long-delayed right'.


            18.  In Ghising (family life -  adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  the
           Upper Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of  its  determination)
           that  the  judgments  in  Kugathas  had  been  'interpreted  too
           restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the  light  of
           subsequent decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg courts', and
           (in  paragraph  60)  that  'some  of  the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
           decisions indicate that family life between adult  children  and
           parents will readily be found, without evidence  of  exceptional
           dependence'. It went on to say (in paragraph 61):


                 '61. Recently, the [European Court  of  Human  Rights]  has
                 reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012]  Imm.
                 A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will  be  whether
                 or not the adult child has founded a family of his own.  If
                 he is still single and  living  with  his  parents,  he  is
                 likely to enjoy family life with them. ...'.


           The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in  the  court's
           judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs 46 to 49),  which
           ended with this (in paragraph 49):


                 '49. An examination of the Court's case-law would  tend  to
                 suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years  old,
                 who resides with his mother  and  has  not  yet  founded  a
                 family of his  own,  can  be  regarded  as  having  'family
                 life'.'


           19.   Ultimately, as Lord Dyson M.R. emphasized when giving  the
           judgment of the court in Gurung (at paragraph 45), 'the question
           whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of  fact  and
           depends on a careful consideration of all the relevant facts  of
           the  particular  case'.  In  some  instances  'an  adult   child
           (particularly if he does not have a partner or children  of  his
           own) may establish that he has a family life with his  parents'.
           As Lord Dyson M.R. said, '[it] all depends on  the  facts'.  The
           court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46), as 'useful'  and  as
           indicating 'the correct  approach  to  be  adopted',  the  Upper
           Tribunal's review of the relevant jurisprudence in paragraphs 50
           to 62 of its determination in Ghising (family life  -  adults  -
           Gurkha policy), including its observation (at paragraph 62) that
           '[the] different outcomes in cases  with  superficially  similar
           features emphasises to us that the issue under Article  8(1)  is
           highly fact-sensitive'.


            20.  To similar effect were these observations of  Sir  Stanley
           Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
           [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):


                 '24. I do not think that the  judgments  to  which  I  have
                 referred lead to any difficulty in determining the  correct
                 approach to Article 8 in cases involving adult children. In
                 the case of adults, in the context of immigration  control,
                 there  is  no  legal  or  factual  presumption  as  to  the
                 existence or absence of family life  for  the  purposes  of
                 Article 8. I point out that the approach  of  the  European
                 Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly  in  Kugathas
                 did not include any requirement of exceptionality.  It  all
                 depends on the facts. The love  and  affection  between  an
                 adult and his  parents  or  siblings  will  not  of  itself
                 justify a finding  of  a  family  life.  There  has  to  be
                 something more. A young adult living with  his  parents  or
                 siblings will normally have a family life to  be  respected
                 under Article 8. A child enjoying a family  life  with  his
                 parents does not suddenly cease to have a  family  life  at
                 midnight as he turns 18 years of age. On the other hand,  a
                 young adult living independently of his  parents  may  well
                 not have a family life for the purposes of Article 8.''


   24. What is there said is consistent with what is said by the  Judge  at
       [26] of the Decision.  Where one is considering whether family  life
       exists between adult family members more  is  required  than  normal
       emotional ties.  Family life depends  on  "committed  and  effective
       support".  The fact that an adult child has  formed  an  independent
       life will tend to suggest that family life has come to an end.   The
       fact that the parent and child are living apart is relevant but  not
       determinative; whether family life exists depends on the reasons for
       separation.  Finally, whether  family  life  exists  for  Article  8
       purposes is fact sensitive requiring  "careful  consideration".   It
       is, as Mr Jarvis submitted, a "nuanced assessment".


   25. In fact, when one reads the  grounds  of  appeal  and  considers  Ms
       Jaja's submissions, the Appellant's challenge is not that the  Judge
       misdirected himself as to the law but that he misapplied the law  to
       the facts of this case.


   26. Ms Jaja relied on certain factors as pointing in  the  direction  of
       family life being or remaining in existence.  The Appellant has  not
       formed his own family; he is single. He lived in Saudi Arabia whilst
       his family remained in  Nepal.   However,  Ms  Jaja  said  that,  by
       reference to what is said in Rai, family members did not have to  be
       in the same country for family life to continue to be enjoyed.  That
       comment needs to be looked at in context.  It is  common  in  Gurkha
       cases, as the Court of Appeal noted at [42]  of  its  judgment,  for
       families to be split between Nepal and the UK because, for  example,
       parents arrive to settle before children either because of the  cost
       of applications for entry clearance or because  of  policy  changes.
       That does not mean however that it will routinely be the  case  that
       family life continues to exist where families  are  split.   As  the
       Judge put it, it depends on the reasons for the separation.  In  the
       case of the Appellant's move to Saudi Arabia, that was with  a  view
       to securing his own employment as the Judge noted.


   27. Furthermore, Ms Jaja said that, whatever the position  between  2012
       and 2016,  the  Appellant  was  living  with  and  on  the  evidence
       dependent on his mother thereafter, both at the time the application
       was made and at the time of the appeal.  She said that the Judge had
       dwelt unduly on the 2012 to 2016  period  without  recognising  that
       circumstances had changed.  However, as the  Court  of  Appeal  also
       noted in Rai, the issue of where and with whom he has resided in the
       past is a relevant consideration.


   28.  Ms  Jaja  submitted  several  times  that  the  Appellant's  mother
       considered the family to be one unit and intended the family to move
       as one unit.  That is as may be.  However, the issue is whether  the
       Appellant,  as  a  matter  of  law,  has  evidenced  the   necessary
       commitment and support to show that family life exists  between  him
       on  the  one  hand  and  his  mother  and  sisters  on  the   other.
       Furthermore, as Mr Jarvis pointed out the issue for  me  is  whether
       the Judge made any material  error  of  law  when  determining  this
       issue.


   29. I begin by looking what is said about the period  between  2012  and
       2016.  It is relevant that the Appellant moved  out  of  the  family
       home when he was aged twenty-one years.  That he  went  looking  for
       work suggests that he was looking  to  gain  his  independence.   He
       first tried to join the British Army and when he was rejected, moved
       abroad to work.


   30. The Judge's consideration of that period is criticised on the basis,
       first that his mother funded his move by borrowing money and  second
       that he retained contact with his family.   As  to  the  first,  the
       Appellant's evidence is that he was repaying the loan  himself  from
       his earnings in Saudi Arabia.  Whilst he may have  depended  on  his
       mother to fund his move initially, that is beside  the  point.   The
       fact that he had taken on the responsibility for repaying  the  loan
       is if anything more consistent with him relinquishing  support  than
       continuing to rely upon it.

   31. As to the second, the Judge accepted that he visited his mother  and
       phoned her.  In fact, the evidence suggests that he phoned her  once
       per week and that he visited three times in  five  years.   However,
       that is nothing more than a  continuation  of  the  relationship  of
       parent and child.  It does not  evidence  "committed  and  effective
       support".  There is no suggestion that his mother was  dependent  on
       him or that he was dependent on her on the evidence.   There  is  no
       error in the Judge's reasoning as appears at [32] of the Decision or
       his conclusion that there was no family life at that time.


   32. The position thereafter is perhaps more nuanced.  As Ms Jaja pointed
       out, the Judge considered the period after the Appellant's return to
       Nepal only at [34] of the Decision.  The Judge there indicated  that
       there was no evidence about whether the Appellant was able  to  save
       whilst working in Saudi Arabia which I accept is  inconsistent  with
       what is said at [3] of the Appellant's statement, as set out at [20]
       above.  That is indeed one of the errors asserted in ground  one  as
       disclosing materiality of that evidence.  As Mr Jarvis pointed  out,
       though, it is mere assertion that the Appellant did not earn  enough
       to  save  anything.   There  are  no  particulars  or  corroboratory
       evidence provided.


   33. In any case,  says  Mr  Jarvis,  it  is  not  the  only  reason  why
       dependency is not accepted.  The other reason that the  Judge  found
       that  the  Appellant  had  not  established  the  necessary  support
       relationship was because he was not satisfied on the  evidence  that
       he was not able to secure his own employment on return.  Whilst  the
       Appellant asserts that this is  the  position  and  the  Appellant's
       mother says the same, the evidence is premised  on  mere  assertion.
       The way it  is  expressed  in  the  Appellant's  statement  is  also
       unclear.  He says that he has never worked in Nepal.  That may  well
       be so but does  not  explain  why  not.   He  says  "[t]here  is  no
       employment for me in Nepal" and that he intends to remain  dependent
       on his mother.  But he gives no details of why he cannot work  there
       nor what  efforts  he  has  made  to  find  work.   Particularly  in
       circumstances where he has some past employment  history,  more  was
       needed.  The Judge  was  entitled  not  to  be  satisfied  that  the
       evidence showed that the Appellant was unable to find work in Nepal.
        This is the second aspect of the evidence  relied  upon  in  ground
       one.  I do not consider that the Judge fell into error in making the
       finding he did on this aspect on the evidence.


   34. That brings me to  the  other  point  made  by  Ms  Jaja  about  the
       reasoning of the Judge at [34] of the Decision  which  reflects  the
       basis on which permission was granted, namely  that  the  Judge  has
       wrongly focussed on a test of financial necessity.


   35. In this regard, what the Judge says has  to  be  considered  in  the
       context of the  evidence.   The  evidence  of  support  between  the
       Appellant  was  based  on  three  factors.   First,  the   financial
       dependency based on his lack  of  employment.  Second,  the  contact
       maintained between  him  and  his  mother.   Third,  the  "emotional
       support" which the Appellant needed from his  mother  and  she  from
       him.  I have already dealt  with  what  the  Judge  said  about  the
       Appellant's mother's reliance on him.  There was no evidential basis
       for suggesting that she was reliant on him for "day to day  affairs"
       in the UK as he asserted.  He says that she found  it  difficult  to
       call him when she first came to the UK but that is undermined by the
       evidence which shows that she has been regularly communicating via a
       smartphone. Again, there  is  a  bare  assertion  of  the  need  for
       emotional support with no particulars.


   36. In light of the evidence, it is unsurprising that much of  what  the
       Judge says is directed to the financial aspect of the support.  That
       was the main substance of the evidence. There is no error of law  on
       the basis identified in the permission grant.

   37. What is said at [34] of the Decision also has  to  be  read  in  the
       context of [33] of the Decision.  As I have already noted, the Judge
       was entitled on the evidence to find that the relationship of family
       life came to an end when the Appellant  moved  to  Saudi  Arabia  to
       work.  At [33] of the Decision, the Judge observes that, while it is
       possible to find that family life has been recreated and  Article  8
       re-engaged by subsequent circumstances, "it is significantly  harder
       to establish" in such cases.  There is a presumption of family  life
       between parent and minor child but the same is not the case where  a
       child becomes an adult.  Ms Jaja's submissions  appeared  to  assume
       that, unless there was sufficient evidence pointing in favour of the
       Article 8 family life having come to an end, it continues.  That  is
       not the law.  It is in relation to a parent and minor child but  not
       in relation to a parent and adult child.


   38. Whilst I accept that there is no presumption the other  way  as  the
       case-law makes clear, in circumstances where an adult child has left
       home to start his or her own independent life, it stands  to  reason
       that it will be more difficult to establish on the evidence that the
       necessary dependency has resumed.  It is  not  impossible.  One  can
       envisage a situation where a child leaves  home  to  start  his  own
       life, but an accident then befalls  him,  which  renders  the  child
       unable to continue to  live  alone.   Similarly,  where  an  elderly
       parent moves to live with an adult child because  he  is  unable  to
       live alone, I can readily accept  that  family  life  begins  again.
       Article 8 would then be engaged once again.


   39. However, on the evidence in this case, the  Judge  was  entitled  to
       question whether a dependency/ support  relationship  had  been  re-
       established which included the question why the Appellant  had  gone
       back to live at home.  There is no error in the  approach  taken  by
       the Judge at [33] of the Decision  and,  even  if  the  point  about
       savings is speculative and unsupported by the  evidence,  the  Judge
       was entitled to conclude that the evidence did  not  show  that  the
       necessary support relationship, emotional or otherwise, had been re-
       established.


   40. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Judge did not err in  his
       self-direction as to the law nor as to his application of the law to
       the facts.  For that reason, ground two fails.


   41. As to ground one, as set out above, my primary  conclusion  is  that
       there is no error.  In any event, I accept that  any  error  is  not
       material.  The only matters raised in the Appellant's statement  not
       covered by the mother's evidence would  not  materially  affect  the
       reasoning.  Even if the Judge was wrong to take  into  account  that
       the Appellant might have saved money from his job in  Saudi  Arabia,
       his conclusion would remain the same without that finding.   In  any
       event, the question is not (or not only) one of financial dependency
       (as is observed in the permission grant).  The ultimate question  is
       whether there is a relationship of "committed and effective support"
       between parent and adult child. It depends on all the evidence.  The
       Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  such  relationship  was  not
       established on the evidence.


    CONCLUSION


   42. For the above reasons, I am satisfied  that  there  is  no  material
       error of law disclosed by the grounds of appeal.  I therefore uphold
       the Decision  with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
       remains dismissed.




    DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  G  Mitchell
    promulgated on 18 July 2019 with the consequence that  the  Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed

      Signed           [pic] Dated: 28 January 2020
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
