
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/21764/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers:          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|22 November 2019                   |On 28 November 2019                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     JDK
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                             Anonymity Direction
I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. Liberty to apply.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born 28 April 2002. She  appealed
    to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision of the 13 September 2018, refusing to  grant  entry  clearance
    pursuant to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  The  decision  was
    treated as a refusal of a human rights claim and, thus, provided for  a
    right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  25  July  2019,  at
    which time the appeal was dismissed on the basis that  the  appellant's
    mother (and sponsor) was not present and settled for  the  purposes  of
    the immigration rules (a requirement under paragraph 297)  because  she
    had obtained permanent residence in the UK as a  consequence  of  being
    the wife of an EEA national. No other issues  were  considered  by  the
    FtT.

 3. In her Rule 24 response the SSHD accepts, contrary to  the  finding  of
    the  FtT,  that  "the  appellant's  sponsor,  a  non-EEA  national   in
    possession  of  a  permanent  residence  card  issued  under  the   EEA
    Regulations, is 'present and settled' as defined by paragraph 6 of  the
    immigration rules" and thus for the purposes of paragraph 297 of  those
    Rules. It is accepted, as a consequence, that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine afresh.

 4. I concur fully with the SSHD's  suggested  course,  and  the  reasoning
    behind such suggestion.

 5. I  also  make  the  further  observations  that,  irrespective  of  the
    aforementioned obvious error, the First-tier Tribunal did not,  in  any
    event, complete the task required of it in that it  did  not  determine
    the human rights appeal before  it.  Indeed,  there  is  not  a  single
    mention in the FtT's decision of the only relevant ground in the appeal
    i.e. that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer leads to a breach
    of the appellant's protected rights under Article 8 ECHR.




Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine afresh


                    Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
                                    [pic]
                           Date: 22 November 2019
