
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/21052/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |    Decision & Reasons           |
|                                        |Promulgated                      |
|On 4 March 2019                         |    On 19 March 2019             |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                              ul haq dar haseeb
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, London View Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the remaking of the appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary
    of State's decision of 17 August  2016  refusing  his  application  for
    leave to remain and refusing his human rights claim.

2.   The appellant's appeal against that decision was allowed by a Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, but subsequently after a  hearing  on  6  June
    2018 I found errors of law in the judge's decision and directed that it
    be reheard.

3.   The appellant had been in the United Kingdom since June 2013 as a  Tier
    1 Dependant of his father.  On 23 June 2014 he made an application as a
    Tier 1 Dependant over the age of 18 years.  He was  refused  indefinite
    leave to remain on 25 January 2016 because he had a police caution  for
    battery, arising out of a domestic incident involving  pushing  at  his
    home.  The refusal of  indefinite  leave  to  remain  was  because  the
    caution was  within  the  two  year  cautionary  period.   This  was  a
    mandatory refusal under paragraph 322(9) of HC 395.

4.   The appellant is currently a third  year  law  student  at  Queen  Mary
    University in London.  There is also an issue as to problems  with  his
    sight.

5.   There is a letter from the consultant ophthalmologist Mr  Hakim  of  29
    September 2018 which in summary says that the appellant is at  risk  of
    acute narrow angle glaucoma and should have laser iridotomies for which
    he had an appointment in October 2018.

6.   In a subsequent letter from Mr  Hakim  dated  25th  February  2019,  he
    noted that the  iridotomies  had  been  undertaken  at  Moorfields  Eye
    Hospital and the hospital had  made  special  contact  lenses  for  the
    appellant and he had additional reading glasses.  Mr  Hakim  said  that
    the appellant's eyes are very unusual in that he has extreme  hyperopia
    predisposing him to a number  of  sight  threatening  risks  which  are
    appropriately being monitored at Moorfields Eye Hospital.  It  is  said
    that he needs continual care which is almost certainly not available in
    his home country.

7.   There is also a letter from Ian Sexton of Vision Express who  had  been
    consulted by the  appellant  since  August  2016.   He  says  that  the
    appellant has significant visual problems being  a  very  high  powered
    hypermetrope who struggles to maintain good vision and his  spectacles.
    Mr Sexton had fitted the appellant with a very special  large  diameter
    scleral lens which enables him to achieve  excellent  vision  for  both
    distance and near.  He says that  he  has  a  difficulty  reading  with
    spectacles  due  to  the  increased   thickness   of   his   particular
    prescription and that the lenses are only available in  Europe  or  the
    United States and there are very few specialised opticians who can  fit
    these lenses.  Without them the appellant would be unable  to  function
    on a day-to-day basis.

8.   There  is  also  a  letter  from  a  Dr  Diyal  of  the  Department  of
    Ophthalmology  College  in  Sialkot,  Pakistan.   He  stated  that  the
    appellant has an extremely unusual eye prescription and due to this  he
    will always be at a very high risk of developing problems with eyesight
    including night  blindness  and  glaucoma  which  could  lead  to  full
    blindness.  He says that despite the initial success the  operation  at
    Moorfields last autumn it is vital that the appellant stays  under  the
    radar at Moorfields for some period as  complications  can  arise  some
    time after the procedure and it is important for him to return  to  all
    his follow-up appointments at Moorfields which usually lasts for a  few
    years.  Despite the surgery the appellant would still be at  high  risk
    of developing glaucoma due to his extremely small eyeballs.

9.    The  recommendation  for  someone  who  suffers   from   such   severe
    farsightedness of the appellant is to use contact lenses.  It  is  said
    that the appellant's case is quite complicated  in  comparison  to  the
    position of  normal  contact  lens  wearers  as  he  has  a  very  high
    prescription, small eyeballs and unusually shaped natural  eye  lenses.
    Dr Diyal says that it is incredibly hard to find  the  correct  contact
    lenses for the appellant.  The appellant had told him that he had tried
    to get contact lenses  in  Pakistan  before  he  moved  to  the  United
    Kingdom, but he could not find any lenses suiting his eyes.   Dr  Diyal
    goes on to say that although they do treat patients having a refractive
    error of up to +20D,  the  appellant's  case  is  different  given  his
    extremely high prescription of very small eyeballs and unusually shaped
    natural eye lenses.  He says that because of the complications  present
    in the appellant's eye condition it is important for  him  to  get  his
    treatment from the United Kingdom.

10.  In essence on the basis of  his  evidence  Mr  Iqbal  argued  that  the
    appellant should succeed under the Immigration Rules on  the  basis  of
    showing very significant obstacles  to  integration  into  Pakistan  or
    alternatively  outside  the  Rules   on   the   basis   of   compelling
    circumstances.

11.  Mr Avery argued that there was no real evidence as to an  inability  to
    integrate into Pakistan, and the medical evidence was not  such  as  to
    show that the compelling circumstances test was met.   It  was  unclear
    what was meant by the fitting issue as lenses were designed for him and
    he could order them from outside the United Kingdom and he could  apply
    for entry clearance to come back for treatment.  There was no  evidence
    of any follow-up beyond the appointment last autumn.

Discussion

12.  But for the caution for battery it would seem clear that the  appellant
    would probably have succeeded in the application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain.  There is of course no room  for  a  near  miss,  and  as  a
    consequence he finds himself having to put a claim forward on  a  human
    rights basis in particular arguing that he has a close family life with
    his family in the United Kingdom and, the matter of  particular  force,
    that he has a private life meriting protection  on  the  basis  of  the
    unusual and problematic eye difficulties which he experiences  and  the
    potential benefits to the United Kingdom of his abilities as a graduate
    as it is hoped he will be soon, from a distinguished law school in  the
    United Kingdom.

13.  It is a difficult balance, but I am persuaded on the balance  that  the
    appellant has  shown  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Pakistan.   This  is  on  the  basis  of  the  medical
    evidence which I have set out in some detail above.  It is  clear  that
    the recommendations are  that  he  should  remain  under  the  care  of
    Moorfields  for  the  foreseeable  future  and  that  there   will   be
    significant difficulties for him in coping with the eye  problems  that
    he has in light of  the  more  limited  availability  of  treatment  in
    Pakistan.  I think it is relevant also to note the judge's finding that
    there were more than normal emotional ties between the family  members.
    I also consider that at the stage which  the  appellant's  studies  now
    are, it would not be proportionate for him to  be  expected  either  to
    return to Pakistan to complete his studies or apply for entry clearance
    to do so.  I consider that on balance  there  have  been  shown  to  be
    compelling circumstances which outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's removal in this case, and as such I conclude not only  does
    he succeed under the Rules but if it were necessary to do  so  I  would
    find that he succeeds outside the Rules  on  the  basis  of  compelling
    circumstances justifying a decision  in  his  favour  in  that  regard.
    Accordingly the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision is allowed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date 14 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


