
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
HU/21128/2016

                                                      HU/21133/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6th April 2018                          |On 18th April 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                       miss sita rai (First Appellant)
                   miss gita kumari rai (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Manley, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Row promulgated on 30th October 2017 dismissing the Appellants' appeals
    against their applications for entry clearance to settle in the  United
    Kingdom as the dependent daughters of Mr  Ichha  Badur  Rai,  a  former
    Ghurkha soldier.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C A Parker.   The  grounds  upon  which  permission  was
    granted may be summarised as follows:

         "... The grounds allege that the Judge failed to give  reasons  for
         finding against the appellants on credibility;  refused  to  accept
         the sponsor's explanation (his illness) for having  initially  made
         an error in his evidence concerning  a  document  at  p163  of  the
         bundle; the Judge cast doubt upon the  veracity  of  documents  (at
         para 22 of the  decision)  without  putting  his  concerns  to  the
         sponsor  and  further  referred  to  'other  unreliable  documents'
         without specifying what they were.

         I have carefully considered the decision.  At  para  24  the  Judge
         stated that the version of events relied upon by the appellants was
         'feasible' but that  an  alternative  set  of  facts  was  'equally
         feasible'.  The Judge did not explain why he rejected  the  account
         of the appellants and  arguably  applied  the  wrong  standard  and
         burden of proof.  The Judge arguably did not give adequate  reasons
         for not accepting that the sponsor made a simple mistake due to his
         illness  over  the  documents  when  giving  evidence.   The  Judge
         arguably erred at para 22 as alleged in the grounds.

         There is an arguable error of law in the decision.   Permission  to
         appeal is granted."

 2. I was provided with a Rule 24 reply from the Respondent which was  read
    by all parties before the hearing commenced.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of submissions I indicated that I did find that there  was
    an error of law in the decision such that it should be set  aside.   My
    reasons for so finding are as follows.

 4. In terms of the first ground and the account of events which the  judge
    has preferred, there is merit in this ground in that  paragraph  24  of
    the judge's decision reveals the statement that the  account  given  of
    the Appellants' circumstances by the Sponsor is  "on  the  face  of  it
    feasible", but that an alternative account was "equally feasible".   As
    Mr Manley put it, if both accounts were equally feasible and  the  case
    was so finely balanced, then one would need to be sure of  the  reasons
    why one account was preferred over the other.

 5. In terms of paragraph 25 and that reasoning, it is simply said that due
    to the Sponsor being untruthful in at least one aspect of his  account,
    this casts doubt on everything else and for that reason the  judge  was
    not satisfied  on  the  sole  issue  of  whether  the  Appellants  were
    financially and emotionally dependent upon their Sponsor (and also that
    they could not meet the requirements of  Annex  K,  their  account  not
    being preferred).  That reasoning is dependent upon the correctness  of
    the Sponsor's credibility, and whilst I do find that there is an  error
    of law revealed by this ground due to my  findings  below,  this  error
    would not have been sufficient in and of itself to justify the decision
    being set aside for a material error in law without those  findings  in
    relation to the Sponsor's credibility.

 6. Turning to Ground 2, the issue here is far more pressing in relation to
    the judge's credibility finding which stems from what is termed  as  "a
    key part" of the Sponsor's evidence.  In short, the Sponsor's  previous
    counsel in his examination-in-chief put page  163  of  the  Appellants'
    bundle before the Sponsor and elicited evidence that the  HSBC  account
    deposits in the name of S. Khatri Chhetri were payments  for  the  rent
    for the daughters in Nepal.  That is reflected at paragraph 16  of  the
    decision.  Paragraph 17 of the decision  shows  that  the  Sponsor  was
    cross-examined on this point and he accepted  that  the  HSBC  deposits
    were in fact for payment to his own landlord of his own rent in the UK.
    This naturally followed as the UK tenancy agreement for  the  Sponsor's
    own accommodation appeared at page 162 of the Appellants' bundle on the
    page adjacent to the HSBC deposit slips that were identified  as  being
    payments for rent in Nepal.  This tenancy agreemnt reflected  that  the
    landlords included a person known  as  "Mrs  Sabitri  Khatri  Chhetri".
    Paragraph 18 of the decision reflects that the  Sponsor  clarified  his
    evidence on the rental payments once more for the judge  and  confirmed
    that the payments were not for the daughters' rent  but  were  for  his
    rent and were made to his own landlord in the UK.

 7. The judge then went on to find that, although the Sponsor  was  unwell,
    this could not have been a  case  of  confusion  and  that  as  he  had
    produced these receipts, his incorrect  evidence  that  they  were  for
    payment of his daughters' rent showed that he was an unreliable witness
    in terms of a key part of his evidence.  In my view this finding is one
    that could be described as  perverse  as  if  the  Sponsor  were  truly
    intending to mislead the Tribunal, it would  be  bizarre,  to  say  the
    least, for the payments for the daughters'  rent  to  the  landlord  in
    Nepal to firstly be in pound sterling and regularly made  to  a  person
    named as the landlord in the UK according to the adjacent page  of  the
    Appellants' bundle, and if this had truly been an attempt  to  mislead,
    the deposit slips  would  rather  have  appeared  next  to  the  rental
    agreement for the Appellants  in  Nepal  at  pages  49  to  50  of  the
    Appellants' bundle instead of next to the UK rental agreement  at  page
    162 of the Appellant's  bundle.   I  note  looking  at  the  daughters'
    tenancy agreement that the landlord's name in  Nepal  is  Sher  Bahadur
    Lawati, which is an entirely different name to that seen  on  the  HSBC
    deposit slips. This points on balance to those deposit slips being more
    likely  to  be  deposits  for  the  Sponsor's  own  rent  in  the   UK,
    particularly where the contents page for the  Appellants'  bundle  also
    describes pages 162 to 163  as  "Sponsors  rental  agreement  and  rent
    receipts".

 8. I also note that pages 51 to 71 of the Appellants' bundle  shows  money
    remittances from the Sponsor to Gita Rai, the Second Appellant, and  to
    Sita Rai, the First Appellant as recipients in Nepal.  I  further  note
    that the judge's findings are inconsistent with the evidence she  heard
    which she has not appraised (before reaching her conclusion  that  this
    was damaging to the Sponsor's  credibility)  in  that  if  the  Sponsor
    stated that the money was sent by "money exchange", it could hardly  be
    said that "HSBC deposit slips" for a UK bank could  pass  for  receipts
    for money exchange remittances to Nepal.  Thus, given that the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 25 is that the Sponsor had been untruthful in  "at
    least one aspect of his account", which is bound  to  cast  into  doubt
    everything else which he said, viewing the evidence in the  round,  the
    finding that the Sponsor was being untruthful  in  this  respect  is  a
    perverse one.  Thus, I do find there is a material error  in  terms  of
    Grounds 1 and 2.

 9. Having found a material error of law in respect  of  Grounds  1  and  2
    combined, I do not propose to go on to consider the  remaining  grounds
    as those errors are  sufficient  to  render  the  decision  unsafe.   I
    therefore set aside the decision in its entirety and  do  not  preserve
    any findings.

Decision

10. The matter is to be remitted to be heard by a Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than Judge Row.

11. The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are therefore allowed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby set aside.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 17 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini







