
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/21363/2016
                                                               HU/21360/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 11 April 2019             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                sandisiwe [m]
                                                             First Appellant
                                    [M M]
                                                            Second Appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Johal, Counsel instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in HU/21363/2016, Sandisiwe  [M],  is  described  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  the  "first  appellant".  The
    appellant in HU/21360/2016, [MM], is described in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal as the "second appellant" and I so designate them.

 2. They are sister and brother and are the  children  of  a  refugee  from
    Zimbabwe.  They appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing
    their appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing them entry
    clearance under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules as  the  family
    members of a refugee.

 3. I begin with the first appellant.  She was born in September  1997  and
    so is now 22 years old.  It is accepted that she was over 18 years  old
    when the application was made.  The  application  was  refused  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in part because it  is  a  requirement  of  the
    relevant Rule that the applicant is under the age of 18 years.   Whilst
    this is an appeal on  human  rights  grounds  the  decision  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  illuminates  the  public  interest  and  the  first
    appellant's case under the Rules simply did  not  begin  to  run.   The
    First-tier Tribunal decided in a possibly rather perfunctory  way  that
    there was no question of their having an Article 8  right  because  she
    was old enough to be living as an independent adult.

 4. Permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell  who
    referred to the case of Rai  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320.   With  respect  I
    understand the point.  It was made plain in Rai that there needs to  be
    a proper consideration of a claim that private and family  life  exists
    which is not normally answered just by reference  to  the  age  of  the
    people concerned.  This was particularly in the  context  of  a  Gurkha
    case where there is considerable evidence of high degrees of dependency
    often extending into adult life  well  passed  an  age  that  would  be
    expected in western European society.

 5. However there was very little before the judge that would have assisted
    him if he had tried to  embark  on  the  most  comprehensive  analysis.
    Extraordinarily, given the age of the appellant, there is no  statement
    from her at all.   There  are  some  documents  showing  correspondence
    between her and her mother but that is not the point.  I see no  reason
    why she could not have given detailed and full instructions  about  her
    relationship with her mother which  could  have  been  considered  with
    other evidence but she did not.

 6. Further the mother's own  evidence  of  the  relationship  is  somewhat
    skimpy.  She claims it is a close emotional relationship.  That is  not
    unusual between mother and daughter  of  all  kinds  of  ages  and  the
    appellant is a young woman who might ordinarily be expected to be close
    to her mother but the only strand of evidence I see that points to  her
    not being able to live independently is that her  mother  continues  to
    pay her school fees.  I am not entirely sure what that  means  and  the
    point is not explained but in my judgment there is just not  enough  in
    the evidence which would have enabled the judge to find that  there  is
    the kind of relationship between these two adults  which  comes  within
    the protection of Article 8(1)  in  a  way  that  requires  the  United
    Kingdom to facilitate entry into the country.   There  is  no  material
    error here.  I raise this point specifically with Counsel but Mr  Johal
    could not say very much.  That is not his fault.   There  is  not  very
    much worth saying.

 7. It follows that  I  dismiss  the  appeal  in  the  case  of  the  first
    appellant.

 8. The case of the second appellant is  a  little  more  complicated.   He
    remains a minor.  Very broadly, and by way of  introduction  only,  the
    children of people who are refugees are in a better  position  to  gain
    entry to the United Kingdom than other children.  Broadly they  do  not
    have to prove compliance with the financial requirements of  the  Rules
    and it is clearly advantageous to a  properly  qualified  appellant  to
    seek entry by that route.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that the second appellant was
    able to satisfy the Rules.  The judge did not accept  that  the  second
    appellant was part of the family unit when the mother left Zimbabwe  in
    order to seek asylum.

10. It is interesting to see how the Secretary of State has considered  the
    problem.  It is a requirement of the  Rules  that  the  person  seeking
    entry in this capacity was part of  the  "family  unit  of  the  person
    granted asylum at the time that the  person  granted  asylum  left  the
    country of their habitual residence in order to seek asylum" (paragraph
    352D(iv) of HC 395).  This is a rather troublesome phrase in  the  case
    of a person who did not leave her country of nationality  intending  to
    seek asylum but decided to, and did,  seek  asylum  after  arriving  in
    another country.  The Secretary of State has  considered  (although  on
    what basis is unclear) a more generous test and has  asked  himself  if
    the appellant were part of the "family  unit  before  they  left  their
    country  of  habitual  residence  or  at  the  time  they  made   their
    application to seek leave outside of the Immigration Rules."

11. The Secretary of State decided this was not shown  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal agreed.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept  that  the
    second appellant had shown that she was part  of  the  mother's  family
    unit when she left Zimbabwe in order to seek asylum.  That  finding  is
    clear but it is not particularly well-reasoned.  This is what concerned
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge when permission was granted.  It  is  the
    evidence of the sponsor that  when  she  left  Zimbabwe  she  left  the
    children in the care of her mother.  Again there is a want of detail in
    her evidence.  It is a feature of her case that she did not  even  name
    the second appellant when she was interviewed about asylum.   It  is  a
    matter of record that the sponsor did not claim asylum  on  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom.  She said she came to the United Kingdom to  attend
    her sister's graduation.  She then remained as a student.  It was  only
    in 2009 that she made an asylum claim.  That was some years  after  she
    arrived in the United  Kingdom.   It  may  well  be  that  the  sponsor
    continued to  provide  financial  support  for  her  children  but  the
    evidence was wholly open to the interpretation that  the  children  and
    their grandma had established their own independent family unit by then
    although no doubt very grateful for  the  financial  support  from  the
    United Kingdom.  This is  important.   The  decision  that  the  second
    appellant is  outside  the  scope  of  the  refugee  relevant  Rule  is
    important and permissible.  Once that has gone then  the  human  rights
    consideration has to be informed by other Rules and the  obligation  to
    meet the financial requirements which cannot be met here.

12. In short I see no material error.  The judge made decisions  that  were
    open to him and they are intelligible and lawful  and  I  dismiss  both
    appeals.

    Notice of Decision

    These appeals are dismissed.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 April 2019                  |



