
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21835/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2018                         |On 27th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    A F A
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jaghdesham (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Durrance, promulgated on 7th December  2017,  following  a  hearing  in
    Manchester on 22nd November 2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of the United States, and  was  born
    on 17th March 2002.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent
    Entry Clearance Officer, dated 9th June 2016, refusing his  application
    to join his father in the UK, who is a US national by  birth,  but  who
    had established himself in the United Kingdom with his  four  children,
    having married a British national in this country.  At the date of  the
    decision, the Appellant was living in New York.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he had lived in Yemen  for
    the majority of his life.  When his parents divorced, he was a toddler.
     He cannot remember having lived with his natural mother at  all.   She
    would visit him sparingly during his school term breaks.  He  sees  his
    mother occasionally now.  He lived with his grandmother,  although  his
    natural father had 'sole responsibility' over his  care,  and  provided
    him with financial support and moral guidance.  His  sponsoring  father
    had lived in the United Kingdom for many years now.  He was established
    there.  He had met and married his current wife in 2005.   However,  he
    was prevented from bringing the Appellant to the United Kingdom at  the
    time.  In 2013 he attended the US Embassy and obtained a US passport on
    behalf of the Appellant.  Within the Grounds of Appeal,  it  is  stated
    that the Sponsor's ex-wife had attended the US Embassy in Yemen and had
    answered questions and signed documents to confirm that she was not the
    person with custody of the Appellant, ever since her divorce  from  the
    sponsoring father in 2005.  The conditions in  Yemen  had  deteriorated
    and so the Appellant had travelled to  the  United  States  in  January
    2016.  It was from there that he is applying  to  join  his  sponsoring
    father in the UK.

 4. The Respondent ECO rejected the Appellant's claim on the basis that his
    biological mother lived in Yemen.  The Appellant could easily have been
    resident with his biological mother in Yemen.   There  was  very  scant
    evidence in respect of sole responsibility by  the  sponsoring  father.
    The decision of the ECO was upheld by the ECM on 19th August 2016.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge held that it was entirely unclear why the Appellant's  father
    had not taken action at an early juncture to bring his son to  the  UK.
    In any event, there was no reason why  he  could  not  have  sought  US
    citizenship on behalf of his son in 2005 when he moved  to  the  United
    Kingdom (see paragraph 30(a)).  The judge also held that, although  the
    Appellant had left Yemen with a number of family members including  his
    cousins with whom he had been  raised,  this  was  on  account  of  the
    worsening security situation in that country  (paragraph  30(c)).   The
    judge did not accept that the Appellant left Yemen due  to  reasons  of
    family life, and for such family life to being restored with his father
    (paragraph 30(d)).  Most importantly, the judge held that the  evidence
    in respect of  the  Sponsor  exercising  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant's son was "scant" and that "there is little evidence  of  the
    moral guidance that the Appellant refers to in his  witness  statement.
    I accept that the Sponsor sends money and gifts such as  chocolate  but
    this does not equate to sole responsibility.  The  letters  in  support
    indicate that money and gifts are sent but are silent on  the  messages
    from which sole responsibility might be  inferred  (paragraph  30(e))."
    The judge also held that the Appellant had lived in Yemen with extended
    family members and "was, in essence, under the supervision and  control
    of his grandmother, uncle and aunt" (paragraph 30(f)).  The Appellant's
    family members had cared for him since 2008 and that,  "I  equally  can
    see no reason why the Appellant's aunt and uncle cannot look after  the
    Appellant  if  there  are  issues  with  age  and  infirmity   of   the
    grandparent" (paragraph 30(g)).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  examine  the
    relevant evidence before coming to those conclusions  (particularly  at
    paragraph 30(a)).  The Appellant's witness statement (at  paragraphs  3
    to 4) makes it clear that his father played a central role in his life.
     He took the decisions with respect to any medical  treatment  required
    for the Appellant as he was growing up.  He made arrangements  for  the
    Appellant to be enrolled in  school.   Furthermore,  the  mother's  own
    statement (at page 33 of part A) made it clear that since  the  divorce
    in 2005 it has been  the  father  who  has  had  full  custody  of  the
    Appellant and been instrumental in managing his life.

 8. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the only issue  was  whether  the
    grandmother played a sufficiently central role in the Appellant's life.
     The judge made a mistake about two cousins being in Yemen because this
    is not true.  The judge also made a mistake that the aunt and uncle  of
    the Appellant could look after him.  Nevertheless, the grandmother  was
    in Yemen and the Appellant could be looked after  by  the  grandmother.
    At paragraph 30(e) the judge had taken a clear view with respect to the
    Sponsor's role in exercising sole responsibility for the Appellant  and
    had concluded that there was "little evidence  of  the  moral  guidance
    that the Appellant refers to in his witness statement".

 9. In his reply, Mr Jaghdesham submitted that "moral guidance" was no part
    of a requirement of "sole responsibility" which had to be considered as
    a whole in relation to the needs of the Appellant child.   What  was  a
    requirement was who provided control and direction  for  the  Appellant
    and in this respect there could be no doubt that it was the Appellant's
    father.

10. In any event, at paragraph 30(e) the judge  is  not  referring  to  any
    evidence (even with respect to the grandmother in Yemen) to demonstrate
    that the sponsoring father could not have played any role of importance
    in the Appellant's life. The grandmother was  actually  active  on  the
    wishes of the sponsoring  father.  The  sponsoring  father's  statement
    makes it quite clear that with respect to core activities such  as  the
    provision of medical treatment and the Appellant's  schooling,  it  was
    the sponsoring father that gave the direction to  the  carers  in  this
    respect.  At page 22 (of part A) the grandmother makes  it  clear  that
    she is acting at the behest of the sponsoring father.  She  also  makes
    it clear that she is no longer able to provide the care needed  because
    of her health.   Indeed,  at  paragraph  30(g)  the  judge  appears  to
    acknowledge that the grandmother can no longer carry on  providing  the
    requisite care for the Appellant when he refers to the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's  uncle  and  aunt  can  look  after  the  Appellant,  quite
    forgetting the fact that there is no uncle and aunt to look  after  the
    Appellant at all.  The grandmother alone was in a position  to  provide
    care in Yemen and she was now told to do so.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, it is not the  case  that
    the evidence with respect  to  sole  responsibility  exercised  by  the
    father is "scant" (see paragraph 30(e)).  The witness  statement  makes
    it clear (at paragraphs  8  to  11)  that  the  sponsoring  father  has
    exercised sole responsibility with respect to the Appellant,  including
    taking decisions on  any  medical  treatment  required,  together  with
    making telephone calls with respect  to  this,  as  the  Appellant  was
    growing up.  He also made arrangements for the Appellant to be enrolled
    in school.  He explains how the school refused to accept the  Appellant
    (at paragraph 9) until the sponsoring father sent an email allowing the
    child to register at the school.  Moreover,  when  the  Appellant  flew
    from the USA to the UK, the airline required a letter from  the  father
    granting permission for him to fly to the UK, and this  the  sponsoring
    father was able to do because he had flown back and forth from Yemen on
    various occasions to visit the Appellant son (see paragraph  6  of  his
    statement). It matters not that the Appellant's father did not apply at
    an early juncture to bring his son to the UK, or not to have registered
    him for US citizenship,  because  none  of  these  matters  go  to  the
    question of whether, as a factual matter,  the  sponsoring  father  had
    exercised 'sole responsibility' for his son.  That involves the  giving
    of direction and exercising control over his life.  The evidence  shows
    that the sponsoring father was principally the adult doing so.

12. Second, the Appellant is now a teenager, and living with his father  in
    the United Kingdom, and under Section 55 of the BCIA 2009,  his  wishes
    are important to any administrative decision taken with respect to  his
    life.  His witness statement (at pages 12 to 14) makes it clear that he
    wants to live with his father and his siblings  in  this  country.   He
    mentions the fact that he had been separated from his  father  for  too
    long and wants to settle with him.  He makes it clear (at paragraph 11)
    that, "I was able to regain lost time and to live a  regular  childhood
    again", at the prospect of being in the  UK  with  him.   He  is  at  a
    critical stage in his life as a teenager, and his best interests are to
    be cared for by his father, in circumstances where his mother has  been
    separated from him since 2005, and is given legal custody over  to  the
    sponsoring  father.   The  evidence  before  the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant had minimal contact with his mother.  In the  United  States,
    he was simply living with extended family members.

Re-Making the Decision

13. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons given  above.  In  TD
    (paragraph 297(i)(e) ("sole responsibility")) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049,
    the Tribunal made it clear that the proper basis of approach to a  case
    such as this is that,  "where  one  parent  has  disappeared  from  the
    child's  life,  and  so  relinquished  or  abdicated   his   (or   her)
    responsibility for the child, the starting point must be that it is the
    remaining active parent who has 'sole responsibility'  for  the  child"
    (paragraph 49).  The sponsoring father in this case  is  the  remaining
    active parent who has sole responsibility for the Appellant.  This is a
    "one parent case", and whilst the starting point of sole responsibility
    is that with a single parent,  this  may  be  negated  where  there  is
    evidence that the carer abroad has shared responsibility for  decisions
    with others, respect to the child's life, in this case the evidence  is
    that this has been done expressly  at  the  behest  of  the  sponsoring
    father.

14. Second, there is Section 55 of the BCIA 2009 and in this respect  Ndebe
    [2013] UKUT, makes it clear that the focus of Section 55  cases  is  on
    the circumstances of the child in the light of his or her  age,  social
    background, development  or  history.   It  requires  an  enquiry  into
    whether there is (a) evidence of neglect or abuse; (b) there are  needs
    that  should  be  catered  for;  and  (c)  whether  there  are   stable
    arrangements for the child's physical care.   The  assessment  involves
    consideration  as  to  whether  the  combination  of  circumstances  is
    sufficiently serious and compelling to require  the  admission  of  the
    Appellant into the UK.  In this case, there are stable arrangements for
    the child's physical care in the UK, although there is no  evidence  of
    any neglect or abuse in Yemen or in the USA, but that said,  there  are
    needs of the Appellant in that he is the teenage son of his  sponsoring
    father, from whom he has been separated, together  with  the  resulting
    separation from the rest of his siblings, who are now in the UK.

15. Moreover, in JO (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2015]  UKUT  00517,  it  was
    made clear that the decisionmaker must  be  properly  informed  of  the
    position of the  child.   Being  properly  informed  and  conducting  a
    scrupulous analysis is a prerequisite of identifying the  child's  best
    interests,  and  thus  balancing  them   with   the   other   essential
    considerations.  Performing these duties will  be  an  intensely  fact-
    sensitive and contextual exercise.  In a  case,  where  the  sponsoring
    father can already demonstrate that he has  had  "sole  responsibility"
    for the Appellant, I find that the balance of considerations  falls  in
    the Appellant's favour with respect to  the  wishes  of  the  Appellant
    being taken into  account  in  an  effective  manner  with  a  view  to
    determining that his best interests lie in remaining  with  his  father
    and his siblings.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.


17. There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
    concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing,
    and typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the
    system, before promulgation.

An anonymity direction is made.

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019

