
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21292/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 6 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                           Mohamed Mohamed Eseleni
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara of Counsel instructed by Western
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Libya born  on  24  November
    1982.  As set out in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant has a lengthy immigration history  which  culminated  in  him
    applying for indefinite leave to remain in the UK having been in the UK
    for more than ten years.  The respondent, in a decision dated 23 August
    2016, refused that application.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated
    on 3 May 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Morris  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:
      1) Issue of discretion in relation to breaks in lawful residence - the
         judge erred in  his  approach  given  the  Immigration  Directorate
         Instructions as to breaks in lawful residence (for which  a  reason
         was  provided)  and  this   was   relevant   to   the   Article   8
         proportionality assessment;
      2) In relation to insurmountable obstacles  the  judge  erred  in  his
         approach  given  the  evidence  before  the   judge   as   to   the
         circumstances in Libya;
      3) The judge should have considered Article  15(c)  in  light  of  the
         evidence before the judge including the FCO device.

Error of Law Discussion

 3. Mr Avery submitted that there was no evidence that the  respondent  did
    not turn its mind to the discretion issue and this was a  red  herring.
    It was his submission that this did not  make  any  difference  to  the
    ultimate decision and equally, in Mr Avery's submission, the Tribunal's
    findings on  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  were  sustainable  given  that  the
    appellant had been back to Libya multiple times and  had  family  there
    and therefore regardless of the material before the judge this  was  in
    integration question.  However, Mr Avery conceded  that  the  appellant
    may have an Article 15(c) argument.  I share that view.

 4. Mr Avery submitted  that  there  was  potentially  inadequate  evidence
    before the judge in relation to Article 15(c) and it was conceded by Mr
    Bellara that ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 had not  been
    promulgated at the time of the First-tier Tribunal decision.  The First-
    tier Tribunal decision was promulgated 3 May 2017, which was  the  date
    that ZMM was heard and the country guidance was only  published  on  29
    June 2017.

 5. I am of the view that the Tribunal erred in its approach.  The judge in
    reaching his decision under Article 8 decided that, although there  was
    no reason to doubt the appellant's evidence, the appellant  had  failed
    to satisfy the Tribunal that the respondent was  wrong  to  refuse  his
    application for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Neither the respondent nor the Tribunal turned its mind to the relevant
    guidance in relation to discretion for breaks in  lawful  residence  in
    the IDIs which includes as follows:
         "You must always discuss  the  use  of  discretion  with  a  senior
         caseworker.  You must be satisfied that  the  applicant  has  acted
         lawfully throughout the whole 10 year period  and  has  made  every
         effort to obey the Immigration Rules.   The  decision  to  exercise
         discretion  must  not  be  taken  without  consent  from  a  senior
         caseworker (SEO) or equivalent."

    At paragraph 2.3.3:
         "Breaks in lawful residence and the use of discretion
          If an applicant has a single short gap of lawful residence through
         making one single previous application out of time by  a  few  days
         (not  usually  more  than  ten  calendar  days  out  of  time)  the
         caseworker should use discretion  granting  ILR,  so  long  as  the
         application meets all the other requirements.
         It would not usually be appropriate to exercise discretion when  an
         applicant has more than one gap in their lawful  residence  due  to
         submitting more than one of  their  previous  applications  out  of
         time, as they would not have  shown  the  necessary  commitment  to
         ensuring that they have maintained lawful  leave  throughout  their
         time in the UK
         It may be appropriate to use  your  judgement  in  cases  where  an
         applicant has submitted a single application more than ten days  at
         a time if there are  extenuating  reasons  for  this  (e.g.  postal
         strike, hospitalisation, administrative error on  our  part  etc.).
         This must be discussed with a Senior Caseworker."

 7. Although the appellant's case did  not  fit  into  the  examples  given
    (above) the list was not exhaustive and the respondent  ought  to  have
    considered whether to exercise discretion and  therefore  the  Tribunal
    was incorrect in  the  reasons  it  gave  for  its  decision  that  the
    appellant had failed to satisfy the Tribunal that  the  respondent  was
    wrong to refuse the application for indefinite leave to remain  on  the
    basis of long residence.  At the very least, the fact that there was no
    evidence that the respondent had exercised her discretion as to whether
    or not to refuse the application, given the explanation provided as  to
    why the decision was out of time, ought to have been a  factor  in  the
    Tribunal's consideration.

 8. I do not accept Mr Avery's  submission  that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),
    with regards to the insurmountable obstacles for integration on return,
    cannot take into consideration the circumstances on return.

 9. In addition, in Agyarko v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11 it was acknowledged that leave can  be  granted  outside
    the Rules where exceptional circumstances apply, i.e. "circumstances in
    which refusal would result in an unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
    the individual so that the subsequent refusal of the application  would
    not be proportionate.  It is likely to be the case only very rarely".

10. Notwithstanding that ZMM had not  been  decided  at  the  date  of  the
    decision, the Tribunal had  before  it  the  appellant's  bundle  which
    included a one page extract from the  respondent's  COI  report  and  a
    further Foreign and Commonwealth Office document giving  Libyan  travel
    advice running from C2 to C9 of the appellant's bundle.

11. Mr Bellara conceded that the latter document was  directed  at  British
    citizens.  Nevertheless I accept  his  submission  that  the  guidance,
    which was updated on 23 March 2017 and still current on 12 April  2017,
    contains stark warnings.  These included that:
         "There  is  high  risk   of   civilians,   including   journalists,
         humanitarian and medical workers, being  caught  in  indiscriminate
         gunfire, shelling, including air strikes, in all areas where  there
         is fighting, putting those in the area at risk."

12. Although the Tribunal, at [41], took into account  what  the  Court  of
    Appeal said in Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 including that integration is a broad concept,  the
    fact that the Tribunal failed to engage  with  the  background  country
    evidence before it, and give adequate reasons (other than referring  to
    the 'current turmoil' in the country) as to  why  this  would  not  now
    affect someone in the appellant's  circumstances,  notwithstanding  his
    many trips to Libya in the  past  and  his  remaining  siblings  there,
    amounts to an error in the Tribunal's reasoning and a material error of
    law.

13. In such circumstances I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and proceed to remake the decision.

Remaking the Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law.   In
    remaking that decision I take into consideration the  country  guidance
    in ZMM which is authority for the proposition that:

         "... the violence in Libya has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

15. There was no objection to amending the appellant's grounds of appeal to
    include consideration of Article 15(c).  In remaking the  decision  and
    assessing the circumstances today, I take into consideration  what  was
    said, in ZMM at paragraphs 83 to 94 and in particular, at paragraph 93,
    where the Upper Tribunal held that civilians would be severely affected
    and there  is  not  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  'ordinary
    civilian'.

16. Mr Avery made no submissions in relation to the Article  15(c).   I  am
    satisfied that the appeal succeeds under Article 15(c) of  the  Refugee
    Qualification Directive 2004/83/C ECHR given the current  situation  in
    Libya.  It is not necessary to make any  detailed  findings  under  the
    Article 8 provisions of the Immigration Rules  or  outside  the  Rules,
    given that the appeal succeeds on humanitarian protection grounds.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error law such that
    it is set  aside.   I  remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

No anonymity direction was sought or made.


Signed                                  Dated:  2 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 2 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

