
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21349/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2020                       |On 19th June 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                NAHIDE KUSAT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. In Directions sent by email on 28 April 2020 I informed the parties
       that it was my preliminary view that the appeal could and should be
       determined without a hearing. The parties were directed to make
       written submissions and, if they considered a hearing necessary, to
       submit reasons. I have received submissions from both parties.
       Neither party expressed any objection to the appeal being determined
       without a hearing. I have therefore decided this appeal without an
       oral hearing.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 1 March 1939. On
       18 August 2017 she applied for leave to remain in the UK on human
       rights grounds. On 5 October 2018 the application was refused. The
       appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was
       heard on 30 August 2019 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese
       ("the judge"). In a decision promulgated on 2 October 2019 the appeal
       was dismissed. The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

    3. For the reasons set out below, I have decided to set aside the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal to the First-
       tier Tribunal to be heard afresh on the basis that refusing to accede
       to the appellant's adjournment request was erroneous in law. It has
       therefore not been necessary to determine the grounds of appeal that
       do not relate to the adjournment issue.

    4. Neither the appellant nor a representative on her behalf attended the
       hearing on 30 August 2019.

    5. At paragraph 6 of the decision the judge stated that the appellant's
       solicitors sent an email to the Tribunal on 29 August 2019 requesting
       an adjournment on the basis that they had not received a notice of
       the hearing and had only become aware of the hearing scheduled for 30
       August 2019 on that day (29 August 2019) because they had been
       contacted by the respondent.

    6. The judge refused to adjourn the hearing. Several reasons are given
       in paragraphs 7 and 9 of the decision. These are:

        a. The matter was previously adjourned.

        b. Directions were provided to both parties in a notice of hearing
           dated 2 November 2019.

        c. The appellants had not complied with the directions and so were
           not ready for the hearing on 30 August 2019.

        d. The respondent opposed the adjournment application.

        e. The correspondence section at the hearing centre were able to
           confirm that both parties were sent the relevant notice of the
           hearing.

    7. At paragraph 9 the judge stated:

           "I concluded therefore that the claim that the appellant [sic]
           solicitors did not receive a copy of the hearing [notice] was
           not borne out by the facts."

    8. The grounds of appeal argue that it was unfair to not adjourn the
       hearing as the appellant, and her representatives, had been unable to
       prepare for the hearing as they were not aware of it until the day
       before. The grounds note that the fact that a notice was sent does
       not mean it was received.

    9. The respondent argues that the decision to not adjourn was open to
       the judge because the notice had been sent, it had received by the
       respondent, and the appellant's representatives were clearly aware of
       the hearing date.

   10. At paragraph 9 of the decision the judge stated that it "was not
       borne out by the facts" that the appellant's solicitors did not
       receive notice of the hearing scheduled for 30 August 2019. This,
       however, is not correct. Whilst there was evidence before the judge
       that notice of the hearing was sent to the appellant's solicitors,
       there was no evidence that the notice was received by the solicitors.
       On the contrary, there was unambiguous evidence, in the form of an
       email from the appellant's solicitors, that the notice was not
       received by them. The email from the appellant's solicitors, sent on
       29 August 2019, states:

           "... We were contacted today 10 minutes ago by the Presenting
           Officer from the Home Office and express surprise over the date.
           We have never been given a hearing date, never received any
           email, letter or fax. Had we known about the hearing day we
           would have instructed counsel.... We believe that in the
           circumstances it would not be in the interest of justice to
           proceed with the said hearing."

   11. If the notice was, in fact, received by the appellant's solicitors
       then it follows that they were being dishonest in their email of 29
       August 2019. This would be extremely serious professional misconduct.
       However, there was no evidence before the judge that could support a
       conclusion that the appellant's solicitors were not being truthful.
       In the light of the solicitor's email of 29 August 2019, and in the
       absence of any other evidence pertaining to the question of whether
       the notice was received by (as opposed to sent to) the appellant's
       solicitors, there was no reasonable basis to reach any conclusion
       other than that the appellant's solicitors only became aware of the
       hearing a day before it was scheduled to take place.

   12. The issue to be determined is whether failure to accede to the
       adjournment request was unfair, in the sense that the appellant was
       deprived of a right to a fair hearing. As explained by the Upper
       Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC):

           "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such
           decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several
           respects: these include a failure to take into account all
           material considerations; permitting immaterial considerations to
           intrude; denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing to
           apply the correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice,
           in most cases the question will be whether the refusal deprived
           the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an
           adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is
           important to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal
           is not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be
           applied is that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the
           affected party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ
           1284."

   13. With only one day's notice of the hearing, the appellant's solicitors
       would not have had sufficient time to adequately prepare the case or
       instruct Counsel. Nor would there have been enough time for the
       appellant, who is elderly and in poor health, to prepare herself or
       give instructions.  In these circumstances, fairness required the
       granting of an adjournment as the consequence of refusing the
       adjournment request was to deprive the appellant of a right to a fair
       hearing.

   14. As the appellant has not had an opportunity to put her case to the
       First-tier Tribunal, I have decided, having regard to paragraph 7.2
       of the Senior President's Practice Statement, that the appeal will be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.




  Decision

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an
       error on a point of law and is set aside. The appeal is remitted to
       the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different judge.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Daniel Sheridan                      |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |                                     |
|Dated:  5 June 2020                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
