
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21200/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 4 December 2019                   |On 14 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                  TANIA [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Peters, instructed by Terence McCourt Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Gillespie promulgated on 8 May  2019,  dismissing  her
    appeal against a decision of the respondent to refuse her human  rights
    claim.

 2. That decision is set aside as I  am  satisfied  that  it  involved  the
    making of an error of law, for the reasons set out in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In particular, the judge erred  in  going
    behind a concession that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    children of the appellant's partner to leave the United Kingdom and  as
    it  had  not  been  submitted  that  there  was  no  genuine   parental
    relationship between the appellant and those children; and, following R
    (ota RK) v SSHD SSHD (s.117B(6): "parental relationship") (IJR)  [2016]
    UKUT 31, this was a relevant issue, the judge failing to make a finding
    on that issue.

 3. Having found that the decision involved the making of an error of  law,
    I set it aside, and proceeded to hear submissions as to the remaking of
    the decision.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Ecuador.  She is  married  to  a  British
    citizen who formerly lived in Ecuador. He had previously  been  married
    to another Ecuadorian citizen and they had lived together  in  Northern
    Ireland where two of the children of that marriage were born before the
    family moved to Ecuador in 2009.  That marriage broke down in 2014  and
    not long after that, the appellant's relationship with her now  husband
    began.  The appellant's husband then returned to  Northern  Ireland  to
    look after his elderly parents, taking the two UK  born  children  with
    him.  Those children are now 13 and 15  years  of  age.   Both  are  at
    secondary school and neither of them wishes to return to Ecuador.

 5. The appellant sought leave to enter the United Kingdom as the unmarried
    partner of her now husband but this was refused.  She then entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2017 with entry clearance as a visitor granted  until
    20 February 2018.  On the same date she made an application  for  leave
    to remain on the basis of her private life.

 6. The Secretary of State concluded that the appellant did not meet all of
    the eligibility requirements of Section E-LTRP of Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules as although  she  met  the  eligibility  relationship
    requirement in paragraph E-LTRP.1.1 to  1.12,  she  did  not  meet  the
    eligibility requirement in E-LTRP.2.1 to 2.2 as she had  entered  as  a
    visitor.  The respondent then went on to consider EX.1.   She  accepted
    that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  her
    partner; that she had two British stepchildren in  the  United  Kingdom
    and that her  partner  cared  for  his  elderly  parents  but  was  not
    satisfied that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles,  that  is  very
    significant difficulties,  that  she  or  her  partner  would  face  in
    continuing family life together in  Ecuador  and  which  could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship for her and her partner.
     It was accepted that the British stepchildren could reside with  their
    British citizen father in the United Kingdom for a short period  whilst
    she returned to obtain the correct entry clearance  causing  the  least
    disruption to their education.  It was  noted  also  that  the  partner
    could arrange for care for  his  parents  and  accompany  her  and  the
    children back to Ecuador to seek to obtain the correct entry clearance.

 7.  The  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) nor was she  satisfied  that  there
    were exceptional circumstances such that pursuant to paragraph  GEN.3.2
    of Appendix FM that there  were  exceptional  circumstances  such  that
    refusal of leave would be a breach of Article 8 as it would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for her, her  partner  or  a  relevant
    child.  That was on the basis that the best interests of any child were
    taken into account as a primary circumstance.

The Law

 8. I turn first to the position under the Immigration  Rules  in  a  human
    rights appeal under section 82(1)(b) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a  finding  that  a  person)   satisfies   the
    requirements of a particular immigration rule, so as to be entitled  to
    leave to remain,  means  that  (provided  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  is
    engaged), the Secretary of State will not  be  able  to  point  to  the
    importance of maintaining immigration controls as a factor weighing  in
    her favour in the  proportionality  balance,  so  far  as  that  factor
    relates to the particular immigration rule in question. So  far  as  is
    relevant, the Immigration Rules provide as follows:-

         R-LTRP.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain
         as a partner are-

         (a) the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;

         (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for limited or
         indefinite leave to remain as a partner; and either

         (c)

           (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section S-LTR:
           Suitability leave to remain; and

           (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of Section E-
           LTRP: Eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; or

         (d)

           (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section S-LTR:
           Suitability leave to remain; and

           (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
           LTRP.1.2-1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1-2.2.; and

           (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRP.2.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-

         (a) as a visitor; or

         (b) with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or less,
         unless that leave is as a fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner, or
         was granted pending the outcome of family court or divorce
         proceedings

         E-LTRP.2.2. The applicant must not be in the UK -

         (a) on immigration bail, unless:

           (i) the Secretary of State is satisfied that the applicant
           arrived in the UK more than 6 months prior to the date of
           application; and

           (ii) paragraph EX.1. applies; or

         (b) in breach of immigration laws (except that, where paragraph 39E
         of these Rules applies, any current period of overstaying will be
         disregarded), unless paragraph EX.1. applies.

 9. I note as  an  aside  that  the  appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules as a parent as pursuant to E-LTRPT.2.3 she  does  not
    have sole responsibility for the child; she is eligible  to  apply  for
    leave to remain as a partner; and, the parent or carer  with  whom  the
    child  normally  lives  is  her  partner,  expressly  contrary  to   E-
    LTRPT.2.3(b)(ii).  Accordingly,  on  that  basis  she  cannot  meet  R-
    LTRPT.1.1(d).

10. Mr Peters submitted that there were compelling reasons as to why it was
    unreasonable to expect the children to go to Ecuador or to be separated
    from their stepmother, let  alone  from  their  father.   He  submitted
    further that the grandparents are frail and need their son.

11. Mr Govan submitted that the fact that EX.1 does not apply and  that  it
    was the clear purpose of the  Immigration  Rules  that  people  in  the
    appellant's position should not be permitted to say  was  an  important
    factor to be taken into account in assessing the public  interest.   He
    submitted  further  that  JG  v  UTIAC  [2019]   NICA   27   could   be
    distinguished, on the basis that this case concerned a  stepparent  and
    was different from a real parent.  He asked me to  note  that  in  this
    case the family relationship had been built up over time and would have
    been broken and that there was no expectation the children would leave.

12. He submitted further that the appellant had  not  integrated,  did  not
    speak English and that there was a significant interest in  her  having
    to leave the United Kingdom.

13. The wording of the Immigration Rules is sufficiently  clear.   Even  if
    this appellant could meet the requirements of EX.1, she does  not  meet
    the requirements under E-LTRPT 2.1 and  so,  pursuant  to  R-LTRPT  she
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  That,  however,
    is not the end of the matter.  Any assessment pursuant to GEN.3.2  must
    be undertaken in consideration of the best interests  of  the  children
    concerned and also in light of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

14. I therefore turn to Section 117B(6) which provides.
     Section 117B provides:

         ...

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

15. In considering how section 117B(6) should be applied it is relevant  to
    have regard to  SSHD v AB and AO [2019] EWCA Civ 661 at paragraphs [59]
    to [61] and [73]:

         "59. Accordingly, the position has now been reached in  which  this
         Court is not only free to depart from the approach taken by Laws LJ
         in MM (Uganda) but indeed is required to do so in order  to  follow
         the binding decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria). That can
         be done by following the preferred  approach  of  Elias  LJ  in  MA
         (Pakistan), at para. 36, where he said:

             "Looking at section  117B(6)  free  from  authority,  I  would
             favour the argument of the appellants. The focus on  paragraph
             (b) is solely on the child and  I  see  no  justification  for
             reading the concept of  reasonableness  so  as  to  include  a
             consideration of the conduct and immigration  history  of  the
             parents as part of an overall analysis of the public interest.
             I  do  not  deny  that  this  may  result  in  some  cases  in
             undeserving applicants being allowed to remain,  but  that  is
             not in my view a reason for distorting  the  language  of  the
             section. Moreover, in an appropriate  case  the  Secretary  of
             State could render someone liable to deportation, and  thereby
             render him ineligible to rely on this provision, by certifying
             that his or her presence would not be conducive to the  public
             good."

         60.  The essential submission which Ms Patry makes on behalf of the
         Secretary of State is that the  condition  for  section  117B(6)(b)
         simply did not arise on the facts of  the  two  cases  before  this
         Court now. She submits that there was no question of either of  the
         relevant children concerned being  expected  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom. In those circumstances there was no need for the Tribunals
         to ask the question whether it was reasonable to expect them to  do
         so.

         61.  In my judgement, this submission must be rejected. It founders
         on the clear wording of the legislation. As Mr Drabble QC submitted
         to this Court on behalf of the Respondent AB, it requires the Court
         to  insert  words  into  the  Act  which  are  simply  not   there.
         Furthermore, as he submitted, it requires the Court to  divide  the
         concept of a "qualifying child" into two types. There is simply  no
         warrant in the legislation itself for doing so.

         ...

         73.   Speaking  for  myself,  I  would  not   necessarily   endorse
         everything that was said by the UT in its reasoning, in  particular
         at para. 25, as to the meaning of the concept "to expect". However,
         in my view that does  not  make  any  material  difference  to  the
         ultimate interpretation, which I consider was correctly set out  by
         the UT in JG. In my view, the concept of "to expect" something  can
         be ambiguous. It can be, as the UT thought at para.  25,  simply  a
         prediction of a future event. However, it can have a more normative
         aspect. That is the sense in which Admiral  Nelson  reputedly  used
         the word at Trafalgar, when he said that "England expects every man
         to do his duty." That is not a prediction  but  is  something  less
         than an order. To take another example, if a judge says late in the
         day at a hearing that she expects counsel to have filed and  served
         supplementary skeleton arguments by 9 a.m. the  following  morning,
         so that there is no delay to the start of a hearing an hour  later:
         although she may not be ordering the production  of  that  skeleton
         argument, that is what she considers should happen. That is  not  a
         prediction of  a  future  occurrence.  It  carries  some  normative
         force."

16. Thus, the key question is as is set out in JG (s  117B(6):  "reasonable
    to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072:

         "Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002 requires a court or Tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in
         question would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely
         to be the case, and ask whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect
         the child to do so".

17. The first question to be asked is whether the appellant's  stepchildren
    have a parental relationship with her.  The refusal  letter  refers  to
    them as stepchildren and the preponderance of the  evidence  which  has
    not been challenged in any way before me  today  is  that  there  is  a
    parental relationship.  That there is no biological relationship is not
    determinative as can be seen from R (ota RK), I  am  satisfied  on  the
    basis of the material supplied both by the children, the appellant, the
    appellant's partner and also the supporting letters from the family and
    friends that the appellant has in effect stepped into the shoes of  the
    mother, who continues to live in Ecuador with the other  two  children.
    I am therefore satisfied that, on the balance of  probabilities,  there
    exists in  this  case  a  genuine  parental  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the children of her partner. Both  of  the  children  are
    British Citizens. Accordingly, I am satisfied that Section  117B(6)  is
    engaged.

18. I turn next to the position of the children and as to whether it  would
    be reasonable to expect them to go to leave the United  Kingdom.   They
    have now lived in Northern Ireland again for  some  three  and  a  half
    years.  They are of an age when their  wider  circle  is  beginning  to
    become more important than the family circle and I  note  their  desire
    not to live in Ecuador. I have no reason to doubt that.   I  note  also
    the letter from the children's senior housemaster that the boys are now
    both in a critical stage of preparation for GSCE exams (the letter  was
    dated 17 December 2018) and so the situation has  now  moved  on.   The
    letter states as follows:-

         "I and the boys' tutors feel that we have developed a very positive
         relationship with them and there is a very strong network for  both
         of the boys.  For these reasons I would be very  concerned  if  the
         boys were uprooted again having only just found  their  feet  after
         their previous move".

19. I accept that this is reliable evidence,  and  that  the  children  are
    still at a critical stage of their education, all the more so as  major
    exams will need to be taken in the near  future.   It  is  evidence  to
    which I attach significant weight.

20. Unusually, the children speak Spanish  and  do  have  a  background  of
    living in Ecuador.   That  was,  however,  some  years  ago  and  their
    relationship with their mother appears now to have become  lesser  than
    it was.  They have of course already had one upheaval  in  moving  from
    Ecuador to the United Kingdom in 2016.  Were they to leave again, there
    would be yet further upheaval at a critical time in  their  development
    and which would take them away from the network into which as teenagers
    they have now grown.

21. Taking all of these factors into account, I conclude that it  would  on
    the particular facts  of  this  case  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave the United Kingdom.  It therefore follows that  there
    is no public interest in requiring the appellant to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

22. I reach that conclusion bearing in mind that the appellant's English is
    far from perfect and that there is reliance  on  public  funds  to  the
    extent that the family are not dependent.  Whilst those  factors  would
    engage Section 117B(6)(2) and (3) of the  2002  Act,  this  has  to  be
    balanced against the clear proposition set out at Section 117B(6)  that
    there is no public interest in the  appellant's  removal.   That  is  a
    clear expression of the will of parliament.  The same  force  does  not
    apply to the submission  that  the  scheme  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    indicates that people should not be able to remain if  they  have  come
    here as a visitor.  I accept that that is the scheme of the  Rules  but
    equally I bear in mind that Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act focuses  on
    the best interests of children.   Whilst  these  are  not  a  paramount
    consideration, they are a primary consideration,  and  section  117b(6)
    reflects the clear will of parliament.

23. I conclude that on the facts of this case given the strong bond between
    the  appellant  and  her  stepchildren  which  is  a  genuine  parental
    relationship that it would not be reasonable to expect the children  to
    leave, that the appeal falls to be allowed on the basis that  requiring
    her  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with her right to private  and  family  life  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

24. I remake the appeal by allowing it on human rights grounds.

25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 9 January 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

