
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21811/2018
                                                               HU/21804/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 1 October 2019                    |on 15 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                RAMANJIT [T]
                                    [H G]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellants appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal Malcolm (the judge), promulgated  on  19  June  2019,
        dismissing their joint appeals against the  respondent's  decisions
        dated 11 October 2018 refusing their Article 8 human rights  claims
        made on 2 March 2018.

   Background


     2. The 1st appellant is a national of India born on 28  January  1985.
        The 2nd appellant is the son of the 1st appellant, born in  the  UK
        on 7 July 2015. The 1st appellant  entered  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
        (General) Student on 4 April 2011. She made an in-time  application
        for further Leave to Remain (LTR) in the same  capacity  which  was
        granted, but this leave was curtailed on 25 September 2014  as  the
        1st appellant  was  believed  to  have  obtained  a  TOEIC  English
        language test arranged by Educational Training Services (ETS) using
        a  proxy  test  taker.  Although  the  1st  appellant  requested  a
        reconsideration of this decision this was refused in January  2015,
        and the refusal was issued again to  the  1st  appellant  in  March
        2015. The 1st appellant did not seek to challenge  the  curtailment
        decision by way of judicial review proceedings.


     3. The 2nd appellant was born from the  1st  appellant's  relationship
        with Amolak [G], an Indian  national  with  no  lawful  immigration
        status in the UK.  During  an  'enforcement  visit'  undertaken  by
        immigration officers on  25  January  2018  the  1st  appellant  is
        recorded as having said that she was no  longer  on  talking  terms
        with Mr [G]. On 2 March  2018  the  appellants  made  human  rights
        claims. The respondent noted that the 1st appellant was  not  in  a
        relationship with someone  who  fulfilled  the  immigration  status
        requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  that  she  did  not  meet  the
        requirements of Appendix FM in respect of her relationship with the
        2nd appellant. The respondent was not satisfied the  1st  appellant
        provided  adequate  evidence  that  there  were  'very  significant
        obstacles' to her integration in  India  and  noted  that  the  2nd
        appellant had not lived in the UK for at least 7 years. Nor was the
        respondent satisfied that the Suitability requirements of  Appendix
        FM were met given the belief that the 1st appellant  used  a  proxy
        test taker in respect of her ETS supervised  test.  The  respondent
        considered whether there were exceptional circumstances outside the
        immigration rules warranting a grant  of  LTR  in  accordance  with
        Article 8 ECHR principles but concluded there were not. In so doing
        the respondent considered her  duty  under  s.55  of  the  Borders,
        Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the circumstances  of  the
        2nd appellant.


     4. The appellants appealed the respondent's decisions pursuant to s.82
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The judge set out the documentary evidence before her contained  in
        bundles provided by  the  respondent  and  by  the  appellants  and
        summarised the 1st appellant's oral evidence. The judge  noted  the
        1st  appellant's  explanation   for   overstaying   following   the
        curtailment of her LTR and for the delay in making  an  application
        under Article 8 (this was due to her expecting her child)  and  her
        description of the ETS test she claimed to have  taken.  The  judge
        also noted the 1st appellant's  claim  that  she  was  still  in  a
        genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr [G] and  that  although
        they lived apart from August/September 2017 they recommenced living
        together approximately 6 months prior to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing. There was no attendance by Mr [G] at the  hearing  and  he
        provided no witness statement. The 1st appellant  stated  that  she
        has regular contact with her parents and two brothers in India  and
        that her partner also  had  family  in  India.  The  1st  appellant
        explained that since coming to the UK she lived with her  aunt  who
        supported her but the 1st appellant did not believe that  her  aunt
        would be able to continue supporting her if the appellants returned
        to India.


     6. Having summarised the submissions  from  both  representatives  the
        judge set out her findings. The judge noted the failure by the  1st
        appellant to seek  to  regularise  her  immigration  following  the
        respondent's refusal to reconsider her curtailment  decision  until
        March 2018. The  judge  considered  the  1st  appellant's  evidence
        concerning the circumstances of the ETS test and concluded that she
        provided an innocent explanation and that  she  did  undertake  the
        test. The judge consequently found  that  the  respondent  was  not
        entitled to rely on the Suitability requirements in Appendix FM  in
        rejecting the 1st appellant's human rights  claim.  The  respondent
        has not challenged this finding.

     7. The judge then considered the appellants' Article  8  claims  under
        paragraph 276ADE  and  outside  the  immigration  rules,  it  being
        accepted by the appellants'  representative  that  they  could  not
        succeed under Appendix FM. At [79] the judge noted the  absence  of
        adequate documentary evidence that  Mr  [G]  was  living  with  the
        appellants, and noted that, even  if  he  was,  he  had  no  lawful
        immigration status and they had only been  living  together  for  a
        short time. The judge noted that the 1st appellant had  educational
        qualifications obtained in India and the UK,  that  she  spent  the
        formative years of her life in India, that she  would  be  familiar
        with the culture, language, lifestyle and customs of that  country,
        and that she had family in India who would be able to support  her.
        The judge noted that the bare assertion that  the  1st  appellant's
        aunt in the UK would be unable to support the appellants  in  India
        was only contained in  a  statement  and  was  unsupported  by  any
        financial evidence. The judge considered the  2nd  appellant's  age
        and noted  that  he  would  be  returned  to  India  with  the  1st
        appellant,  ensuring  family  unity.  The  judge  found  that   the
        requirements of paragraph 276ADE were not satisfied.


     8. From [81] onwards the judge  considered  the  appeals  outside  the
        immigration rules. The judge  indicated  that  she  approached  the
        'free-standing' Article 8 appeal by  reference  to  the  principles
        established in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and that she took into account
        the factors in section 117A to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration
        and Asylum Act 2002. At [84] the judge stated,

             "The first Appellant is exercising family life in the UK  with
             her child and in her  evidence  also  with  her  partner.  The
             appellant came to the UK as a student and did  initially  have
             leave, however, part of her stay has been unlawful and at best
             her stay in the UK has been precarious."

     9. And at [85] the judge stated,

             "Accordingly whilst the first Appellant has  been  in  the  UK
             since 2011, little weight can be given  to  the  private  life
             established by her during her time in the UK."

    10. The judge noted that Mr [G] had no leave to remain in the UK,  that
        it was in the best interests of the 2nd appellant to  be  with  his
        parents, whether that was in India or the  UK,  and  that  the  1st
        appellant's proficiency in English and her  financial  independence
        were neutral factors. At [90] the judge explained that, as the  1st
        appellant could have no expectation of remaining in  the  UK  there
        were no identifiable exceptional circumstances enabling the appeals
        to be allowed under Article 8. The appeals were dismissed.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision and the 'error  of  law'
hearing

    11. The written grounds contend that the judge failed to  consider  her
        finding that the 1st appellant did not use a proxy  tester  in  her
        ETS TOEIC test  when  undertaking  the  proportionality  evaluation
        under Article 8.  The only reason the  1st  appellant's  leave  was
        curtailed in 2014 was the mistaken belief that  she  used  a  proxy
        test taker. The 1st appellant should be put back into the  position
        she would have occupied had the curtailment decision  not  occurred
        and the judge failed to do this. The judge  consequently  erred  in
        law in her proportionality assessment.


    12. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds stated,

             "The main appellant's history following the curtailment of the
             visa is unclear from the papers. It is arguable that the FtTJ,
             having found that the main appellant had not  used  deception,
             had  failed  to  give  consideration  to  the  impact  of  the
             curtailment decision (See Ahsan and  others  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
             2009 at [120-121] and Khan and others v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ
             1684 at [37(i) (ii)])."

    13. In his skeleton argument and his oral submissions Mr Raza submitted
        that the judge's proportionality assessment  failed  to  take  into
        account the injustice that the 1st appellant faced given  that  her
        leave was wrongly curtailed. He relied on paragraph 120 of Ahsan  v
        SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 which reads,

             "The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if on  a
             human rights appeal  an  appellant  were  found  not  to  have
             cheated, which inevitably means that the section  10  decision
             had been wrong, the Secretary of State  would  be  obliged  to
             deal with him or her thereafter so far as possible as if  that
             error had not been made, i.e. as if their leave to remain  had
             not been invalidated. In a straightforward case, for  example,
             she could and should make a fresh grant  of  leave  to  remain
             equivalent to that which had been invalidated. She could also,
             and other things being equal  should,  exercise  any  relevant
             future discretion, if necessary "outside the  Rules",  on  the
             basis that the appellant had in fact had leave  to  remain  in
             the relevant period notwithstanding that formally  that  leave
             remained invalidated. (I accept that how to  exercise  such  a
             discretion would not always be easy, since it  is  not  always
             possible to reconstruct the world as it would have  been;  but
             that problem would arise even if the decision were quashed  on
             judicial review.) If it were clear  that  in  those  ways  the
             successful appellant could be put in  substantially  the  same
             position as if the section 10 decision had been quashed, I can
             see no reason in principle why that should not be  taken  into
             account in  deciding  whether  a  human  rights  appeal  would
             constitute an appropriate alternative remedy.  To  pick  up  a
             particular point relied on by Mr Biggs, I do  not  regard  the
             fact that a person commits a criminal offence by remaining  in
             the UK from (apparently) the moment of service of a section 10
             notice as constituting a substantial detriment such that he is
             absolutely entitled to seek to have  the  notice  quashed,  at
             least in circumstances where there has  been  no  prosecution.
             (It is also irrelevant that the appellant  may  have  suffered
             collateral consequences from the section 10  decision  on  the
             basis that his or her leave  has  been  invalidated,  such  as
             losing their job; past damage of that kind cannot alas  cannot
             be remedied by either kind of proceeding.)"

    14. According to Mr Raza the respondent's wrongful decision to  curtail
        the 1st appellant's leave constituted an 'exceptional circumstance'
        and should have been considered by the judge in her proportionality
        assessment. There was no dispute that Article 8 was engaged and the
        impact of the curtailment decision on the  1st  appellant,  coupled
        with the respondent's approach to situations where there  had  been
        an erroneous decision based on  proxy  test-taking,  meant  that  a
        refusal of LTR constituted an unjustifiably harsh  consequence  (by
        reference to GEN.3.1 of Appendix FM). Given that  the  respondent's
        stated position was to put individuals who were wrongly accused  of
        involvement in  proxy  test  taking  substantially  back  into  the
        position they would otherwise have occupied, the judge should  have
        taken this into account when assessing proportionality and  allowed
        the appeal under Article 8.


    15. Ms Isherwood pointed out  the  absence  of  any  challenge  to  the
        respondent's curtailment decision and the long  delay  by  the  1st
        appellant in making her human rights claim. The judge looked at the
        circumstances of both appellants and the respondent's  position  in
        respect of those found not to have  been  involved  in  proxy  test
        taking  would  have  made  no  difference  to  the  proportionality
        assessment. It was pointed out that there  was  nothing  preventing
        the 1st appellant from returning  to  India  and  making  an  entry
        clearance application in light of the ETS findings.

Discussion

    16. The judge found that the 1st appellant had not cheated. Her LTR  as
        a student, which had been valid to 9 April  2016,  was  erroneously
        curtailed on 25 September 2014. Although the 1st appellant remained
        in the UK as an overstayer and failed to challenge the  curtailment
        decision, for example by way of judicial  review  proceedings,  had
        the erroneous curtailment decision not been  made  she  would  have
        continued to reside with lawful leave, albeit in a status that  did
        not lead to settlement until her leave was due to expire  in  2016.
        At [84] the judge notes that part of the 1st  appellant's  stay  in
        the UK had been unlawful and that her residence was, at all  times,
        precarious. Whilst these assertions are accurate, the judge has not
        considered that it was the respondent's erroneous decision that led
        to curtailment, and that the basis of the curtailment was likely to
        prevent  the  applicant  from  making   a   successful   subsequent
        application for LTR in most  categories.  The  fact  that  the  1st
        appellant's leave was erroneously curtailed must, in my  judgement,
        reduce, at least to some extent, the weight that can be attached to
        the public interest in the appellants' removal. I  am  consequently
        satisfied that the  judge  failed  to  'factor  in'  the  erroneous
        curtailment in her proportionality assessment, and that the  First-
        tier Tribunal's decision must be set aside.


      Remaking the decision


    17. No application was made to adduce any further evidence pursuant  to
        rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        and Mr Raza was content for me to proceed to remake the decision on
        the basis of the evidence before me. I proceed on  the  basis  that
        the 1st appellant did not cheat in her TOEIC test.


    18. It was accepted by Mr Raza that  neither  appellant  could  succeed
        under paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules. This must be right
        given the age and length of residence of the 2nd appellant  in  the
        UK and the 1st appellant's evidence of her family in India and  the
        First-tier Tribunal judge's at [76] to [80],  none  of  which  were
        challenged. Although the judge appeared  to  doubt  the  subsisting
        nature of the claimed relationship between the  appellants  and  Mr
        [G], given that he has no lawful immigration status in the UK, even
        if there was a genuine relationship the  1st  appellant  could  not
        succeed under Appendix FM in respect of a  partnership  application
        and there would appear to be nothing preventing the  appellant  and
        Mr [G] from relocating to India as a family unit.

    19. In assessing the human rights claims outside the immigration  rules
        I apply the principles established in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  I
        take into  account  the  factors  in  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is
        family life between the appellants (and possibly between  them  and
        Mr [G]), but any decision to remove the appellants would not breach
        family unity as the appellants (and Mr  [G],  if  he  chose)  could
        relocate to India  together.  Given  that  the  1st  appellant  has
        resided in the UK since April  2011,  she  would  have  established
        private life relationships through the  weight  of  years  and  her
        studies and her relationship with her aunt. The 2nd  appellant  was
        only born in July 2015 and, as a four year old, is unlikely to have
        established any significant private life relationships outside  his
        immediate family unit. I am satisfied that the refusals of the  1st
        appellant's human  rights  claim  interferes  with  her  Article  8
        private life  right,  but  that  the  decision  is  in  pursuit  of
        legitimate public interests and that it is in accordance  with  the
        law. I now consider the issue of proportionality.

    20. I take into account, as a factor reducing the weight to be attached
        to the public interest factors, the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
        that the 1st appellant did not cheat in her ETS test and  that  her
        LTR as a Tier 4 (General) Student was wrongly  curtailed.  She  has
        therefore been deprived of an opportunity to lawfully reside in the
        UK for a longer period, and  of  an  opportunity  to  make  further
        applications  for  leave  to  remain  given  the   basis   of   the
        curtailment. The wrongful curtailment decision reduced  the  weight
        that can be attached to the public interests in her and  her  son's
        removal.

    21. The appellants contend that  I  should  allow  their  human  rights
        claims based on the private lives they have established in the  UK,
        particularly through the 1st appellant's length  of  residence  and
        her relationships with her aunt and Mr [G], and the 2nd appellant's
        attendance at school, and  in  light  of  the  respondent's  stated
        position, in both Ahsan and Khan & Ors v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1684,
        in respect of those found not to have cheated in ETS tests.

    22. Both Ahsan and Khan are primarily concerned with  the  availability
        and  nature  of  a  right  of  appeal  in  which  the  respondent's
        allegation of proxy test taking could be fairly considered  on  the
        merits. Ahsan involved direct challenges  to  decisions  to  remove
        taken under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, as it  was
        prior to the amendments wrought by the Immigration Act 2014.  Khan,
        which was concerned with  the  appeals  regime  introduced  by  the
        Immigration Act 2014, involved  direct  challenges  to  curtailment
        decisions in respect of which there were no  rights  of  appeal.  A
        compromise was  reached  by  the  parties  in  Khan  in  which  the
        appellants would  make  human  rights  claims  and,  if  they  were
        successful in a subsequent human rights appeal on  the  basis  that
        they did not cheat, save in  the  absence  of  a  new  factor,  the
        respondent would rescind her curtailment decisions and afford  them
        a reasonable opportunity to secure further leave  to  remain  [23].
        The Court of Appeal  set  out  the  Secretary  of  State's  written
        position at [36] and [37]. [37] reads,

             Further, at para. 8 of the note, it was stated:


                  "Nonetheless,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the   SSHD
                  confirms that:


                  (i) For those individuals whose leave was  curtailed,  and
                  where that leave would still have time to run  as  at  the
                  date of an FTT determination that there was no  deception,
                  subject to any further appeal to the UT,  the  curtailment
                  decision would be withdrawn and the effect  ...  would  be
                  that leave would continue and the individuals would not be
                  disadvantaged in any  future  application  they  chose  to
                  make;


                  (ii) For those whose leave has been curtailed,  and  where
                  the leave would in any  event  have  expired  without  any
                  further  application  being  made,  the  Respondent   will
                  provide a  further  opportunity  for  the  individuals  to
                  obtain leave with the safeguards in paragraph (iii) below.


                  For those whose leave had expired, and who had made an  in
                  time application for further leave  to  remain  which  was
                  refused on ETS grounds, the effect of an FTT determination
                  that there was no deception  would  be  that  the  refusal
                  would be withdrawn. The applicant in question would  still
                  have an outstanding application for leave  to  remain  and
                  the  Respondent  will  provide  them  with  a   reasonable
                  opportunity  to  make  any  further   changes   to   their
                  application which would be considered on the basis of them
                  not having employed any  deception  in  the  obtaining  of
                  their TOEIC certificate, and  they  would  in  no  way  be
                  disadvantaged in any  future  application  they  chose  to
                  make.


                  (iii) In all cases, the Respondent confirms that in making
                  any future decision he will not hold any previous  gap  in
                  leave caused by any erroneous decision in relation to  ETS
                  against the relevant applicant, and will have to take into
                  account all the circumstances of each case.


                  However, the Respondent does not accept that it  would  be
                  appropriate for the Court  now  to  bind  him  as  to  the
                  approach  that  he  would  take  towards   still   further
                  applications in the future, for example  by  stating  that
                  each applicant has already accrued  a  certain  period  of
                  lawful leave. The potential factual  permutations  of  the
                  cases that may need to be considered are many and various.
                  In some cases, for example,  it  will  be  apparent  that,
                  whilst  on  the  facts  as  presented  at  the  appeal  an
                  appellant's human rights claim is successful, he would not
                  have been able to obtain leave at previous  dates.  Again,
                  this issue will have to be dealt with on a  case  by  case
                  basis." (Bold in original)

    23. Neither authority dealt with a situation such as the present  where
        there had been no legal challenge to the curtailment  decision  and
        where there had been a significant delay  between  the  curtailment
        decision and the subsequent human rights  claim.  Nor  does  either
        authority dictate how a human rights appeal must be determined even
        if there was a finding that there had been  no  dishonesty.  It  is
        apparent from both Ahsan and Khan that,  if  there  is  a  judicial
        finding that a person did not cheat the respondent can be  expected
        to provide that person with a further opportunity to obtain  leave.
        It is therefore open to the 1st appellant, armed  with  the  First-
        tier Tribunal judge's factual findings, to approach the  respondent
        with an application and request, in reliance  on  Ahsan  and  Khan,
        that she be treated as if her LTR had  not  been  invalidated.  The
        fact of an incorrect invalidation does  not  however  mean  that  a
        human rights claim must  be  allowed.  Whilst  the  past  incorrect
        invalidation is a relevant factor in assessing proportionality, and
        one that I have fully considered,  the  proportionality  assessment
        must be undertaken on the basis of the  particular  facts  of  each
        case.

    24. When her LTR was curtailed the 1st appellant was residing in the UK
        as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  This  is  not  a  category  in  the
        immigration rules that leads to settlement. The 1st  appellant  did
        not indicate in her evidence that she would have sought further LTR
        in a category contained in the immigration rules had her leave  not
        been curtailed. She indicated in her statement that she  overstayed
        because she was expecting her first child. She did not identify any
        further basis upon which she would, if she was found  not  to  have
        cheated, have sought to remain in the UK other than by reference to
        her and  her  child's  private  and  family  life  rights.   It  is
        speculative to say the least to suggest that,  had  her  leave  not
        been curtailed, she would have sought further  LTR,  or  that,  had
        such an application been made, she would have been granted  further
        LTR.

    25. In assessing the proportionality of  the  decision  I  additionally
        take into account the fact that the 1st appellant did not  seek  to
        raise  any  legal  challenge  to  the   curtailment   decision.   I
        acknowledge her oral evidence at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
        that she did consult a solicitor in September or October  2014  who
        did not properly advise her, but she made no reference to  this  in
        her statement and there was no supporting evidence.  In  any  event
        the  1st  appellant  then  attributed  the  absence  of  any  legal
        challenge to her pregnancy. The curtailment decision was made  over
        9  months  before  the  birth  of  her  son,  and  a  copy  of  the
        respondent's decision to refuse  her  reconsideration  request  was
        sent to her, at the latest, in March 2015, still 4 months prior  to
        the birth.  There  was  no  medical  evidence  that  her  pregnancy
        prevented her from seeking to  legally  challenge  the  curtailment
        decision, and she  does  not  advance  any  other  reason  for  not
        challenging that decision. Nor is there any medical  evidence  that
        she and her son were unable to return to  India  after  his  birth.
        Instead the appellant remained in the UK illegally for a further  3
        � years before making her human rights claim.

    26. The Article 8 private life established by the appellants in the  UK
        is relatively weak. Although I have accepted that the 1st appellant
        has established a private life in the UK, and that the respondent's
        decision interferes with her  private  life,  there  is  relatively
        little evidence of the nature and  strength  of  her  private  life
        relationships or the  quality  of  her  integration.  She  provides
        little detail in her statement of the life she has  established  in
        the UK and  her  oral  evidence,  as  recorded  by  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, did not further advance her private life claim. The  best
        interests of the 2nd appellant are to remain  with  his  parent(s),
        and given his young age and the absence of cogent evidence that  he
        has established a meaningful private  life  outside  his  immediate
        family unit, the 2nd appellant's best interests could  be  achieved
        either in the UK or in India.

    27. Applying the factors in s.117B  of  the  2002  I  note  the  public
        interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls,
        although  I  attach  less  weight  to  this  given  the   erroneous
        curtailment decision. The 1st appellant's  proficiency  in  English
        and her ability to be financially independent are neutral  factors.
        Given that her leave was wrongly curtailed I  attach  more  limited
        weight to her precarious immigration status, although  I  note  the
        relatively long delay in making her and son's human rights claims.

    28. Having considered the aforementioned factors 'in  the  round',  and
        whilst bearing in mind the consequences of the wrongful curtailment
        decision, I am not  persuaded,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities
        standard, that the refusal of the human rights claims constitutes a
        disproportionate interference with Article 8 given  the  relatively
        weak nature of the appellants' private life claims (and there being
        no breach of their family life relationships given that the  family
        would be removed together), given the delay  in  making  the  human
        right claims following the curtailment decisions,  and  given  that
        the unchallenged factual finding by the First-tier Tribunal will no
        longer prevent the applicant from making a further application  and
        the respondent's position as outlined in Ahsan and Khan.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material  errors  on  points
of law and is set aside.

The decision is remade, the human rights claims being dismissed.



D.Blum                                  11 October 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
