
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21236/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 2 October 2019                    |On 17 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     n s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Simon Barr, Simon Barr Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As this appeal concerns a minor, I make an order pursuant to rule 14 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 whereby  any  matter
    leading to the identification of the child in these proceedings or  the
    parents is prohibited.  Any breach of this order may lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born in  1991.   She  has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Fox who dismissed her appeal for reasons given in his decision dated 22
    February 2019 against the Secretary of State's decision dated 19 August
    2016, refusing the appellant's  application  made  on  Form  (FLR)(FP))
    dated 30 March 2016, following her arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    12 February 2015 on a visit and  subsequent  extension  of  leave  for
    medical treatment.  According to a letter accompanying the  application
    the appellant's spouse and their child are British  citizens  and  they
    all live together.  The letter sets out the family history in  extenso.
    The relevant matters are  that  the  appellant  married  SD  a  British
    national in January 2013 in Pakistan.  They lived abroad in Dubai. They
    arrived in the UK together in February 2015 for  a  short  holiday  but
    have remained here since.  The appellant's leave to remain expired on 2
    April 2016.  Their child was born in Newry in December 2015.  It is the
    appellant's case that she is unable to live in Pakistan.

 3. The Secretary of State refused  the  application  under  the  ten  year
    partner route.  Although accepting the genuineness  of  the  subsisting
    relationship with her British partner certain eligibility  requirements
    of the Rules had not been met.  In particular, it was not accepted that
    the appellant and her partner intended to live together permanently  in
    the United Kingdom or that they intended to do so in the future.   This
    was because they had previously resided in Dubai and it had  also  been
    stated on the covering letter with the application that they wished  to
    move freely between the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland as a
    family for the purposes of  living,  working  and  doing  business.   A
    further eligibility requirement which the appellant did  not  meet  was
    the length of her last grant of leave.   This  was  as  a  visitor  for
    private medical treatment, for which she had stated she would leave the
    United Kingdom at the end of that treatment.

 4. Appendix EX.1. of Appendix FM was considered by the Secretary of  State
    but no evidence had been seen indicating that there were insurmountable
    obstacles  in  accordance  with  paragraph  EX.2.  of  that  provision.
    Furthermore, the Secretary of State did not accept that  the  appellant
    met the private life provisions in paragraph 276ADE or that there  were
    exceptional circumstances with particular reference to the difficulties
    the appellant would encounter with long  haul  travel  due  to  medical
    complications with her ear.

 5. Judge Fox noted that the appellant's last grant of leave as  a  visitor
    was for private medical treatment for a period of  six  months  and  he
    also referred to the appellant having  previously  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor for a period of five weeks to visit relatives.  He
    was satisfied  on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate there were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  or  exceptional
    circumstances with  regard  to  her  reintegration  into  Pakistan,  if
    required to leave.

 6. In respect of Article 8 the judge explained at [27]:

         "27. I have taken into  account  all  relevant  factors,  not  just
             limited to those above but also the  following.   There  is  a
             child born to this relationship between the Appellant and  her
             husband.  The child acquires British  citizenship  because  of
             her British husband.  I must consider the  best  interests  of
             child as the primary consideration.  There  is  no  suggestion
             that the child, and her husband would be  compelled  to  leave
             the United Kingdom with the Appellant.  The Appellant  submits
             that her husband was entirely capable  of  looking  after  the
             child but has not demonstrated, to any meaningful degree  that
             this would be so.  He  clearly  has  [sic]  an  educated  man,
             competent, erudite, talented and resource full [sic].  He also
             claims to have family, as they both do, in the United  Kingdom
             generally the [sic] could provide support and assistance.  The
             child is of tender years and it would be reasonable, if I were
             to accept the husband's inability to look after his child, for
             the child to remain with  its  mother.   The  expectation,  as
             recorded above was that the [sic] was never any probability or
             guarantee that the Appellant would be allowed to live  in  the
             United Kingdom on  a  permanent  basis.   She  only  ever  had
             temporary Leave to Remain.  It appears that no backup plan was
             ever developed no safety net had been put in place.  The child
             is in a state of robust good health.  I'm  satisfied  that  it
             would not be unreasonable to expect a child to travel with its
             mother back  to  Pakistan  if  that  was  the  choice  of  the
             parents."

 7. And as to the appellant's medical circumstances, the judge explained at
    [28]:

         "28. The Appellant herself claims to be in a state of poor  health.
             However, it would appear that her medical condition involve  a
             build-up  of  earwax  and  a  blood   the   [sic]   condition.
             Regrettably, however, there is no  clinical  evidence  on  the
             papers before me today that would assist  in  determining  how
             dangerous either of these of these conditions may or could be.
              I  suspect,  from  reading  her  narrative,  that  the  blood
             condition is well treated as is the build-up  of  her  earwax.
             He complains that the earwax condition would prevent her  from
             taking long-haul flights but does not suggest that short  haul
             flights are impossible to undertake."

 8. After considering the private lives of the appellant and  her  husband,
    the judge came to the following conclusions at  [36]  to  [40]  in  his
    decision:

         "36. On the evidence before me  today  I  am  satisfied  that  such
             interference is necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  others.   I  am
             satisfied such interference is proportionate to the legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved.

         37.  I am satisfied on  the  evidence  before  me  today  that  the
             Appellant is not entitled to Leave to Remain and such Leave to
             Remain should not be issued to the Appellant  as  confirmation
             of her right to reside in the United Kingdom.

         38.  I have considered the Appellant's claim under the Human Rights
             Act 1998, Article 8.  I find that the UK  Government,  in  its
             exercise of a fair  and  firm  immigration  policy  has  acted
             proportionately by refusing to grant Leave to  Remain.   There
             has been family life that has been interfered with but  in  an
             entirely  proportionate  manner.   The  Appellant   does   not
             identify any interference with private life.

         39.  On 11 June  2012  the  Government  announced  changes  to  the
             Immigration Rules to unify consideration under the  Rules  and
             Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
             Immigration Rules set out the requirements for  those  seeking
             Leave to Enter or Remain  on  the  basis  of  their  right  to
             respect for private or family life by  defining  the  criteria
             that a person is expected to fulfil in order to  qualify  this
             right to remain in the United Kingdom.  These criteria are set
             out in Appendix FM and Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  As a consequence, because the  Appellant  has  applied
             under these provisions a full consideration of their Article 8
             ECHR rights has been  undertaken  by  the  Respondent  and  by
             myself today.

         40.  On the totality of the evidence before me today,  I  find  the
             Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof  and  reasons
             given by the Respondent justify the refusal.   Therefore,  the
             Respondent's decision is in accordance with the  law  and  the
             applicable Immigration Rules."

 9. The grounds of  challenge  refer  to  the  appellant  not  having  been
    professionally represented at the  hearing.   It  is  argued  that  the
    Secretary of State had not carried out any substantial  review  on  the
    best interests of the child and the judge had made no reference  to  MK
    (Section 55 - tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015]  UKUT  00223  (IAC)
    and the judge had made no reference at all to the section 55 duty.   It
    is also argued that the decision by the judge was  not  one  which  was
    open to him.  The judge had failed to specifically determine the  point
    under appeal.

10. In granting permission to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Neville
    considered that [27] of the decision  arguably  contained  insufficient
    reasoning to demonstrate the judge had approached  section  117B(6)  in
    the light of JG (s117B(6)): "reasonable to  leave"  UK)  Turkey  [2019]
    UKUT 72 (IAC).

11. Ms Peterson acknowledged at the outset of the heairng that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not have proper regard to the child's best  interests
    and conceded that the decision was infected by error of law and  should
    be set aside.  In my judgment she was correc to  make  that  concession
    having regard to the approach by the judge to the issue  of  the  child
    and the impact on the child in these proceedings and in particular  the
    guidance given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  JG  with  regard  to  the
    assessment of the impact on a child without reference to  the  parents'
    immigration history following the decision of the Supreme Court in  KO.



12. The appellant has lodged with the Upper Tribunal an extensive bundle of
    material although Mr Barr has explained that not  all  is  specifically
    relied on.  Included in  that  material  is  medical  evidence  from  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist regarding SD.  The report by Dr Bell  is  dated
    23 September 2019 in which he carries out  a  comprehensive  reivew  of
    SD's  medical  history  and  provides  a  diagnosis  of   anxiety   and
    depression.  He explains in his concluding paragraph and I quote:

         "Dr Graham in her letter has pointed out the  relationship  between
         SD's ill health and the health issues which his wife  and  daughter
         have had  recently.   These  health  issues  have  exacerbated  his
         symptoms of stress which have been due to the ongoing issues around
         his wife's UK visa  to  reside,  to  the  point  now  where  he  is
         suffering from a depressive disorder with anxiety.  In view of  the
         serious risk of suicide which was present  when  he  last  suffered
         from anxiety and depression in 1999, I would consider him to be  at
         serious risk of self harm and I would strongly  recommend  that  he
         contact his own NHS GP in order to be referred to local  psychiatry
         services in order to prevent a recurrence of the  serious  overdose
         which took place in 1999."

13. A report has also been provided by Dr Graham,  a  General  Practitioner
    dated 31 May 2019 in terms that the appellant has not  recovered  fully
    from a stressful pregnancy and that her ongoing health issues  together
    with the worry about her daughter's health has an effect on her husband
    and their family.

14. There is no dispute in  this  case  that  the  appellant  was  able  to
    demonstrate that she met the eligibility requirements under  the  rules
    including the financial requirements but for those  identified  in  the
    decision letter.  Ms Peterson sensibly agreed that this  is  an  appeal
    that should be allowed based on the evidence that  is  now  before  the
    tribunal specifically in respect of the evidence regarding  the  child,
    the child's best interests and whether it would be reasonable  for  the
    child, a British citizen, to  be  expected  to  relocate  to  Pakistan.
    Furthermore, she accepted that in the light of the  continued  presence
    of the appellant and her family in the United Kingdom since 2015  there
    was less in the Secretary of State' point regarding the  intentions  of
    the parties as to where they would live.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside for error of
    law.  The decision is re-made in the Upper Tribunal and the  appeal  is
    allowed on article 8 grounds.


Signed                                  Date 14 October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson




