
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21877/2018
                                                               HU/21882/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2019                   |On 18 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                  T O & I O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Lanlehin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria and are mother and minor  child.



    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify them. This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.

 2. The Appellants, with permission, appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated on the 18 June
    2019, dismissed their appeals against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    made on the 10 October 2018 to refuse their applications for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.

 3.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on the 7th August 2019.

Background:

 4. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter and  the
    determination at paragraphs 1-4 and include an earlier decision of  the
    FtT in 2017 relating to the first appellant. It can  be  summarised  as
    follows. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  the  9  September
    2006 having been  granted  entry  clearance  and  was  granted  further
    periods of leave as  a  student  until  23  January  2011.  The  second
    appellant was born in the UK in January 2011. On the  10  August  2014,
    the first appellant made a human rights application which was  refused,
    and a second application was also refused with a right of appeal on the
    17 November 2015. The appeal was refused by  the  FtT  and  she  became
    appeal rights exhausted by 2017.

 5. On the 29 June 2018 the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds which was refused on  the  10th  October
    2018.

The respondent's decision:

 6.  The  decision  letter  was  summarised  at   paragraph   11   of   the
    determination.  The  Appellant   could   not   meet   the   immigration
    requirements of the Immigration Rules under Appendix FM as a parent.

 7. Under EX1, whilst it had accepted her child had resided in the  UK  for
    over 7 years, it was stated that it was reasonable  for  the  child  to
    leave the UK with the appellant and continue family life in Nigeria. It
    was considered that the first appellant had lived in Nigeria  for  most
    of her life, including her formative years and some of her  adult  life
    and that she would have retained her knowledge of  life,  language  and
    culture and would not face significant obstacles to re-integrating into
    life in Nigeria. As to private life under Paragraph 276ADE,  she  could
    not meet the requirements given her length of residence since 2006.

 8. Paragraphs 33-53 of the decision letter set out  the  consideration  of
    the second appellant's claim. It was accepted that he had  had  resided
    in the UK for over 7 years but that it would be  reasonable  to  expect
    him to return to Nigeria with the first appellant and  continue  family
    life there. As his mother had lived in Nigeria and would have  retained
    her knowledge  of  life,  language  and  culture  and  would  not  face
    significant obstacles to re-integration into life there. She  would  be
    able to support the second appellant to adapt on return. As a  national
    of Nigeria he would be able to access education and whilst the level of
    educational provision may differ to that of the UK, the respondent  was
    satisfied that the second appellant would receive the same standard  of
    education as other nationals of Nigeria. As to the best  interests,  it
    was stated that his best interests would be  served  by  him  remaining
    with his mother (at [51]).

The decision of the FtTJ:

 9. The Appellant appealed  and  the  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the 20th May 2019. The FtTJ heard oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant and three witnesses. In a determination promulgated on the 18
    June 2019 the Judge dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and on human rights grounds (Article 8).

10. The judge set out his conclusions at paragraphs 39-64 and at  78-89  of
    his decision. The FtTJ found that the second appellant  was  a  healthy
    child with no medical concerns and would be leaving with his mother and
    thus there was no risk of separation. The judge found that  there  were
    no significant family ties in the United Kingdom and that in  terms  of
    the child's education, English was spoken widely in Nigeria. The second
    appellant and spent all his life in the United  Kingdom  but  would  be
    able to obtain education in Nigeria. The judge found at [44] that seven
    years from the age of four was more significant than  the  first  seven
    years of life and the appellant was  eight  years  having  spent  those
    years since birth and had not forged a life for himself. He was not  at
    a critical stage in his education (at  [45]).  The  appellant  and  her
    child would return to Nigeria  and  where  the  father  of  the  second
    appellant was resident. Consequently,  the  judge  found  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom
    (see [48]).

11. In respect of the first appellant, she could not meet  the  immigration
    rules under paragraph  276  ADE  taking  into  account  her  length  of
    residence since 2006 and that there were no  significant  obstacles  to
    her reintegration. The judge found that she  had  family  remaining  in
    Nigeria and was in good health and had been educated to master's level.
    The judge also made adverse credibility findings at paragraph 64.

12. When looking at Article 8 outside of the rules, the FtTJ  at  paragraph
    78 made reference to the second appellant having lived in  the  UK  for
    the first eight years of his life; he had started  primary  school  and
    had never lived in Nigeria but that English was spoken there and he was
    not  suffering  from  any  health  conditions  that   would   make   it
    unreasonable for him to return to Nigeria. The judge then turned to the
    first appellant and her immigration history and found that  the  second
    appellant was born during the time and when she had no leave.

13. At [79] the FtTJ found that it was in the best interests of children to
    be with both their parents and that if both parents are  being  removed
    the starting point suggested that the dependent children who form  part
    of the household should do so unless there were strong reasons  to  the
    contrary. Having found that it was reasonable for the second  appellant
    leave the United Kingdom, he would be  leaving  with  his  mother.  The
    judge therefore concluded at paragraph 95 but it would be reasonable to
    expect second appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom  with  the  first
    appellant.



The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

14.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on the 7 August 2019.

15. Before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Lanlehin relied upon the written  grounds
    and the grant of permission which  I  have  taken  into  account.   The
    written grounds principally challenge the legal test applied as to  the
    issue of the assessment of reasonableness and whether the judge applied
    the correct test.

16. The submissions can be  readily  distilled  into  a  challenge  to  the
    assessment of best interests and the overall assessment of the issue of
    reasonableness  of  return.  In  her  oral  submissions,  Ms   Lanlehin
    submitted that the judge took into account the public interest and  the
    first appellant's immigration  history  when  assessing  reasonableness
    citing the decision in SSHD v AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA
    Civ 661 and that  the  judge  failed  to  adequately  factor  into  the
    assessment the weight  properly  attached  to  the  child's  length  of
    residence and as represented in the respondent's guidance.

17. At the oral  hearing,  after  hearing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, Ms Everett appropriately conceded that there was a  material
    error of law as set out in the grounds when  read  with  the  grant  of
    permission. I find the  Respondent's  concession  to  be  appropriately
    made, and in the circumstances, I give only summary reasons for finding
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
    material error of law such that  it  is  necessary  to  set  aside  the
    decision.

Discussion:

18. The statutory provisions contained in Paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (iv)  and
    section 117B (6) were at the forefront of the issues  in  this  appeal,
    which state that the public interest  will  not  require  the  person's
    removal where that person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with a 'qualifying child' and it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

19. There is no dispute that the second appellant is a  "qualifying  child'
    for the purposes of section 117B (6) as he had resided in  the  UK  for
    over 7 years.

20.  The issue identified is whether it would be 'reasonable' to expect the
    children to leave the UK within the meaning of Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    and section 117B (6). In MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  705  the
    Court of Appeal expressed some doubt as to whether the 'reasonableness'
    test should  include  consideration  of  public  interest  factors  but
    declined to depart from the earlier decision  in  MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450, which concluded that it did. The  Supreme  Court's
    decision in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 made reference  to  that
    approach at paragraphs 63 and 64 of the decision. The Court  held  that
    the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in MM(Uganda) was  wrong  and
    endorsed the approach Elias LJ would have taken at  paragraph  36  (see
    the judgment of Lord Carnwath at paragraph  17  and  at  paragraphs  12
    -19).

21. As to the issue of whether the child will leave  the  UK,  the  correct
    test being identified  and  summarised  in  Secretary  of  State  v  AB
    (Jamaica and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661, at  paragraphs  72-  75;
    the question that the statute requires to  be  addressed  is  a  single
    question; is it reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?

22. The Court stated:

         "72. I respectfully agree with the interpretation given by  the  UT
             to section 117B(6)(b) in JG.


         73.   Speaking  for  myself,  I  would  not   necessarily   endorse
             everything that was said  by  the  UT  in  its  reasoning,  in
             particular at para. 25, as to the meaning of the  concept  "to
             expect". However, in my view that does not make  any  material
             difference to the ultimate interpretation,  which  I  consider
             was correctly set out by the UT in JG. In my view, the concept
             of "to expect" something can be ambiguous. It can be,  as  the
             UT thought at para. 25, simply a prediction of a future event.
             However, it can have a more  normative  aspect.  That  is  the
             sense in which Admiral  Nelson  reputedly  used  the  word  at
             Trafalgar, when he said that "England expects every man to  do
             his duty." That is not a prediction but is something less than
             an order. To take another example, if a judge says late in the
             day at a hearing that she expects counsel to  have  filed  and
             served  supplementary  skeleton  arguments  by  9   a.m.   the
             following morning, so that there is no delay to the start of a
             hearing an hour later: although she may not  be  ordering  the
             production  of  that  skeleton  argument,  that  is  what  she
             considers should happen. That is not a prediction of a  future
             occurrence. It carries some normative force.


         74.  Finally, in that regard, I agree with and  would  endorse  the
             following passage  in  the  judgment  of  UTJ  Plimmer  in  SR
             (Subsisting Parental Relationship - s117B (6)) Pakistan [2018]
             UKUT 00334 (IAC), a case which was decided before decision  of
             the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), at para. 51:


                  "... It is difficult to see how section 117B(6)(b) can  be
                  said  to  be  of  no  application  or  to  pose  a  merely
                  hypothetical question. Section 117B (6)  dictates  whether
                  or not the public interest requires removal where a person
                  not liable to deportation has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                  parental relation with a qualifying  child.  The  question
                  that  must  be  answered  is  whether  it  would  not   be
                  reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  UK.  That
                  question as contained in statute,  cannot  be  ignored  or
                  glossed over. Self-evidently, section 117B (6) is  engaged
                  whether the child will or will not  in  fact  or  practice
                  leave   the   UK.   It   addresses   the   normative   and
                  straightforward question - should the child  be  'expected
                  to leave' the UK?"


         75.  I respectfully agree. It  is  clear,  in  my  view,  that  the
             question which the statute  requires  to  be  addressed  is  a
             single question: is it reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the UK? It does not consist of two questions, as suggested  by
             the Secretary of State. If the answer to the  single  question
             is obvious, because it is common ground that  the  child  will
             not be expected to leave the UK, that does not mean  that  the
             question does not have to be asked; it merely means  that  the
             answer to the question is: No."


23. The advocates are in agreement  that  the  grounds  and  the  grant  of
    permission identify material errors of law in the decision of the  FtTJ
    and expressly in relation to  the  issue  under  S117B6  and  Paragraph
    276ADE(1) (iv).  I am satisfied that the concession made by Ms  Everett
    is correctly made and accept that  there  are  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision reached which I am also satisfied are material to the outcome.
    Firstly, the judge appeared to take into account the  position  of  the
    first  appellant  and  her  history  when  assessing   the   issue   of
    reasonableness at paragraph 78 and then at paragraph 80.

24. In the decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) & Others -v-  SSHD
    handed down   on 24 tht October 2018, Lord  Carnwath,  with  whom  Lord
    Kerr, Lord Wilson, Lord  Reed  and  Lord  Briggs  agreed,  referred  to
    paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules, and s117B(6) of  the
    2002 Act. Having referred to the requirement that appears at  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules, he stated, at [7]:

         "It will be seen immediately that the substance of this provision,
         in particular the seven-year criterion and the "reasonableness"
         tests, appears identical to that of section 117B (6), taken with
         the definition of "qualifying child"


At paragraphs [17] to [19], Lord Carnwath stated:

         "17. As has been seen, section 117B (6) incorporated the substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in the context
         of the right of the parent to remain. I would infer that it was
         intended to have the same effect. The question again is what is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705,
         [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the subsection to
         import a reference to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets
         out a number of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B (6) is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification being that the
         person relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above) seems
         to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the context of
         section 117B (6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of the parents may become indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain
         here and having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain. The point was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in  SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245 :


             "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
             one has to address the question, 'Why would the child be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as this
             there can only be one answer: 'because the parents have no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the question in any
             other way strips away the context in which the assessment of
             reasonableness is being made ..."






25. He noted at (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
    considering the "best interests" of children in the context of section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in EV
    (Philippines) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

         "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has no right to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the background against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus, the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?"


To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
(Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing in the
section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered otherwise than
in the real world in which the children find themselves.

26. Ms Everett was in agreement with the submission made on behalf of the
    appellant that the considerable weight to be given to the length of
    residence of the second appellant was not placed in the balance as
    reflected in the respondent's guidance. Whilst reference was made to
    the "7 years threshold as a recognised threshold" (at [44]), and at
    [86] that "... the 7 years from the age of 4 was found to be more
    significant to a child than the first 7 years of their life" that the
    great weight attached to the length of residence was not weighed in the
    balance. Furthermore, the analysis did not address the matters set out
    in the respondent's guidance.

27. On the question of reasonableness of  return  for  a  qualifying  child
    there is no longer a reference to the need for "strong  reasons"  being
    required before leave is refused. The updated guidance now says this:

         "Would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?


         If the effect of refusal of the application would be, or is  likely
         to be, that the child would have to  leave  the  UK,  the  decision
         maker must consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK.


         Where there is a qualifying child


         A child is a qualifying child if they are a British child  who  has
         an automatic right of abode in the UK, to  live  here  without  any
         immigration restrictions as a result of their citizenship, or a non-
         British citizen child, who has lived in the  UK  for  a  continuous
         period of at least the seven years immediately preceding  the  date
         of application, which recognises that over time children  start  to
         put down roots and to integrate into life in the UK.  The  starting
         point is that we would not normally expect a  qualifying  child  to
         leave the UK ..."


28. Given that this formed part of the guidance, some  assessment  of  that
    issue was necessary and although the "strong reasons" injunction in the
    guidance no longer appears, it is notable that the guidance does  state
    that "The starting point  is  that  we  would  not  normally  expect  a
    qualifying child to leave the UK".

29. In addition, significant weight must be given to a child's residence of
    over seven years. In MA (Pakistan) Elias LJ said this:

         "46. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact  that
         a child has been here for seven years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view, they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment...


         49.  However, the fact that the child has been in the UK for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."


30. Notwithstanding the jurisprudence that has  followed  the  decision  in
    MA(Pakistan), and the change in the wording of the  guidance  which  no
    longer refers to "strong reasons" what is  of  remaining  relevance  is
    that the  length  of  residence  should  be  taken  into  account  when
    determining the strength of the  children's  best  interests.   On  the
    facts of this appeal, the relevant child had been born in  the  UK  and
    had lived in the  UK  for  8  years  and  is  a  weighty  and  relevant
    consideration.   That  was  not  reflected   in   the   assessment   of
    reasonableness.

31. Consequently, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge involved the making of an error of law and therefore the
    decision cannot stand and shall be set aside.

32. By way of re-making the appeal it is agreed by the advocates  that  the
    outstanding issue is that in Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  the  mirror
    section 117B(6), it being accepted  that  the  second  appellant  is  a
    "qualifying child "and as his residence of over 8 years is entitled  to
    considerable weight. Ms Everett in those circumstances does not seek to
    argue that it would be reasonable for the second appellant to leave the
    United Kingdom and therefore it is accepted on behalf of the respondent
    that his removal would be disproportionate. Furthermore,  in  light  of
    that conclusion, it follows that the public interest does  not  require
    the first appellant's removal, as she  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with  the second appellant and thus it follows that  leave
    should be granted to the  first appellant so that the family  unit  can
    remain together in the UK. Therefore the first appellant's appeal  also
    succeeds.



Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and is set aside;  the  appeal  is  re-made  as
    follows; the appeals on behalf of the first and second  appellants  are
    allowed.


Signed   Date: 14 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

