
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/21870/2018
                                                               HU/21872/2018
                                                               HU/21874/2018
                                                               HU/21880/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Monday 19 August 2019             |On Thursday 05 September 2019        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  1) A O F
                                  2) M I T
                                  3) M Q T
                                  4) H A T
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Ntochukwu, solicitor, Cardinal Hume Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge, it is appropriate to make an anonymity  direction  because  the  case
involves minor children. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the
Respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Lucas promulgated on 4 June 2019 ("the  Decision")  dismissing  their
       appeals against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  9  October  2018
       refusing their human rights claim made in  the  context  of  proposed
       removal to Nigeria.

    2. The First Appellant came to the UK as a visitor on 27 July  2007  and
       has since overstayed.  On 13 March 2018,  she  made  the  application
       which led to the Respondent's decision under appeal.  She  has  three
       children all born in the UK.  None are British citizens.   They  were
       born in 2010 ([HAT]), 2011 ([MIT]) and 2015 ([MQT]) and were, at  the
       time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing (and indeed now)  aged  nine,
       eight and three respectively.  It is on the basis of the position  of
       the  two  elder  children   (the   Fourth   and   Second   Appellants
       respectively) that the success or otherwise of the Appellants' appeal
       turns.

    3. The Judge largely accepted the evidence before him but concluded that
       the Appellants could  adapt  to  life  in  Nigeria,  that  there  was
       "nothing exceptional" in this case  and  therefore  the  decision  to
       remove them to Nigeria was not disproportionate.

    4. The Appellants raise four grounds of appeal.  First,  they  say  that
       the Judge erred by failing to make findings  whether  the  two  elder
       children meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")
       in particular paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  Second,  they  say  that  the
       Judge failed to make any or any adequate findings whether it would be
       reasonable for the two elder children to return to  Nigeria.   Third,
       they say that when reaching the findings which he did make as to  the
       return to Nigeria of those  two  children,  the  Judge  impermissibly
       focussed on the conduct of their mother which ought to have been left
       out of account.  Fourth, they say that the Judge's findings that  the
       two elder children could re-adapt to life in Nigeria  was  irrational
       or perverse on the evidence and taking account of the  tests  set  by
       relevant case law.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien
       on 28 June 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

           "... [3]    There  is  an  arguable  failure  by  the  Judge  to
           identify the children's best interests and the wider question of
           whether it would be reasonable to expect the two older  children
           to leave the UK.  They had lived their entire lives  in  the  UK
           and the eldest child had been nearly 9 � years old at  the  date
           of the hearing.  There did not appear to be any consideration of
           why the public interest outweighed the best  interests  of  that
           child in particular.  The Appellant's appeal stood  or  fell  on
           whether it was reasonable to expect the eldest  child  to  leave
           the UK."

    6. The matters come before me to consider whether the Decision  contains
       a material error of law and if I conclude that it does, either to re-
       make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for
       redetermination.

  ERROR OF LAW DECISION

    7. As I observed in the course of the hearing, although  the  Appellants
       raise four grounds of appeal, they are in effect a different  way  of
       saying the same thing.  In essence, they are that  the  Judge  failed
       properly or at all to consider the position, in particular of the two
       elder children and to make any or any reasoned  findings  about  what
       their best interests require or whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
       expect them to return to Nigeria.

    8. The Judge's findings are set out in relatively short order at [24] to
       [37] of the Decision.  The Judge accepted at  [27]  of  the  Decision
       that the Appellants' claims centred around the  two  elder  children.
       He accepted at  [28]  of  the  Decision  that  both  were  qualifying
       children given their length of residence.   He also accepted that the
       best interests of those children were "quite clearly at the forefront
       of this claim".   Despite  directing  himself  correctly,  the  Judge
       failed thereafter to make any discernible  findings  about  what  the
       best interests require.

    9. The Judge accepted at [29] of the Decision that the  evidence  showed
       that "the children are well integrated into life within the UK.  They
       are doing  well  at  school  and  have  progressed  well."   However,
       thereafter, having regard to the position of the First Appellant  and
       her anticipated circumstances in Nigeria, he concluded as follows:

           "[36] It is accepted that Appellants 2 and 3 [sic] have been  in
           the UK for all of their short lives and that they are qualifying
           children under the Rules.  However, in the view of the Tribunal,
           they are not at a vital stage of their education and can  easily
           adapt to the system of education in Nigeria with the support  of
           their carer - their mother.  They also have  a  grandmother  and
           uncle living in Nigeria who could help them  to  adapt  to  life
           there.

           [37]  There is nothing exceptional in this case.  In the view of
           the Tribunal, the family life of all of the Appellants  in  this
           case are also subject to the equally important  public  interest
           in effective immigration control.  Any disruption to the life of
           the family would be temporary and the children will continue  to
           have the sole support of the main Appellant."

   10. Having heard Mr Ntochukwu's  oral  submissions,  Mr  Melvin  for  the
       Respondent conceded that the Judge's consideration  of  the  relevant
       issues was "scant".  Although he said that the Judge  had  considered
       the position in the "real  world"  as  he  was  entitled  to  do,  he
       accepted that the Judge had not considered the best interests of  the
       children.  The Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that he had
       on the evidence but there was a lack of proper reasoning in  relation
       to the position of the children.

   11. I accept that the paragraphs which I cite at [36] and [37] above  are
       capable  of  being  read  as  a  short-form  conclusion  that  it  is
       reasonable to expect the two elder children  to  return  to  Nigeria.
       However, although the Judge refers to the  best  interests  of  those
       children as  being  "at  the  forefront  of  this  claim",  he  fails
       thereafter to make any findings about what the best interests of  the
       children require, having regard to the evidence and particularly  the
       evidence which the Judge accepts at [29] of the Decision  as  to  the
       children's integration and education in the UK.

   12. Nor is there any consideration of the case-law in this  regard.   The
       Appellants' grounds refer in particular  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
       judgment in MA (Pakistan) and others v Secretary  of  State  for  the
       Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  ("MA  (Pakistan)")  and  the
       requirement to give significant weight to the  children's  length  of
       residence and for there to be strong reasons given  to  outweigh  the
       significance of that factor.    I  accept  that  what  the  Court  of
       Appeal there says about the approach to the reasonableness issue  has
       to be tempered to some extent by what is said by the Supreme Court in
       KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC
       53 ("KO (Nigeria)") about the need to  assess  the  position  of  the
       children in the "real world".    However,  the  children's  interests
       still require to be determined and assessed  giving  those  interests
       the weight they deserve.  In this case, the Judge has failed properly
       to conduct such an analysis.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that  there
       is an error of law made by the Judge when considering the position of
       the two elder children.

   13. Having found an error of law and indicating  that  I  set  aside  the
       Decision, Mr Ntochukwu was content that  I  should  re-determine  the
       appeals without further oral evidence.  The only evidence is that  of
       the First Appellant who was present at the hearing.   However,  there
       was no application to adduce further evidence from her or any further
       documentary evidence.  Her evidence was  largely  accepted  by  Judge
       Lucas and I could therefore rely  on  the  Judge's  account  of  that
       evidence coupled with my own examination of the documentary evidence.
        I therefore turn to re-make the decision.

  RE-MAKING

   14. As indicated above, the Appellants' cases  stand  or  fall  with  the
       cases of [HAT] and [MIT].  It is therefore  mainly  in  that  context
       that I consider the evidence although, because of the need to  assess
       the reasonableness of those children returning  to  Nigeria,  I  will
       also need to consider the evidence about the position in that country
       and the First Appellant's circumstances and immigration history.

  Legal Framework

   15. Paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Rules

           "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life


           276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
           to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at
           the date of application, the applicant:

           (i) does not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
           Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5.  in
           Appendix FM; and

           (ii) has made a valid application for leave  to  remain  on  the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and

           ...

           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously  in
           the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) and it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
           applicant to leave the UK;

           ...

           (vi)   ...is aged 18 years or above, has lived  continuously  in
           the UK for less  than  20  years  ...but  there  would  be  very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK"

       Section 117B, Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("Section
       117B")

           "...

           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal  where
           -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom."

   16. The question whether it is reasonable to expect a child to return  to
       his or her home country was considered by the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
       (Nigeria).  The relevant paragraphs are as follows:

           "[16] It is natural to begin with the first  in  time,  that  is
           paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed  solely  to
           the position of the child.  Unlike  its  predecessor  DP5/96  it
           contains  no  requirement  to  consider   the   criminality   or
           misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor.  It is  impossible
           in my view to  read  it  as  importing  such  a  requirement  by
           implication.

           [17]   As  has  been  seen,  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
           substance of the rule without material change, but this time  in
           the context of the right of the parent to remain.  I wold  infer
           that it was intended to have  the  same  effect.   The  question
           again is what is 'reasonable' for the child.  As Elias J said in
           R (MA (Pakistan) Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
           [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in  the  subsection
           to import a reference to the conduct  of  the  parent.   Section
           117B sets out a number of  factors  relating  to  those  seeking
           leave to enter or remain, but criminality is not  one  of  them.
           Subsection 117B(6)  is  on  its  face  free-standing,  the  only
           qualification being that the person relying on it is not  liable
           to deportation.  The list of relevant factors set out in the IDI
           guidance (para 10 above) seems  to  me  wholly  appropriate  and
           sound in law, in the context of section 117B(6) as of  paragraph
           276ADE(1)(iv).

           [18]  On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
           seems to me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider
           where the  parents,  apart  from  the  relevant  provision,  are
           expected to be, since it will normally  be  reasonable  for  the
           child to be with them.  To that extent the record of the parents
           may become indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing  to
           have a right to remain here, and having to leave.   It  is  only
           if, even on that hypothesis, it wold not be reasonable  for  the
           child to leave that the provision may give the parents  a  right
           to remain.   The  point  was  well-expressed  by  Lord  Boyd  of
           Duncansby in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
           Department 2017 SLT 1245, para 22:

                'In my opinion  before  one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
                whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
                one has to address the question, 'Why  would  the  child  be
                expected to leave the United Kingdom?'  In a  case  such  as
                this there can only be one answer: 'because the parents have
                no right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in
                any  other  way  strips  away  the  context  in  which   the
                assessment of reasonableness is being made'.

           [19]  He noted (para 21) that Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar
           point in considering the "best interests"  of  children  in  the
           context  of  section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
           Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v  Secretary  of  State
           for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [58]:

                'In my judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
                interests of the children must be made on the basis that the
                facts are as they are in the real world.  If one parent  has
                no right to remain, but the other parent does, that  is  the
                background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   If
                neither parent has the right to remain,  then  that  is  the
                background against which the assessment is conducted.   Thus
                the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable  to  expect
                the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  in
                the country of origin?'

           To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise  in  MA
           (Pakistan) [2016] 1 WLR 5093,  para  40,  I  would  respectfully
           disagree.  There is nothing  in  the  section  to  suggest  that
           "reasonableness" is to considered other than in the  real  world
           in which the children find themselves."

   17. Reference is there made to the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  MA
       (Pakistan).  In that case, Elias LJ giving the lead judgment had made
       clear  that  he  would  have  wished  to  adopt  the   interpretation
       eventually  favoured  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  but
       considered that he ought to follow the Court of Appeal's judgment  in
       MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
       Civ 450.  The approach in that latter judgment was overturned by  the
       Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).   However,  he  went  on  to  say  the
       following about the correct approach to Section  117B  (6)  whichever
       interpretation of the reasonableness test was adopted:

           "46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
                that a child has been here for seven  years  must  be  given
                significant weight when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
                exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published  guidance
                in August  2015  in  the  form  of  Immigration  Directorate
                Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a partner or  parent)
                and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it  is  expressly
                stated that once the seven years' residence  requirement  is
                satisfied, there need to be "strong  reasons"  for  refusing
                leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not  in  force
                when the cases now subject to appeal were determined, but in
                my view they merely confirm what is implicit in  adopting  a
                policy of this nature. After such a period of time the child
                will have put down roots and developed social, cultural  and
                educational links in the UK such that it  is  likely  to  be
                highly disruptive if the child is required to leave the  UK.
                That may be less so when the children are very young because
                the focus of their lives will be on their families, but  the
                disruption becomes more serious as they get older. Moreover,
                in these cases there must be a very strong expectation  that
                the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK  with
                his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank  as
                a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

           47.   Even if we were applying the  narrow  reasonableness  test
                where the focus is on the child alone, it would  not  in  my
                view follow that leave must be granted whenever the  child's
                best interests are in  favour  of  remaining.  I  reject  Mr
                Gill's  submission  that  the  best   interests   assessment
                automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness  question.   If
                Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to  dictate
                the outcome of the leave application, it would have said so.
                The  concept  of  "best  interests"  is  after  all  a  well
                established one. Even where the child's best  interests  are
                to stay, it may still be not  unreasonable  to  require  the
                child to leave. That will depend upon a careful analysis  of
                the nature and extent of the links in  the  UK  and  in  the
                country where it is proposed he should  return.  What  could
                not  be  considered,  however,  would  be  the  conduct  and
                immigration history of the parents.

            48.  In  EV  (Phillipines)  Lord  Justice   Christopher   Clarke
                explained how a tribunal should  apply  the  proportionality
                test where wider public interest considerations are in play,
                in circumstances where  the  best  interests  of  the  child
                dictate that he should remain in the UK (paras. 34-37):

                    '34.     In determining whether or not, in a  case  such
                    as  the  present,  the  need  for  immigration   control
                    outweighs the best interests  of  the  children,  it  is
                    necessary to determine  the  relative  strength  of  the
                    factors which make it in their best interests to  remain
                    here; and also to take account of any factors that point
                    the other way.

                    35.      A decision as to what is in the best  interests
                    of children will depend on a number of factors  such  as
                    (a) their age; (b) the length of  time  that  they  have
                    been here; (c) how long they have been in education; (c)
                    what stage their education  has  reached;  (d)  to  what
                    extent they have become distanced from  the  country  to
                    which it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable
                    their connection with it may be; (f) to what extent they
                    will have linguistic, medical or other  difficulties  in
                    adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent  to
                    which the course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
                    family life or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as
                    British citizens.

                    36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned  with  how
                    emphatic an answer falls to be given to the question: is
                    it in the best interests of the  child  to  remain?  The
                    longer the child has been here, the  more  advanced  (or
                    critical) the stage of his  education,  the  looser  his
                    ties  with  the  country  in  question,  and  the   more
                    deleterious the consequences of his return, the  greater
                    the weight that falls into one side of the scales. If it
                    is overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that  he
                    should not return,  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
                    control may well not tip the balance. By contrast if  it
                    is in the child's best interests to remain, but only  on
                    balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the
                    result may be the opposite.

                    37.      In the balance on the other side there falls to
                    be taken into account the strong weight to be  given  to
                    the need to maintain immigration control in  pursuit  of
                    the economic well-being of  the  country  and  the  fact
                    that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have  no  entitlement
                    to remain. The immigration history of  the  parents  may
                    also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or  have
                    acted deceitfully.'

            49. Although this was not in fact a  seven  year  case,  on  the
                wider construction of section 117B(6), the  same  principles
                would apply in such a case. However, the fact that the child
                has been in the UK for seven years would need  to  be  given
                significant weight in the proportionality exercise  for  two
                related  reasons:  first,  because  of  its   relevance   to
                determining the nature and  strength  of  the  child's  best
                interests; and second, because it establishes as a  starting
                point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful
                reasons to the contrary."

   18. The primacy of the  consideration  of  best  interests  is  now  well
       settled in case-law.  It is however helpful to remind myself what the
       Supreme Court said about the importance  of  those  interests  in  ZH
       (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4
       as follows:

           "Applying these principles

           29.   Applying, therefore, the approach in Wan to the assessment
                of proportionality under article  8(2),  together  with  the
                factors identified in Strasbourg, what is encompassed in the
                "best interests of the child"? As the UNHCR says, it broadly
                means the well-being of the  child.  Specifically,  as  Lord
                Bingham indicated in EB (Kosovo),  it  will  involve  asking
                whether it is reasonable to expect  the  child  to  live  in
                another country. Relevant to this will be the level  of  the
                child's integration  in  this  country  and  the  length  of
                absence from the other country;  where  and  with  whom  the
                child is to live and the arrangements for looking after  the
                child in the other country; and the strength of the  child's
                relationships with parents or  other  family  members  which
                will be severed if the child has to move away.

           ...

           31.   It is not enough to say that a  young  child  may  readily
                adapt to life in another  country.  That  may  well  be  so,
                particularly if she moves with both her parents to a country
                which they know well and where they can easily  re-integrate
                in their own community (as might have  been  the  case,  for
                example, in Poku, para 20, above). But it is very  different
                in the case of children who have lived here all their  lives
                and are being expected to move to a country  which  they  do
                not know and will be separated from a parent whom they  also
                know well.

           ...

           33.   We now have a much greater understanding of the importance
                of these issues in assessing the overall well-being  of  the
                child.  In  making  the  proportionality  assessment   under
                article 8, the best interests of the child must be a primary
                consideration. This  means  that  they  must  be  considered
                first. They can, of course, be outweighed by the  cumulative
                effect  of  other  considerations.   In   this   case,   the
                countervailing considerations were the need to maintain firm
                and fair immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's
                appalling immigration history and the precariousness of  her
                position when family life was created. But, as the  Tribunal
                rightly pointed out, the children were not to be blamed  for
                that. And the inevitable result of  removing  their  primary
                carer would be that they had  to  leave  with  her.  On  the
                facts, it is as least as strong a case as Edore v  Secretary
                of State for the Home Department [2003] 1  WLR  2979,  where
                Simon Brown LJ held that "there really is only room for  one
                view" (para 26). In those circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
                State was clearly right to concede that there could be  only
                one answer."

       I have omitted the passages which relate to children who are  British
       citizens as the children in this appeal are not.  As is evident  from
       the passages  cited,  there  is  a  degree  of  overlap  between  the
       assessment of the children's best interests and the reasonableness of
       return which is now encompassed separately in the Rules and statute.

   19. I have regard to other relevant case-law to which I was  directed  by
       the Appellants in the course of my discussion below.

  Evidence, Findings and Discussion

   20. Although, as I have indicated, the Appellants' cases stand  and  fall
       with that of [HAT] and [MIT], it is necessary for me first to  say  a
       few words about the position of the First Appellant as, as  was  said
       in KO (Nigeria), the best interests of those children (and also their
       younger  sister)  and  the  reasonableness  of  return  have  to   be
       considered in the "real  world"  which  encompasses  the  immigration
       status of the child's parents.

   21. On the evidence before me, the children have been raised by the First
       Appellant alone.  There is reference at [12] of the First Appellant's
       witness statement to the children's father having made  contact  with
       her about three months previously (and therefore in January 2019) and
       having sent �100 to the children via a friend.  However, she goes  on
       to say that she and the children have not received any other  support
       from him.  She says at [11] of her statement that he has not been  in
       contact with the children since February 2016  which  appears  to  be
       contradicted to some limited extent by what is said at  [12]  of  the
       statement that he speaks to the children occasionally on  the  phone.
       Even if that is right, though, there is nothing to show that he could
       not maintain that sort of contact if the  children  were  in  Nigeria
       rather than in the UK.  Moreover, as Mr Melvin pointed out, there  is
       no evidence as to his current location or his status even if he  does
       remain in the UK.  I therefore proceed on the basis that  the  father
       of the children has no subsisting parental relationship with them and
       that such limited contact as there  may  be  could  continue  if  the
       children return to Nigeria.  It may even be the case that  he  is  in
       that country rather than in the UK (the children's birth certificates
       indicate that he is of Nigerian origin and there is no evidence  that
       he has or ever had a right to remain in the UK).

   22. Turning then to the immigration status of the  First  Appellant,  she
       has lived in the UK for about twelve years but  all  apart  from  the
       first six months has been without  any  form  of  leave.   If  I  was
       considering her position alone, therefore, without any  consideration
       of the position of the children, she would  have  no  basis  of  stay
       within the Rules and there would be a significant public interest  in
       her removal, taking into account the  unlawfulness  of  her  position
       throughout her stay.

   23. Mr  Ntochukwu  suggested  in  the  course  of  his  submissions  that
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules has  some  application  in  this
       case as the First Appellant  could  not  be  expected  to  return  to
       Nigeria  as  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   her
       integration in that country.

   24. The First Appellant's witness statement dated  1  May  2019  provides
       some information about the family's life in the UK and what she  says
       would happen if they returned to Nigeria.  That reads as follows  (so
       far as relevant):

           "[16] I was born at Akure in Ondo State of Nigeria.  In  Nigeria
           I have an elderly and frail mother and a brother.  My father has
           passed away.  I have no real contact with my mother  or  brother
           in Nigeria.  I am unable to keep contact with my mother  because
           of lack of means and also due to the huge  moral  responsibility
           or pressure I feel of taking care of her and not  been  able  to
           support her.  I feel sad and depressed each time I think  of  my
           mother's poor health and lack of care.  It terrifies me  that  I
           could lose her soon and at the same time being helpless.

           [17]  Although, my father had another wife apart from my mother,
           I have had no relationship with my  father's  2nd  wife  or  her
           children.  And since my father died more than 5 years ago, there
           has been some serious family  feud/problem  which  has  worsened
           over the years over his house.  As a result, the house  I  lived
           at with my mother whilst in Nigeria has  been  forcefully  taken
           over by estranged step mother and her  children  and  my  mother
           chased away.

           [18]  Since my arrival to the UK  in  2007,  neither  I  nor  my
           children have visited Nigeria.  And whilst  in  Nigeria,  I  had
           only completed an 'O' Level.  I  was  not  working  and  had  no
           further education or experience of working in Nigeria.

           [19]  We have no family house or  property  in  Nigeria  and  no
           accommodation where the children and I could live if required to
           leave  the  UK.   We  would  be  destitute.   And  without   any
           qualification, I will  find  it  extremely  harsh  to  find  any
           meaningful employment  in  Nigeria  to  support  myself  and  my
           children with 'O' level.

           [20]  I am concerned that I will not be able to  find  means  to
           support my family as a single parent if removed to  Nigeria.   I
           am extremely worried that we would  be  destitute,  which  would
           seriously hamper the welfare and interests of my children.

           [21]  We no longer have any ties or connections to Nigeria.   My
           children do not speak any local Nigerian language.

           ...

           [23]  My children are in different stages of their education  in
           the UK.  My children have been in education since they have been
           about 3 years old.  They have settled well with their  education
           and are progressing fine.  The like to go  to  school  and  have
           made very good friends.

           [24]  [HAT] and [MIT] have developed the bond and emotional ties
           with  their  friends  and  their  social  connections  including
           friends from the church.   They  look  forward  to  meeting  and
           spending time with them.

           [25]  [HAT], [MIT] and [MQT] on the contrary do not know my  mum
           as their grandmother or my brother as their uncle  because  they
           are not known or in touch with them.   My  children  only  speak
           English language and do not  speak  or  understand  any  Nigeria
           languages.

           [26]  In addition to my children's  friendship  with  their  own
           friends,  they  have  developed  deep  affection  and  emotional
           attachment to Ms Omotehinse (the lady who took us in and gave us
           shelter and who we  are  currently  living  with).   They  spend
           regular time with her and call her 'grandma'.

           [27]  [HAT] and [MIT] are involved in  extra  school  activities
           such as art work, football, hockey and other  activities,  which
           they enjoy and look forward to attending.

           [28]  I don't know of or in contact with any immediate relatives
           in Nigeria. The only close relative I have is my mother  who  is
           now very old and frail with poor health.

           [29]  Although I was born in  Nigeria,  I  have  lost  ties  and
           connection to Nigeria and I have never being back there for more
           than 11 years and  have  not  travelled  to  any  other  country
           before.

           [30]  I can say that  we  have  established  a  strong,  family,
           social and cultural ties in the UK.  My children turn to me  for
           advice, instructions and support.  They  have  lived  all  their
           lives in the UK and they know no other place than the UK and  it
           is the place we call home.  We really wish to remain in  the  UK
           and it would be in my children's best interest to continue their
           education in the UK and be brought up in an environment familiar
           to them.

           [31]  I would like to have the opportunity to study and/or  work
           in the UK and to contribute to  the  economic  wellbeing  of  UK
           while improving my knowledge and skills as well as to look after
           myself and take good care of my children.

           [32]  My immigration status is the  source  of  great  emotional
           distress to me and my children.  I now  suffer  from  depression
           and have sought medical attention for the stress I feel.  I have
           also noticed limb pains as a  result  of  the  stress.   I  have
           trouble sleeping because of the  distress  and  have  difficulty
           explaining why I am emotionally upset to my children,  who  have
           noticed my distress. My sons [HAT] and [MIT] have not been  able
           to undertake any school trips outside the UK and now ask me  why
           they cannot travel or go on holidays.

           [33]  If required to return to Nigeria, my children and  I  will
           suffer hugely and will not be able to cope with life in Nigeria.
            We would face very significant and insurmountable obstacles  to
           integrate into life in Nigeria in all aspects.  To start with my
           children and I will be destitute as we will  have  no  house  to
           return to and no family, relatives or friends that we know of in
           Nigeria who is able to take us even temporarily.

           [34]  More so, because I left Nigeria more than 11 years ago and
           my children not ever being to Nigeria, we would not know how the
           system and society work as I believe a  lot  must  have  changed
           since my departure.  It would be therefore  extremely  difficult
           for my children to start education or to fit in within the wider
           society.  They will lose the support  and  stability  they  have
           accrued in the UK.  Pulling them out from their settled life and
           education in the UK will be extremely disruptive."

   25. The First Appellant came to the  UK  aged  twenty-seven  years.   Her
       evidence fails to explain what she was doing in Nigeria  up  to  that
       time if not working or studying.  Furthermore, I do  not  accept  her
       assertion that she has no ties there.  On her own admission, she  has
       a mother and brother there.  Although her  unchallenged  evidence  is
       that her mother is elderly and frail which I  therefore  accept,  she
       says nothing about the circumstances of her  brother.   There  is  an
       affidavit sworn by her mother at [AB/32] dated 10 March  2017.   That
       undermines the First Appellant's evidence that  she  has  no  contact
       with her mother.  The affidavit only deals with the loss of the First
       Appellant's birth certificates  and  makes  no  mention  of  her  own
       situation in Nigeria.  The affidavit states that she  resides  at  an
       address in Akure.  She makes no mention of having no home in Nigeria.



   26. As the First Appellant explains in her statement, she has managed  to
       live in the UK with no right to work for a period of twelve years  by
       relying on the charity of the church community.  She  has  no  family
       members in the UK.  The lady who accommodates the family  is  someone
       who the First Appellant says the children regard as their grandmother
       because they do not know their biological grandmother, but she is not
       related.  She says that the children "have developed  deep  affection
       and emotional attachment to Ms Omotehinse".  The  closeness  of  that
       relationship is however undermined by the letter from that lady dated
       10 March 2018 which appears at [AB/30] and reads as follows:

           "I have accommodate [AOF] and her children for some months  now,
           they have been living with me in my house.

           She have three children age 8, age 7 and age 2

           I have also been helping in caring for those children since  the
           first day she move into my apartment.

           As I write my flat is  overcrowded  to  the  extent  I  find  it
           difficult to sleep when the children are awake.

           I will be so grateful if something can be done about her stay in
           the UK as I am tired of the noise for the children.

           I am ready to support her application, so I can have some  peace
           in my house.

           Am appealing to Home Office to kindly please  grant  this  young
           mother of three a resident permit so she can start her life  all
           over again, she is good lady, very hardworking, I know she  will
           be a good benefit to the community if she is being  grant  leave
           to remain."

       Although I accept that Ms  Omotehinse  speaks  warmly  of  the  First
       Appellant, put bluntly, this letter does not indicate  any  emotional
       attachment between her and the children as asserted.  It appears that
       she would like the  family  to  move  out  of  her  house  as  it  is
       overcrowded.

   27. The First Appellant says that she would like to work if permitted  to
       remain in the UK.  However, it is not  clear  to  me  how  the  First
       Appellant expects to obtain gainful employment if permitted  to  stay
       in the UK given her asserted lack of educational  qualifications  and
       work experience or why that should be more of a barrier to employment
       there than here.  I note that when  making  her  application  to  the
       Respondent, she sought a waiver of the fee and also asked to be given
       leave with recourse to public funds if  allowed  to  remain.  If  she
       would therefore be obliged to survive as she has  to  date  with  the
       assistance of her church community,  there  is  no  reason  why  that
       support could not continue in Nigeria where, moreover, she has family
       members with whom  she  could  reinstate  contact  (specifically  her
       mother and brother) and who could help her and the children adapt  to
       life in Nigeria in the short-term.   On  the  First  Appellant's  own
       admission,  she  feels  guilty  about  not  being  able  to   provide
       assistance to her mother. Return  to  Nigeria  would  enable  her  to
       provide that assistance.

   28. The Appellants  are  being  supported  in  the  UK  by  their  church
       community.  The letters of support show that, so far as stated, those
       persons are  originally  from  Nigeria.   They  may  well  also  have
       connections in Nigeria which the Appellants could use to obtain  some
       assistance.

   29. In any event, the test is no longer whether a person  has  "ties"  to
       their country of  origin  but  whether  they  could  be  expected  to
       integrate there.  In the case of Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department v  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,  the  Court  of  Appeal
       described the test in the current version of the Rules as follows:

           "[14]  In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
           "integration" into the country to which it is proposed  that  he
           be deported, as set out  in  section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
           399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to
           find a job or to sustain life while living in the other country.
           It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject
           to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a  court  or
           tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that  Parliament
           has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for  a  broad
           evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will
           be enough of an insider in terms of understanding  how  life  in
           the society in that other country is carried on and  a  capacity
           to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity  to
           be accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis
           in that society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
           variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
           individual's private or family life.

       That was said in the context of the Rules  relating  to  deportation,
       but the wording is the same. I have already  noted  that  the  church
       community in which the  First  Appellant  plays  an  active  part  is
       largely of Nigerian origin.  There is no reason  why  she  could  not
       find a similar church community to  assist  her  in  Nigeria.  Having
       regard to the fact that the First  Appellant  was  born,  raised  and
       educated in Nigeria and the  lack  of  detailed  evidence  about  the
       problems which she  faces  in  that  country  on  return,  I  am  not
       satisfied that she has discharged the burden of  showing  that  there
       would be very significant obstacles to her  integration  in  Nigeria.
       There is accordingly no reason  why  she  could  not  return  to  her
       country of origin.

   30. I turn then to consider the best interests of the children.   As  was
       said in ZH (Tanzania), the best interests of a child  are  a  primary
       consideration  although  not  paramount.   For  the  reasons  I  have
       identified above, based on  what  is  said  in  KO  (Nigeria),  those
       interests have to be assessed based on  the  position  in  the  "real
       world".  For the reasons given above, therefore, the  best  interests
       of the children have to be assessed on  the  premise  that,  but  for
       their position, their mother would  be  returning  to  Nigeria.   The
       children are all aged under ten years.  At  that  age,  they  clearly
       require the care of their parents.  In this case, as I  have  already
       found, the parental relationship is with their mother only.  The best
       interests of all the children therefore require that they remain with
       their mother.  The real issue is whether their best interests are  to
       remain in the UK or to return to Nigeria.

   31. The two  eldest  children  are  in  primary  school  education.   The
       youngest attends nursery  part-time.   Documents  relating  to  their
       education  appear  at  [AB/9-27]  and  [AB/50-73].   There  are  some
       photographs of the children individually and together with  teachers,
       classmates and their mother.  The children appear from reports to  be
       doing reasonably well at school.  There is some evidence  that  [MIT]
       was performing below expectations but there  is  no  indication  that
       this is due to any developmental or  learning  difficulties  and  the
       evidence suggests that the situation is improving.

   32. The high point of the evidence in relation to the two eldest children
       are two letters from their primary school dated 5 March 2018.   Those
       are signed off "pp M Thompson" on behalf of "[M] School Office".  The
       first ([AB/8]) relates to [HAT] and reads as  follows  (having  noted
       that he joined the school on March 2016):

           "[HAT] is in  year  three.   He  is  currently  working  at  age
           expected level in English and maths.  He is well  liked  amongst
           his peers and gets on with the adults in his  class.   He  takes
           part in extra-curricular activities and is a keen footballer.

           [HAT]  is  settled  and  happy  at  [M]  school  and  has   made
           significant progress in his learning  this  academic  year.   It
           would be detrimental to his education if this were interrupted"

   33. The second letter in  relation  to  [MIT],  again  referring  to  his
       admission date as March 2016 reads as follows:

           "[MIT] is in year two.  He is very eager to  learn  and  engages
           well in lessons.  He is a confident  member  of  the  class  and
           actively contributes to class discussions.  He is  very  popular
           and  has  established  secure  friendship  groups.    [MIT]   is
           currently working just below age expected level in  English  and
           at age expected in maths.

           I believe that it would not be in his best interest if  he  were
           to leave [M] Primary school as he is  settled  and  making  good
           progress with his learning.  If he were to leave the  school  or
           the country I feel this would have a detrimental effect  on  his
           academic progress and his emotional wellbeing."

   34. The children's school reports overall show that they are  polite  and
       popular with their peers.  There is however very limited evidence  as
       to their independent lives in the UK which can be gleaned from  these
       documents.  It is difficult to place much weight on the  two  letters
       which I have cited above since the writer of them does  not  say  how
       the children are  known  to  him/her  or  his/her  qualifications  to
       provide an opinion  on  the  children's  best  interests  and  future
       development.  Even taking those letters at highest, it shows that the
       two children are doing reasonably well  in  education  at  a  primary
       school which they have attended now for some three and a  half  years
       and that they have made friends.

   35. As indicated by the extract from EV (Philippines) which I have  cited
       in the passage from MA (Pakistan) at [17] above, the relevant factors
       to be considered when assessing where a child's  best  interests  lie
       relevant to their own lives (including  their  education)  are  their
       age, the length of time that they have been in the UK, how long  they
       have been in education, the stage their education  has  reached,  the
       extent to which they  are  distanced  from  their  home  country  and
       whether they can renew a connection, any language, medical  or  other
       difficulties.

   36. In this case, both children have been  in  education  since  2016  in
       their current school and there is an indication  that  they  were  at
       nursery before then.  The First Appellant  says  that  they  were  in
       education from the age of about three so the eldest will have been in
       education for about six years and [MIT] for  about  five  years.   At
       primary school level, however, they have not yet  reached  a  crucial
       point in their education.  [HAT] will be obliged to move schools in a
       couple of years when he  moves  to  secondary  school.   Whilst  both
       children have formed friendships,  those  friendships  may  well  not
       survive a move to their next school and in any  event,  there  is  no
       reason why they cannot continue to write to friends in the UK and  to
       make new friends in Nigeria.  The youngest child  has  only  recently
       started nursery school and there is no evidence aside the  report  to
       which I refer below, and which does not indicate that this child  has
       yet formed any independent life (as would be expected to be the  case
       as she is only aged three years).

   37. The First Appellant says that the children do not speak the languages
       spoken in Nigeria.  I reject that evidence for the following reasons.
        First, English is widely spoken in that country.  Second, as appears
       from the reports from the youngest  child's  nursery  at  [AB/68-69],
       "English and Yoruba are spoken  at  home".   There  is  therefore  no
       reason why, if the youngest child can speak Yoruba,  the  two  eldest
       children will not be able to speak it also.

   38. There is evidence that all  Appellants  are  registered  with  a  GP.
       There is no evidence that any of the children have medical  problems.
       I note as an aside that the First Appellant says  that  she  has  had
       depression, physical pains as a result  and  that  she  suffers  from
       sleep  problems  and  has  sought  medical  assistance  for   stress.
       However, there is no evidence of any medical intervention.  The  GP's
       letter at [AB/29] simply states that the family  is  registered  with
       the surgery.

   39. I accept that none of the children has visited Nigeria.  Although the
       First Appellant has obtained Nigerian passports for all of  them  (of
       which I only have the first page of each document), I anticipate that
       this was for the purpose of making the application which led  to  the
       decision under appeal.  I also accept therefore that they  will  have
       little familiarity of Nigerian customs and ways of  life.   They  may
       know  something  about  their  country  of  nationality  from   their
       association with others of Nigerian origin who attend  their  church,
       but I accept that this  will  be  limited,  and  they  will  be  more
       familiar with the British way of life, particularly  the  eldest  two
       children who are in full-time education.

   40. However, I do not accept the First Appellant's categorisation of  the
       children's life in the UK as stable.  They  are  living  in  a  house
       which is described by its owner as overcrowded and are  dependent  on
       the charity of their church community.

   41. I accept, as stated in MT and ET (child's best interests; ex  tempore
       pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT  00088  (IAC)  that  a  child's  position
       independently of his/her parents will develop over time.  However, as
       I have indicated, there is limited evidence of the development of the
       independent lives of [HAT] and [MIT] in the six and five  years  that
       they have been in education.  [MQT] has only recently started school.
        I have regard to the guidance given by this Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed
       and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT
       00197 (IAC) as follows:

           "i)   As a starting  point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
           children to be with both their parents and if both  parents  are
           being removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
           suggests that so should dependent  children  who  form  part  of
           their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

           ii)   It is generally in the interests of children to have  both
           stability and continuity of social and educational provision and
           the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society
           to which they belong.

           iii)  Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
           origin  can  lead  to  development  of   social   cultural   and
           educational ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,  in
           the absence of compelling reason to the contrary.  What  amounts
           to lengthy residence is not  clear  cut  but  past  and  present
           policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

           iv)   Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
           Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is  likely  to  be
           more significant to a child that the first seven years of  life.
           Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than
           their peers and are adaptable."

   42. The assessment of what is  in  the  best  interests  of  a  child  is
       inherently fact sensitive and to  be  carried  out  on  the  evidence
       before the Tribunal.  Having regard to what I say  above  about  that
       evidence, although I accept that [HAT] and [MIT] are reasonably  well
       settled in education and have been here for more than seven years,  I
       cannot accept  that  it  is  other  than  marginally  in  their  best
       interests to remain in the UK. Their  best  interests  and  those  of
       [MQT} are more strongly to remain with their mother wherever  she  is
       living.

   43. The next question  to  be  determined,  however,  is  whether  it  is
       reasonable to expect them to return  to  Nigeria.   When  considering
       reasonableness, the children's best interests are not  determinative.
        However, as said in ZH (Tanzania), "[w]here the  best  interests  of
       the child clearly favour a certain  course,  that  course  should  be
       followed unless countervailing reasons of considerable force displace
       them".  Here, although I have found that it is in the best  interests
       of the Second and Fourth Appellants to remain in the UK because  they
       have been here for seven years and are in education here, I concluded
       that this was only marginally the case and that their interests  were
       more strongly favoured by remaining with their mother. My conclusions
       in relation to best interests are relevant to the issue whether it is
       reasonable for the children to be expected to return to Nigeria  but,
       because their best interests do not clearly favour staying in the UK,
       that conclusion is not determinative of the reasonableness issue.

   44. When carrying out the assessment whether it is reasonable  to  expect
       the Second and  Fourth  Appellants  to  return  to  Nigeria,  I  must
       consider only the position of the children.  I ignore the position of
       the First Appellant.   I  take  into  account  what  is  said  in  MA
       (Pakistan) concerning the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  length  of
       residence of a child.  The Respondent has formulated a rule and given
       statutory effect to the need to have regard  to  a  period  of  seven
       years as being of significance.

   45. However, as with best interests, the significance of that  period  in
       terms of what is reasonable to expect has to be assessed on the facts
       and evidence.  Here, the children are reasonably  well  settled  into
       the English education system, but they have not been  at  school  for
       any lengthy period. There is likely to be some disruption caused by a
       move to a different education system, but they are not at a  critical
       point in their education.  They may well have formed some friendships
       with their classmates but there is little  evidence  that  they  have
       formed any independent lives or  integrated  substantially  into  the
       British way of life such that any  disruption  would  be  other  than
       minor.

   46. I accept that the children have never visited Nigeria.  However, they
       have family members there.  They have no family in  the  UK  and  are
       currently living in unstable  conditions.   It  is  likely  that  the
       children will take a little time to adjust to life  in  Nigeria,  but
       they will have their mother to help them.  I have  already  explained
       why I do not accept that there are very significant obstacles to  her
       integration in that country.  She will be  able  to  look  to  family
       members to assist her and may also be able  to  obtain  some  support
       from persons associated with her church  community.   That  community
       has been generous in its assistance to the family  whilst  they  have
       been in the UK and there is no reason  why  that  support  could  not
       continue in Nigeria whilst the First Appellant finds  employment  and
       accommodation.   Although  there  is  likely  to  be  a   period   of
       readjustment for the children, looking at the evidence as a whole and
       taking account of the children's best interests, it is reasonable  to
       expect the children, in particular the Second and  Fourth  Appellants
       (to whom this issue is relevant), to return to Nigeria.

   47. It follows from the foregoing, that the Second and Fourth  Appellants
       do not meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.  There is no  other
       provision of the Rules which applies in this  case  (see  my  finding
       above  in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)).   They  are   not
       therefore qualifying children for the purposes of Section 117B (6).

   48. For the sake of completeness, I consider the case  also  outside  the
       Rules.   I  have  already  set  out  the  evidence   concerning   the
       interference with the private lives of the  Appellants.   The  family
       will be removed as a whole and there  is  therefore  no  interference
       with their family lives.  I have already found that the children have
       no contact other than indirect with their father (by  telephone  from
       time to time).  The First Appellant has no contact with him and  does
       not even know where he is.  I have  rejected  the  First  Appellant's
       evidence that the children have formed  an  emotional  attachment  as
       family members with the lady who currently accommodates  the  family.
       Conversely, the family will be  able  to  re-establish  contact  with
       their family members  in  Nigeria  (the  children's  grandmother  and
       uncle).  The evidence as to interference with  the  family's  private
       lives is thin.  I have already made findings in relation to what that
       shows about the level of interference with the family's private lives
       and I do not repeat those findings.  In any event,  applying  section
       117B (4), I can give their private lives little weight.

   49. Although the Appellants may not have had recourse to public funds  to
       date, that is only because they are not entitled to them due  to  the
       unlawfulness of their status.  They have been reliant  on  assistance
       from their community.  They sought  recourse  to  public  funds  when
       making their application.  I have already pointed out  that,  if  the
       First Appellant does not have qualifications enabling her to work  in
       Nigeria, she may find it difficult to find work  in  the  UK  either.
       She has no experience of working in this country any  more  than  she
       does in Nigeria as she has not had permission to work. The Appellants
       are not financially independent. That too weighs against them and  in
       favour of the public interest (section 117B (3)).

   50. The First Appellant has been in the UK unlawfully  for  most  of  her
       period of residence.  Although the other Appellants do not  have  the
       right to remain either, as the children of the First Appellant,  they
       have had no option but to stay here.  However, the fact  that,  as  I
       have found, they cannot meet the Rules and  are  here  without  leave
       also weighs against them in the public interest (section  117B  (1)).
       The effectiveness of immigration  control  is  undermined  where,  as
       here, a family seeks to stay in the  UK  having  remained  unlawfully
       with no basis of stay within the Rules in order to gain an  advantage
       based on the children's length of residence.

   51. Although I  have  accepted  that  removal  will  interfere  with  the
       family's  private  lives  and  that  there  will  be  a   period   of
       readjustment to life in Nigeria, when that interference  is  balanced
       against the strong public interest in removal of those with no  right
       to be in the UK and who have no basis of stay within the  Rules,  the
       decision to remove the Appellants is not disproportionate.

  CONCLUSION

   52. For the above reasons, the appeals are  dismissed.   The  Second  and
       Fourth Appellants are not entitled to leave to remain under paragraph
       276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules as it is  reasonable  to  expect  them  to
       return to Nigeria with their mother and sister.  The First  Appellant
       cannot therefore succeed under section 117B (6). There  are  no  very
       significant obstacles to  the  Appellants'  integration  in  Nigeria.
       They have no basis of  stay  under  the  Rules.  Outside  the  Rules,
       balancing the interference  with  their  private  lives  against  the
       public interest, the decision to remove them is not disproportionate.





DECISION

I dismiss the appeals on the basis that removal of the Appellants  does  not
breach Section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 (based on Article 8 ECHR).

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 28 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
