
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21510/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 20th May 2019 and 25th June |On 24 July 2019                    |
|2019                               |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Sharma, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity as the appeal concerns minor children.  No  report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  his
    partner and children.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
    to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Manyarara), promulgated on the 27th July 2018
    dismissing his appeal against the decision to refuse his human rights
    claim based on his family life. Permission to appeal was granted on the
    21st November 2018.


The background:


 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He entered the UK on the 14th
    February 2011 with entry clearance as a student with a visa valid until
    June 2012. On the 29th February 2012 he made a further application for
    leave to remain which was granted from the 12th July 2012 until the
    12th July 2014.

 3. There is a complicated history thereafter concerning his relationships
    with two women; his current partner referred to as the "sponsor" in the
    decision of the FtTJ an whom I shall refer to as "E" and also his EEA
    spouse whom he married by proxy in September 2014 and to whom he
    remains married.  I shall refer to her as "K".  The judge made a number
    of adverse findings in respect of those relationships within the
    determination.

 4. He claimed to have met an EEA national in 2011 but that they began a
    relationship in 2014 when on a break from his relationship with the
    sponsor. He had a child from that relationship, G, born in 2013. He had
    met the sponsor in 2012 and they had an affair, but he went on to marry
    the EEA national K on the 17th September 2014.  This is despite
    asserting in his evidence that he and the sponsor E were in a
    relationship akin to marriage in February 2013. The sponsor was also
    married to an EEA national (who I shall refer to as "L"), whom she
    married in 2010 but was divorced from him in October 2014.

 5. The appellant claimed that in January 2015 (when encountered by
    immigration officers at his address) he was intending to make an
    application for a residence card. The EEA spouse K was not there but
    had returned to her home country. However, as the judge set out, he
    made no reference to E, their relationship or that he had a child G and
    that he gave no explanation for that failure (see paragraphs 36 and
    37). Furthermore, he claimed in his evidence before the FtTJ that the
    sponsor was living with him at the time of the enforcement visit but
    had made no reference to her or their child.

 6. On the 19th January 2015 submissions were made to the respondent on the
    basis of his relationship with E and his child G born in 2013. He was
    served with a notice of liability for removal and with a statement of
    additional grounds to which he responded on the 26th January 2015. On
    the 9th March 2015 he was served with a decision letter which certified
    his claim but following judicial review proceedings, there was a
    consent order on made the 12th June 2015 and the respondent agreed to
    reconsider his claim

 7. In 2016 GP his second child was born, and the respondent refused his
    claim in a decision taken on the 25th August 2016.


 8. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 6th July 2018.
    The judge heard evidence from the appellant and his partner E. In a
    decision promulgated on 27 July 2018 the Judge dismissed his appeal on
    all grounds. The judge found that the appellant could not meet the
    requirements of Appendix FM as he could not meet the suitability
    requirements as result of his conduct and what was described as a "
    bogus marriage" with his EEA national partner K but even if that did
    not apply, he could not meet the requirements for leave to remain as
    either a partner or a parent. As to paragraph 276ADE,  consideration
    was given to the length of time in the UK since 2011  but the applicant
    did not have 20 years continuous residence; he had spent most of his
    life in Nigeria and could not be said to have lost ties or that there
    would be significant obstacles to his re-integration to that country
    given his previous length of residence there and continuing linguistic
    ties.

 9. When considering Article 8 outside of the Rules, the judge addressed
    the question of the best interests of the children noting that as a
    starting point, it was in the best interests of children to be with
    both their parents. The judge then considered the conduct of the
    appellant and found that the appellant had shown himself to be a person
    who was "willing to utilise all avenues possible in order to remain in
    the United Kingdom". In this respect, the judge took into account that
    when the enforcement visit had taken place in January 2015, he had made
    no attempt to refer to either the sponsor E or his child and only did
    so when he could no longer make an application for residence card as
    his EEA spouse K had left United Kingdom in November 2014. The judge
    found that if the appellant had an intention to play an active role in
    his children's lives, he would not have waited until all other avenues
    had been exhausted before making an application on the basis of Article
    8 (at [84]). The judge found that the respondent had been right to
    raise the suitability grounds and that whilst the best interest of the
    child must be assessed in isolation from other factors, such as
    parental misconduct, the best interests were capable of being
    outweighed by other public interest factors. The judge found that there
    were public interest factors that applied in this appeal (see [85]).


10. When applying the section 117B public interest factors, the judge took
    into account that the appellant's immigration status had always been
    "precarious" and thus little weight was attached to the private life
    that he had established in the United Kingdom. The judge found that the
    appellant's children were "qualifying children" by virtue of their
    citizenship and that the sponsor was a "qualifying partner" under
    paragraph 117D but that there were no compelling reasons why leave
    should be granted outside the rules and dismissed the appeal.

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted on the 21
    November 2018.

12. At a hearing on the 19th February 2019 I heard the submissions of the
    advocates (then Mr Plowright of Counsel and Mr Avery, Senior Presenting
    officer) on the issues identified in the grounds.

13. In a decision promulgated on the 18th March 2019 I set out my reasons
    as to why I had reached the conclusion that the decision did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law. I reproduce that below:

    "Decision on the error of law:


       i) I have carefully considered the competing submissions of the
          advocates, and having done so, I am satisfied that the decision
          demonstrates the making of an error on a point of law. I shall set
          out my reasons for reaching that view.


      ii) I am satisfied that ground 2 is made out. In my judgment there was
          a clear error in the determination by the failure to make clear
          findings as to whether or not there was a genuine and subsisting
          relationship between the appellant and his partner and children at
          the time of the hearing.


     iii) In the decision reached, the judge considered whether the
          appellant could meet the "partner route" and made findings of fact
          which were based on the appellant's past conduct and relationship
          with his EEA national wife at a time when the appellant claimed to
          be in a relationship with his current partner (see paragraphs 35 -
          40 of the decision).


      iv) In particular, at [36] the judge stated, "I find that the
          appellant's inability to be consistent about when his
          relationships began is as a direct result of a lack of credibility
          in his claim to have been in a genuine relationship with either
          woman." The judge later made reference to the enforcement visit
          that took place in January 2015 and that despite claiming that the
          sponsor (his current partner) was living with him at the time of
          the enforcement visit, he failed to make any reference to the
          sponsor (current partner) or his child G. The judge found that the
          appellant had "not provided any explanation for his failure to
          refer to the sponsor (his current partner). This is material to
          his current claim. This is because in order to show that he can
          meet the partner route on the basis of his relationship sponsor,
          the appellant would need to show that he and the sponsor were in a
          relationship akin to marriage for at least two years prior to the
          date of the application." (See paragraph 37).


       v) The judge went on to make a finding that to satisfy the "partner
          "provisions the appellant would need to show that he and the
          sponsor (his current partner) were in a relationship akin to
          marriage since January 2013 but that whilst he had suggested they
          lived together since February 2013, that could not apply because
          the appellant's case was that the sponsor's former EEA spouse, to
          whom the sponsor was legally married to the time was living at the
          same property. The judge went on to state at paragraph 38, that
          even if the appellant had begun to live together in February 2013,
          the sponsor was still at that time living with her former EEA
          spouse from whom she had not separated and that in a letter to the
          respondent dated 19 January 2015, the sponsor stated that the
          appellant had moved on with his life. As the appellant had married
          the EEA national in July 2014, he could therefore not have been in
          a relationship akin to a marriage with the sponsor since January
          2013.


      vi) It is clear from those findings that they relate to his past
          conduct and that the judge did not accept that they had been
          living together in a relationship akin to marriage from the date
          the appellant stated namely February 2013. That was a finding open
          to the judge to make, however no findings are made as to whether
          the appellant was now in a genuine and subsisting relationship
          with his asserted partner (sponsor) or the children of that
          relationship.


     vii) At [45] when considering the issue of sole responsibility, the
          judge stated, "the appellant and the sponsor claim to be in a
          subsisting relationship and a further claim to be living in one
          family unit with the children in this appeal." Further on at [48]
          the judge stated "I find that the appellant does not have sole
          responsibility of either of the children in this appeal. That is
          because the sponsor is their biological mother and the appellant's
          evidence is that he is in a relationship with her."


    viii) The next relevant finding is at paragraphs 84 and 85 under the
          heading "the appellant and his children." The judge stated as
          follows: -


              "84.     Having had the benefit of hearing the appellant gave
              oral evidence, and from considering the chronology of
              relationships in this appeal, I find that the appellant has
              shown himself to be a person who is willing to utilise all
              avenues possible in order to remain in the United Kingdom. I
              find that despite the fact that G had already been born when
              the enforcement visit took place in January 2015, the
              appellant made absolutely no attempt to refer to her and only
              raised his relationship with the sponsor and his children
              when he could no longer make an application for a residence
              card as his EEA spouse left the United Kingdom in November
              2014. G was born in 2013. The appellant has not provided a
              credible explanation as to why he failed to mention her. I
              find that if the appellant had an intention to play an active
              role in his children's lives, he would not have waited until
              all other avenues were exhausted before making an application
              on the basis of Article 8.


              85.      I find that the appellant has shown himself to be a
              person who is willing to utilise the immigration laws to suit
              his needs. I find that the respondent was right to raise the
              suitability grounds in this appeal. The appellant's evidence
              about the chronological history of his relationship has been
              inconsistent and I find that such inconsistencies have arisen
              as a direct result of the appellant's attempts to bring his
              circumstances into the provision of the rules. I find that
              whilst Kaur (children's best interests/public interest
              interface) [2017] UKUT 0014 (IAC) held that in the
              proportionality balancing exercise, the best interests of the
              child must be assessed in isolation from other factors, such
              as parental misconduct and was the best interests of the
              children are ordinarily to be with both of their parents, the
              best interests of the child are however capable of being
              outweighed by other public interest factors. I find there are
              public interest factors that apply in this appeal."


      ix) It is plain from paragraph 84 that the judge is referring to
          conduct in 2015 when during the enforcement visit he failed to
          mention that he had a daughter and that "if the appellant had an
          intention to play an active role in his children's lives, he would
          not have waited until all other avenues are exhausted before
          making an application on the basis of Article  8." However, whilst
          that was a finding plainly open to the judge on the evidence that
          was before her, it refers to conduct in 2015 and that he may or
          may not have been playing an active role then. Therefore, the
          finding is based on past conduct alone and does not take account
          of the appellant's present circumstances in which he asserted that
          he had a subsisting relationship with both children. Furthermore,
          it did not take into account that the appellant then went on to
          have another child with the sponsor (his current partner) in 2016.


       x) At paragraphs 87 - 100  in the section entitled "the appellant and
          the sponsor", there is no reference to whether the judge accepted
          there was a genuine subsisting relationship between the appellant
          and the sponsor and if so, the nature of it and its strength given
          the adverse credibility findings made about how the relationship
          had been established at an earlier stage. The judge appeared to
          accept that they were living together despite the observation at
          [45] that they "claim to be in a subsisting relationship".
          However, nothing further is said about the nature and strength of
          that relationship.


      xi) It was entirely open to the judge to question their earlier
          relationship given the chronology of the appellant's relationship
          with his partner at the same time as his asserted relationship
          with an EEA national to whom he is still married and his partner
          being in a marriage also with an EEA national at the same time.
          However, no clear findings are made as to the nature of the
          relationship thereafter and as at the date of the hearing.


     xii) I am also satisfied that there were no clear findings as to
          whether there were genuine subsisting relationships with the two
          children. There were no findings at all in this regard. At
          paragraphs 82 - 86, under the heading "the appellant and the
          children", the judge properly directed herself to the Supreme
          Court's decision in Zoumbas and the assessment of the best
          interests of children and that the starting point was that the
          best interests of children (in the general sense) were to be with
          both parents. The judge also observed that the assessment of the
          best interests must focus on the children concerned. The judge
          then set out her findings at paragraphs 84 and 85, which I have
          set out earlier. The judge made no assessment of the best
          interests of these particular children, in the light of their ages
          and their present relationship with their father and had only done
          so in the context of the past conduct. It was therefore not clear
          whether it was accepted that there was a subsisting relationship
          with the children and if so, the nature of it. There may well have
          been public interest factors or "countervailing factors" as
          described by Counsel Mr Plowright, but it was necessary to make
          clear findings as to the nature of the relationship between the
          family members and expressly the appellant and the children.
          Whilst he could not satisfy Appendix FM and therefore EX1 did not
          apply, when carrying out the proportionality balance thereafter
          and including the section 117B public interest considerations,
          section 117B (6) still required determination.


    xiii) At best the judge properly directed herself to the nationality of
          the children as British citizens and the importance of that in the
          light of the decision in Zoumbas at [86] and applying the
          principles in the case of Zambrano accepted that the sponsor was
          settled in the UK and that there was no suggestion that the
          children should leave with the appellant and that the sponsor had
          been the primary carer. However, there is no reference in that
          paragraph to the second limb of section 117B (6) and any
          assessment of reasonableness.


     xiv) The only reference to section 117B (6) is at [103] where the judge
          stated that she accepted the children were "qualifying children"
          and the sponsor was a "qualifying partner" but stated "I have
          however found that there are countervailing factors that justify
          the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom. I have further
          found that there are no compelling reasons why leave should be
          granted outside of the provisions of the rules in relation to the
          appellant's relationship with the sponsor."


      xv) Nowhere in this paragraph does the judge make any analysis of the
          issue of reasonableness and whether it was reasonable to expect
          the children to leave in the particular factual context that was
          advanced on behalf of the appellant.


     xvi) Furthermore, while the judge cited the principle that the parents
          conduct should not be taken into account when making assessment of
          the best interests, the judge did take into account the conduct of
          the appellant in the context of removal (or if the judge meant to
          consider reasonableness) in that context.


    xvii) In MA (Pakistan) and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the Court
          separated two issues: the best interests of the children and
          whether it is reasonable to expect them to leave the UK. When
          considering the best interests of the children, the conduct of the
          parents is irrelevant. However, when considering the issue of
          reasonableness, wider public interest factors may be weighed in
          the balance, including the conduct and immigration status of the
          parent.


   xviii) In this case the judge did not make findings upon the children's
          best interests as a separate matter before going on to consider
          reasonableness.


     xix) Subsequently, in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 it was
          held that "reasonableness" does not require a balancing exercise
          in which the best interests of the child may be outweighed by the
          public interest in deportation, made all the weightier by the bad
          behaviour of the parent. Furthermore, section 117B (6) is a
          standalone provision in which the focus is purely the effect upon
          the child, who, as indicated, should not be blamed for the conduct
          of its parent.


      xx) However, reasonableness must be assessed in context. Lord
          Carnworth puts it this way at [18]:


              "[I]t seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts [para
              276ADE(1)(iv) and s117B(6) which both posit a situation where
              'it would not be reasonable' to expect a child to leave the
              UK] to consider where the parents, apart from the relevant
              provision, are expected to be, since it will normally be
              reasonable for the child to be with them. To that extent the
              record of the parents may become indirectly material, if it
              leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain here and
              having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis, it
              would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
              provision may give the parents a right to remain."


     xxi) Thus, the extent of the misconduct does not come directly onto the
          balance, but it is equally clear that the father's conduct is
          "indirectly material," because he is expected to be leaving; it is
          normally reasonable for children to be with their parents; and the
          assessment is to be made "in the real world in which the children
          find themselves" [18,19]. Whilst the judge did not have the
          benefit of KO, there is nonetheless a material error in her
          approach. The "real world" analysis would be on the basis that
          that the appellant's partner has settled status and there was no
          consideration of the best interests of the children or the
          assessment of reasonableness in that context.


    xxii) There had been no reference made to the guidance. Since the
          decision of the FtTJ, newer guidance has been published which
          seeks to reflect the decision of the Supreme Court in KO
          (Nigeria). That guidance was published on 19 December 2018. On the
          question of reasonableness of return for a qualifying child there
          is no longer a reference to the need for "strong reasons" being
          required before leave is refused.  The President has also recently
          reported a decision of direct relevance in JG (s 117B (6):
          "reasonable to leave" UK (Rev 1)) [2019] UKUT 92.


   xxiii) For those reasons I am satisfied that the judge made an error on a
          point of law in relation to ground 2.


    xxiv) Permission was not granted in respect of ground 1, although as I
          have set out above Mr Plowright sought to rely upon it when making
          his submissions in relation to section 117B (6).


     xxv) For the avoidance of doubt, I have considered the submissions made
          in respect of ground one and as set out in the papers and the oral
          submissions that I have referred to. In my judgment, the judge
          made clear findings in relation to his previous conduct in his
          relationships with both women.


    xxvi) It was entirely open for the judge to make the adverse credibility
          findings that she made having heard the evidence of both the
          appellant and his present partner. By way of example, at [35] it
          was open to the judge to reach the conclusion that the appellant's
          evidence was inconsistent as to when he embarked upon a romantic
          relationship with the EEA national. It was the appellant's case
          that he met her in 2011, however in contrast, in his oral evidence
          he stated that his relationship with the EEA national began in
          2011 and in 2014. The judge recorded his evidence that he had met
          the sponsor through a friend in January 2012. It was wholly open
          to the judge to find that the appellant's evidence that  the
          sponsor subsequently embarked upon an affair in 2012 suggested
          that any relationship with EEA national started in 2011 as he
          could not have been having an affair in 2012 if he had not been in
          a relationship with the EEA national until 2014 as he said in his
          oral evidence.


   xxvii) The judge's finding as to events in 2015 were also open to the
          judge to make and were amply supported by the evidence. It is
          common ground that he was encountered by the immigration
          authorities in January 2015 and it was not disputed that he had
          not attempted to make an application for an EEA residence card at
          the time of the visit by the immigration authorities. The judge
          set out that it was the appellant's case that he and the EEA
          national had been having problems and that she had was not present
          during the visit because she travelled to Belgium. The appellant
          suggested that he had been intending to make an application for
          residence card. The judge also observed at paragraph 36 that the
          appellant suggested that the sponsor was living at the address
          where the enforcement visit took place. It was open to the judge
          to find that that evidence of the appellant was not consistent
          with his claim that he was intending to make an application for a
          residence card based on his relationship with EEA national nor was
          it consistent with his claim that he had a subsisting relationship
          with EEA national at that time.


  xxviii) It was further open to the judge to make the finding that despite
          claiming that his partner was living with him at the time of the
          enforcement visit, that he failed to make any reference to the
          sponsor or his child G. There was no explanation provided to the
          judge about that failure to refer to the sponsor.


    xxix) The factual chronology demonstrates that he married the EEA
          national in July 2014 and therefore could not have been in a
          relationship akin to marriage with the sponsor since February 2013
          as claimed. Furthermore, the evidence was before the judge was
          that contrary to the appellant's assertion that they had lived
          together since February 2013, the sponsor was living with her
          former EEA spouse from whom she had not separated.


     xxx) I am therefore satisfied that the findings of fact that were made
          as to past conduct were open to the judge to make on the evidence
          that was before him. However, the question remains whether those
          findings of fact were sufficient to establish whether this was a
          "marriage of convenience". Whilst this was not an EEA appeal, it
          was necessary to consider this in the context of whether the
          conduct allegations were made out.


    xxxi) The grounds at paragraph 31 make reference to the failure to take
          account that the appellant's partner succeeded in her appeal.
          Despite making reference to this in the grounds, no copy of the
          decision made by the Judge in the EEA appeal heard on the same
          date was provided to this Tribunal. Therefore, it will be
          necessary for that evidence to be considered when reaching an
          overall conclusion on the conduct issue.


   xxxii) I have therefore reached the conclusion that the decision should
          be set aside but that the adverse findings of fact set out above
          (paragraphs 35-40) should be preserved. There also has been no
          challenge made against the findings made in respect of Paragraph
          276ADE and they shall also be preserved."

14. The appeal was therefore listed in accordance with the directions
    served on the parties which made reference to any further evidence
    being filed in order to re-make the decision.


The re-making of the decision:


The evidence:

15. At the hearing on the 20th May, the appellant was represented by
    different Counsel as was the respondent. For the purposes of the
    hearing, the appellant relied on the bundle of documentation before the
    FtT and a new bundle.


16. I have now been provided with a copy of the other decision made by FtTJ
    Manyarara which relates to the appeal of E under the EEA Regulations.
    Whilst the appeals heard by the same judge on the same day, E was
    represented by different Counsel although the presenting officer
    remained the same. It appears from that decision that no oral evidence
    was given and that both advocates submitted that the appeal could
    proceed on submissions only (paragraphs 13 - 14). At paragraph 25 the
    judge records the only live issue in the appeal is whether the
    appellant can establish a right to retain right of residence under the
    regulations following the breakdown of her marriage to an EEA national.
    The paragraph also makes plain that the respondent had not taken any
    issue as to whether the appellant's marriage to her former EEA spouse
    was a genuine one (see paragraph 25). The judge concluded that the
    appellant had established a right to permanent residence on the
    evidence before the Tribunal.


Evidence of the appellant:

17. I heard oral evidence from the appellant. He adopted his original
    statement as his evidence in chief. There was no updated statement from
    the appellant despite the direction being made.


18. He was asked about his relationship with his two children and he stated
    that he had a fatherly relationship with both children and that they
    did things together. He gave examples of things that they would do
    together as a family.

19. As to his background, he stated that he was from Edo State in Nigeria
    and his wife was from Akew-Ibo State which was a full day's journey
    away by bus. He stated that there was a difference between the two
    states: different cultures, don't eat the same food and language is "a
    hundred percent different". When asked what language he spoke, he said
    "English".

20. He was asked what connections the children had with Nigeria and he
    stated, "no connections really". He stated that his wife had her mother
    and father in Nigeria, but both were old. He said the children had not
    spoken to them as they don't speak English, he said that he had his
    mother also in Nigeria.

21. He was asked whether the children would cope with relocation to
    Nigeria, he stated that they would not cope with the environment and
    the food. He made reference to the eldest child having an allergy to
    dust and that she been in hospital and given a pump for her nose. He
    said that she was in hospital for two days.

22. When asked what the issues would be for the children, he said that
    relocation would really affect them in many ways as they are
    comfortable United Kingdom. They have lived in the United Kingdom and
    have friends and established their lives. They would find it very
    difficult to follow the language.

23. In cross-examination, he was asked about his daughter G when she went
    to the hospital. The appellant said that it took place in 2016 and he
    agreed that it was not a recent condition but that it occurs all the
    time.

24. When asked if either child had any recent health problems, he stated
    that both had been to see the GP and that he had submitted some
    evidence to the Home Office. He described G as having "blood in her
    eye" and she was prescribed antibiotics in 2016/7. He said she was also
    rushed to hospital as it was thought that she had drunk something. He
    said that the youngest child GP had no health problems.

25. He gave evidence of his contact with the school. "They called me and
    asked me to talk to G she had had a fight at school with a boy. This
    took place in 2018. Another occasion was in October/November 2018 when
    the school spoke to him and wanted to know if their mother was living
    alone in the home and leaving the children. G said she had told a
    friend that when a mother was at work the children had stated that he
    was not in the home.

26. He was referred to E's letter and it was that said that the letter did
    not give details of any day-to-day activities that he undertook with
    the children. The appellant stated that "parents take care of children
    and I'm doing 90% of the work at home. I clean the home; I did
    everything for the children and make sure that their happy".

27. He was referred to page 7 of the bundle (his sisters' statement) which
    again gave no details of the relationship. He stated "my sister brought
    me to this country I did my master's degree and I lived with her. She
    has been here for me and the children call her "big mummy". She is very
    close to them".

28. He was asked about the circumstances in Nigeria for the children. He
    confirmed that English was spoken in Nigeria and that education was an
    English but that in the markets they did not speak English and the
    local language was spoken. He stated that the children and his partner
    had a "very close relationship" with his mother and that his mother
    understood English. He confirmed that the children had never been to
    Nigeria. When asked if his wife had ever wanted to take them there
    bearing in mind that she had status in the UK, the appellant stated
    that she had gone to Italy but could not go to Nigeria with the
    children because one of the children had an allergy. He was asked why
    he had provided no evidence as to circumstances in Nigeria (in respect
    of the different languages between the district that he lived in and
    his wife). He stated that he was not asked to do this.

29. He was asked about his witness statement (paragraph 9) and it was
    suggested to him that it portrays him as a tenant in the house with E
    and her former husband L. The appellant stated that he was not a tenant
    and that he was living with his sister. He stated his evidence that E
    was finding it difficult to rent and said as he was working that they
    should look for a house together and therefore they rented a house.

30. It was put to him that E and a husband L were already living at 14 CC?
    He stated that they were living in another area together in 2012 and
    wanted a bigger house and as he was working as an area manager it would
    be easier for him to get a home. There was a tenancy agreement in his
    name.

31. Again it was put to him that paragraph 9 of his witness statement said
    that in February 2013 when he was struggling to find somewhere to stay
    E and her former partner allowed him to live with them at their flat at
    14 CC and that he moved in in February 2013 and have been residing
    there ever since and that E and her partner ended their relationship in
    2014.

32. It was put to him that paragraph 9 made reference to him moving in on
    27 February 2013 and that it was common ground that the child was born
    in May 2013 that the account later he had given did not add up. He
    stated that he was looking for a home and was living with his sister, E
    was looking for a place to live and he said to her "why don't we look
    for a place to live together".

33. It was suggested to him that he had married the EEA national in 2014
    and he was asked if he had married her for the purpose of obtaining
    residence in the UK. He denied that, he said that he knew G was his
    child but didn't remember the date.

34. It became clear that there were some difficulties in the evidence and
    the appellant had not provided an up-to-date witness statement. Over
    the lunchtime adjournment Counsel took a witness statement from the
    appellant to ensure that there was no misunderstanding of his evidence.

35. In that witness statement he said that he had met his wife E in 2012
    through a friend, that they became friends who met socially. He was in
    a relationship within EEA national K and intended to marry.

36. His child G was a result of the visit to a party in 2012 having been to
    a club. His partner was out of the country and so he invited E out and
    they ended up having a "one-night stand".

37. He said that he was not aware that G was his daughter until she was
    born in May 2013 and was not present when the birth was registered. He
    said that K was living with him in an address at CC at the time and she
    overheard E arguing with her husband L who accused her of having an
    affair with him.  K was very angry, and he explained what had happened
    and begged her to forgive him. She agreed to continue the relationship
    and to marry him. The situation changed we he lost his job because his
    visa expired. K said he should go find himself a place when he sorted
    things out, he should call her back because she was not comfortable in
    the house. He said he couldn't pay his share of the rent, so he had to
    rent out his room and he slept on the sofa. K left the house in
    November 2014.

38. As to E's former partner, he left the house in 2013 after the quarrel
    he said he was taking care of G and living in the same flat whilst E
    went to work but his relationship with the did not start until he was
    detained in 2015 and their second child  was planned so that G would
    have a younger sibling.

39. He was cross-examined by Miss Isherwood. He was asked to explain why he
    had stated that he was not aware that G was his daughter and referred
    to living with E at CC, when the birth certificate (page 63) gave a
    different address? He stated that E had moved to CC in February 2013
    but most of her correspondence had not changed. The address in the
    birth certificate is the address that she was living then but she had
    left that address in 2013.

40. He was asked to consider his previous statement (page 4) when he said
    that he heard met E in January 2012 and moved into CC in February 2013
    but that in fact E was already living there in January 2012(see
    paragraph 9 of witness statement). The appellant stated that that was
    not correct and that when he went to visit her, he lived at an address
    in D xxx Street and she lived in Cxx. When she was pregnant, she was
    looking for a house. She was living in C xx in 2012 and most of the
    bills were in the bundle she had not changed her address. The reason
    why the birth certificate is different is because that was her address
    before CC, and she was attending the hospital before giving birth and
    needed to prove her address at the hospital.

41. He was referred to paragraph 6 of his witness statement in which he
    stated that after K found out about the affair they decided to have a
    break in the belief that they would soon reconcile and get back
    together and that he later found out that she'd gone to Belgium. It was
    suggested to him that after she found out about the affair that they
    had then broken up. He denied that and stated that they were going to
    reconcile. However, it was suggested to that it did not say that they
    had reconciled. Again, he denied this, stating that he had told K that
    it was "one-night stand" and that she was very angry, but K was still
    around.

42. It was put to him that if that was the truth why didn't he say in
    witness statement that they had reconciled? He stated "it was not
    immediate; my daughter was born in May 2013 and K left in November
    2014. The incident happened in May 2013 for the period from May 2013
    until November 2014 we were together. She did forgive me for having a
    child.

43. He was asked why she would leave him one month after the marriage? He
    stated "because I did not have a job and my leave to remain had
    expired.

44. It was put to him that from the evidence he had given, he had got
    married in September 2014 and that she left in November 2014, but he
    did not make an application when they were married. He reiterated that
    he did make an application through the solicitors.

45. It was suggested to that he had never provided evidence that he and K
    ever lived together at CC. In reply he stated the address in the bank
    statements in her name have that address on and it was sent to the Home
    Office.

46. It was put to him that he had said that he had provided evidence that K
    was living at CC but although he lost contact the correspondence went
    to the address at CC/he stated that he was sending her money even
    though she had left in November 2014. He said that he still received
    post from K.

47. In re-examination he was asked to what extent his sister paid his
    lawyers fees? He said that it was only occasionally.

Evidence of the appellant's partner:

48. We resumed evidence on 25 June 2019. I heard evidence from the
    appellant's partner E. She adopted as her evidence a letter dated 2 May
    2019 (see bundle provided for the hearing on 20th of May 2019). In that
    letter the following was stated:


         "SA has been very helpful in the up keeping of our children, he is
         always there for us. He helps G1 when she has homework to do, also
         teaches that when she's back from school. We go out together with
         the kids when I'm not working. S is a responsible father, that
         cares for us kindly and morally, he is well respected amongst his
         friends and a dedicated Christian. G and G feel very comfortable
         with their daddy S, they go to the park, town centre, church,
         library, take them to the GP sometime and also take them to X to
         spend the weekend in his elder sister's house. In a nutshell, he is
         a lovely father."

49. In addition, she relied upon a further witness statement that had been
    filed on 13 June 2019. In respect of that witness statement there was
    one alteration at paragraph 11 which she stated should read "S was
    living with me during this time and he was taking care of our daughter
    G whilst I went to work by relationship with S did not start until he
    was released from detention in March 2015."


50. In that witness statement, she gave details as to how the parties had
    meet and then later embarked on a relationship.

51. She stated that her partner E discovered she had had an affair with S
    and one day they were arguing and K overheard the conversation with a
    and that G was S's child as a result the relationship ended in
    September 2014 between her and he and the divorce was finalised in
    April 2015. K after listening to the conversation had problems with S
    but they continued their relationship and married one another. They got
    married by proxy Nigeria on 17 September 2014. She stated that
    "sometime after their marriage" S and K began to have a relationship
    problem again and they decided to have a break in the belief that they
    would soon reconcile and get back together. S found out that K had gone
    to Belgium and would not come back anymore because of the child between
    us. S lost a job and was struggling financially. She stated her
    relationship with S did not start until he was released from detention
    in March 2015. She stated that they have been together since then and
    their second child was born in February 2016.

52. She stated that she is in as genuine and subsisting relationship with S
    and the children. She described the family as being "very happy
    together and enjoy spending quality time together as a family". At
    paragraph 14, she described sharing joint parental responsibility with
    S for their two daughters.

53. She stated that she could not raise the children on her own at they
    both need their parents. Both daughters are British and have a right to
    remain.

54. She stated that it would be unreasonable to expect them to leave the UK
    as they had established a private family life and were settled as a
    family unit. If he was asked to leave the country this would cause a
    hardship in the family and the children could not stay without their
    father present in their life as their very attached to him and spent
    more time with him than they do with her.

55. As to his ties in Nigeria, it was said that he had no remaining ties,
    no family, no friends, no assets no property or prospects. He will be
    alone without his family and children and will be destitute if retuned.
    She stated that she could not follow her partner to Nigeria. She had
    been in the UK for many years and had a well-established private and
    family life with children. She had a career and her networks in the UK.
    All her friends and family members in the UK and she could not leave it
    would be "unfair".

56. Both children were attending school in the UK and are actively involved
    in extracurricular activities and it would be unjust to separate them
    from the educational and social ties they had developed in the UK. They
    are progressing well at school it would be in their best interest to
    continue to stay in the UK. Any disruption would have significant
    consequences on them emotionally and physically and would affect their
    futures. She stated that neither child been absent from the UK nor had
    not lived in Nigeria. The children had made very close friends and that
    her partner had been in the UK for eight years and has both family and
    friends in the UK with him shows a "strong bond". He has adopted
    British culture and considers the UK as his home.

57. Paragraph 27 she described S as an essential part of her in a
    children's lives and that they required his support and that if removed
    family would be broken and it would have a "significant impact" on her
    and the children. He played an important role in the lives of many
    people who would be adversely affected.

58. In evidence in chief she stated that S came from Edo State and that she
    was born in a different state and that both had different cultures;
    they didn't understand each other languages were different. She said
    they spoke English at home. When asked to provide examples as to why
    the culture was different, she made reference to eating different food
    and "our culture is so different."

59. In cross-examination she was asked about family members in Nigeria, she
    said that her mother lived there. When asked if she had any relatives,
    she said that she had a sister who was married, and a younger brother
    living in Nigeria. In the UK she said she had a great aunt. She stated
    that she did not often see her because she worked 12-hour shifts in the
    last time she saw her was in December 2018 when they spoke of
    Christmas.

60. She stated that S did have relatives in Nigeria, he has a sister and
    also his mother. She said that his mother came on a visit had been here
    for a year since early December and would be returning back to Nigeria.
    She has visited previously to years ago. She speaks Edo. When asked how
    she communicated with children, she said she does not understand
    English and so it is translated. She said the children had no
    connections in Nigeria and they did not speak to her mother.

61. As to contact with family in the UK, she stated that the children do
    not go out and is only seen the family once a Christmas.

62. She was asked about the effect on G when her father was detained in
    2015. She stated that G was not very happy and that the school had
    called her to say that she had not been mixing or playing with her
    friends. When asked why she changed a mind about telling the school
    that he was in detention, she said "I said this was going on and told
    them he was detained." When asked to describe any other effects on G,
    she said that G was not eating and that the school called in and asked
    what had been happening at home she said she would be moody and not
    happy.

63. She said that the children spend more time with S than with her because
    she worked. She said he did a good job with G and that G was doing very
    well and she is independent. She thought that was due to her father's
    help.

64. She confirmed that the children ever been to Nigeria and that they had
    spent all their life there. She said that she could not take them to
    Nigeria because a mother was old.
65. As to any health conditions, she made reference to G having a problem
    with dust which meant that she had to hoover the house every day.

66. She said that she would not be able to cope if S left the UK as she had
    to work and that children stayed with S during the day.

67. She was asked about her relationship with S and when it started and
    that she had previously said that it started in 2013 stop she stated
    "English is not my first language it is not the way I wrote it. It was
    not what I said I went to correct it (referring to her witness
    statement). It was put to her that she had adopted that witness
    statement before the FtTJ and why had she not corrected it at that
    stage? She said that she had told her lawyer that she was not in a
    relationship in 2013 and said that it was "friendship", but the
    solicitor had "put another thing." She confirmed that they had had the
    same representatives. She said she was aware of the error when they
    attended court in May 2019. It was put to her that she had made a
    witness statement for the appeal and that she'd signed it and that she
    had now changed evidence because she knew that S had given different
    evidence. She denied that stating that it was not really a change, that
    they were in a friendship but not a relationship.

68. She confirmed that her daughter had no current health needs and that
    the problem with dust happened to years ago. She confirmed that she was
    not receiving any treatment.

69. It was put to her that in her witness statement she had said that S had
    no family, no friends and no assets in Nigeria whereas his mother lived
    in Nigeria. The witness stated, "she had come to visit the UK" and that
    she came here often.  She stated that he had no other close relatives.

70. The witnesses cross-examined about the living arrangements when they
    first met. She said that she was married to E and was not working, and
    she was introduced to S through a friend called I. In 2012 she was
    living in a flat with E. She said that she lived there with visited him
    in this flat was in Cam.  She said that she had S lived in the same
    flat in CC in February 2013. She said that she did not have any
    references and I called S to tell him and so he said, "let's join
    together and take a flat". She said S joined with me to take out the
    tenancy. When asked if anyone else was there, she said "only me and
    him. When S moved in, he came with K."

71. As to her relationship with a, she said it broke down in 2014
    (September) and a divorce petition was issued in October 2014 she said
    it broke down because he was having an affair and that when she gave
    birth to her daughter he found out that she was not his child.

72. He was asked to explain what had happened between May 2013 (went G
    born) in September 2014 (when she separated from E)? She stated that
    she was with L and he would leave her for two weeks.

73. When asked when K had left, she said this took place after she had
    heard her and the quarrelling about G not being his daughter. She left
    after two months she could not remember when.

74. She was asked to explain why the tenancy agreement dated the 27
    February 2013 (page 73) was in her name and that of S when they were
    not living together? She stated that when they checked her references,
    they were not good enough and that S provided references which were
    combined. She was asked why the other two people in the property were
    not named on the tenancy. She stated that she had just started work and
    that she had not got enough money. When asked about K, she said she
    didn't know anything about her. When asked if she knew that K was
    moving in, she said that she only knew S and not K.

75. She was asked to demonstrate if there were any documents showing E 's
    name or K's name in the large bundle of documents? She stated "no, only
    my name and S's name".

76. She confirmed in evidence that S still received post from K and two
    months ago K and she put on it "return to sender". She said that he
    still had contact with K.

77. She was asked why she thought S did not say anything about his daughter
    when he was arrested in 2015? She said "I did tell him that he was the
    father when they arrested him. When we went to visit S, I told him the
    truth and that was in late March 2015 that was the first time that he
    knew he was G's father". It was put to her but according to his witness
    statement para 3 (handwritten; dated 20/5/19) that S had said he was
    not aware that G was his daughter until she was born in May 2013 and
    that this was inconsistent with her account that she had first told him
    that he was her father when she went to visit him in custody. It was
    put to her that her evidence was inconsistent as to when he knew he was
    G's father- his evidence was that it was in May 2013 whilst her
    evidence was that it was in March 2015. She stated that it was in 2015
    when she had told S. When asked when she changed the birth certificate
    to show that S was the father, she said that was in 2014.

78. When asked when K became aware that he was the father of G, she said it
    was when K had heard the argument between her and her husband E.

The submissions:

79. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions from each of the
    advocates. Ms Isherwood on behalf of the respondent made the following
    submissions:

      1) In her submissions she acknowledged that the question that the
         Tribunal had to consider was the genuineness of his relationship
         with the children and his partner and the public interest
         considerations an S117B (6). However, she submitted that it was not
         possible to ignore the fact that the applicant would do anything to
         remain in the UK and that neither the appellant nor his partner had
         been clear or consistent in their evidence as to their respective
         relationships with their EEA national spouses.


      2) She submitted that the appellant's evidence was evasive concerning
         his relationship with K and when it broke down and the evidence
         given at the hearing was inconsistent concerning their
         relationship. In the witness statement of E (dated 16/1/18 at page
         9) she had stated that he had moved to her address as a friend,
         their relationship grew, and they were in love. They had been
         continuously residing together since February 2013."


      3) Similarly, as to the relationship, the appellant's statement was
         that he was aware of his daughter at the point when she was born
         but the evidence of his wife was that she had only told him that he
         was the father of G when he was in detention in 2015. That is also
         inconsistent with the birth certificate which was changed in 2014.
         She submitted none of the dates had been consistent.


      4) Other evidence was not credible. It was said that he still received
         letters from K but there was no evidence in the way of official
         documents relating to K and S ever living together. It was
         acknowledged that the appellant was still asserting to UKBA that he
         was in a relationship with K in January 2015 when he was detained.
         However, that relationship had never been satisfactorily explained
         and that K and S were married in September 2014, but K left in
         November 2014.


      5) Therefore, it is reasonable to reach the conclusion that the
         relationship with K was not genuine and that this reflects on the
         relationship with his current partner. Ms Isherwood referred to a
         letter from the appellant's sister (page 314 dated 24.4.2016) which
         referred to S living with her at before going to rent an apartment
         with E at CC. She submitted that there was no reference to K in
         that letter even when he was relying on that relationship in 2015.


      6) She submitted that the issue that the Tribunal would have to
         resolve was whether he was in a genuine relationship with his wife.
         She submitted there were a number of letters to the address
         addressed to both E and the appellant from approximately 2014 but
         their evidence had been inconsistent as to their relationship. She
         further submitted that when considering the genuineness of their
         relationship now, there was still an unclear picture with no
         details of the actual relationship. His partner made reference to
         them staying together and going to work but no real details of
         their activities. The letters from friends did not paint any
         particular picture.


      7) As to the issue of reasonableness, the witness statement of his
         partner stated that the appellant had no family in Nigeria which
         was plainly incorrect as his mother lived in Nigeria and was only
         in the UK on a visit. She had been evasive in her evidence.


      8) There was no up to date medical evidence relating to the children
         and the only evidence referred to an example in 2016.


      9) A's partner is settled in the UK and both children are British
         citizens. However, there is a lack of evidence concerning the
         relationship between the appellant and the two children and there
         was a lack of detail in the witness statements provided. Ms
         Isherwood therefore submitted that there was no genuine subsisting
         relationship with children.


     10) In the alternative, she submitted that it would be reasonable for
         the children to live in Nigeria. The starting point in the decision
         in KO (Nigeria) was the "real world context" and that the conduct
         of the appellant is indirectly material to this issue. The children
         do not have to leave, they can remain with their mother. In respect
         of the decision of JG, the appellant in that case was an overstayer
         but here the appellant is more than overstayer.

80. Miss Sharma made the following submissions:

      1) She acknowledged that the appellant could not meet the Rules and
         that the claim was based on Article 8 outside of the rules based on
         the genuine subsisting relationship between the appellant and his
         two children.


      2) She acknowledged that there had been some difficulties in the
         evidence as outlined by Ms Isherwood but that this may have been
         due to difficulties with problems of language. In particular, the
         witness statement which the appellant's partner had said was taken
         over the phone and that she had not seen it. It could be that there
         had been an element of not understanding and that it was not a case
         of anyone being evasive. She submitted that a detailed witness
         statement been provided which corroborated their account that they
         had met, became intimate and that the relationships of their
         respective parties had broken down and that they began to live
         together. This was further corroborated by a letter from K
         (undated) which stated that he had been in a genuine relationship
         with her and that they decided to get married in September 2014
         when she found out that he'd had an affair, they decided to have a
         break but that they were still communicating with each other.


      3) Miss Sharma submitted that irrespective of any past events, a long
         time had elapsed, and the appellant and his partner E lived
         together as a family unit with the two children. There were letters
         of support from a number of places including the church and the
         children's schools which demonstrated that there was an ongoing
         interest in both children and was supportive of the fact that this
         was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


      4) She submitted that it would not be reasonable to expect the
         children to live in Nigeria with their parents. Both adults were
         from different areas of Nigeria and spoke different languages as
         demonstrated by the English which was used in the home.


      5) It would also not be reasonable to separate the children from their
         father. The temporary effects upon the child G was set out in
         evidence and that the school were concerned about behaviour and
         described as being withdrawn and G's mother was called into school
         twice. Given that there had been an effect upon G when the parties
         were separated for a short period, there was a greater likelihood
         of stronger harm if permanently separated.


      6) The evidence demonstrated that they lived together as a family
         since 2015 and as the appellant was unable to work, he has looked
         after the children.


      7) The appellant has had no status in the UK since June 2014 and has
         overstayed since that time but it is clear from the photographs
         that he is in an ongoing genuine and subsisting relationship with
         both his partner and children and both have given evidence as to
         why would not be reasonable the children to return to Nigeria as a
         family unit. They are from different regions and speak different
         languages. There are no family members that they communicate with,
         neither child has lived in Nigeria and both are British citizens
         and their nationality is of importance to the decision.


      8) When looking at the best interests of the children there was ample
         evidence to show that the relationship had been genuine and
         subsisting since 2015. In those circumstances S116B (6) applied and
         the appeal should be allowed.

81. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.


Findings of fact and analysis of the evidence:

82. The starting point of my consideration of the findings of fact made by
    the FtTJ. For the reasons set out in my earlier decision, the findings
    of the fact made were not infected by any error therefore were
    preserved.


83. The judge found that the appellant had been inconsistent about when his
    relationships began with each of the women involved (see paragraph 35
    of the FtTJ). In respect of his relationship with K, the EEA national,
    he gave two dates as to when the relationship began-2011 and 2014. The
    judge found that his evidence that he had embarked on an affair in 2012
    suggested that the relationship with K, the EEA national must have
    started in 2011 on the basis that he could not have had an affair if
    his relationship with the EEA national had not begun until 2014.

84. The FtTJ found that the sponsor E had given birth to a child in 2013
    prior to his subsequent marriage to K, the EEA national in 2014. As to
    the circumstances in which the appellant was encountered by the
    immigration authorities in January 2015, the judge found that the EEA
    national K was not present as she had travelled to Belgium. The judge
    rejected his evidence that he had been intending to apply for a
    residence card based on his relationship with K. The appellant's
    evidence before the FtTJ and that of his partner E was that they had
    been living together at the same address and in a relationship. The
    FtTJ found that that did not sit well with his claim that he was still
    intending to make an application for a residence card (see paragraph 36
    of the FtTJ decision).

85. As his relationship with his partner E, the judge found that he had
    claimed that they had been living together since February 2013 which
    was the basis of his application for leave as a partner. However,
    despite that claim, at the enforcement visit in January 2015, the
    appellant failed to make any reference to his relationship with E or
    his child G. The judge found at [37] that the appellant had not
    provided any explanation for his failure to refer to E or his child.
    The judge found that his evidence was also inconsistent with the letter
    he provided to the respondent dated 19 January 2015 that the appellant
    had moved on with his life but still saw his daughter (see paragraph 38
    of the FtTJ decision and the decision letter).

86. As the appellant married the EEA national K by proxy on 17 September
    2014, the judge found that he could not have been in a relationship
    akin to marriage with the sponsor since January 2013.

87. The judge therefore made an omnibus finding it [40] that "the appellant
    attempted to rely on to relationships in circumstances where the
    chronology suggests that neither the relationship could have been
    genuine and subsisting at the same time."

88. The judge went on to state that "whilst the requirements of the rules
    do not incorporate the need to examine whether a person's behaviour is
    morally reprehensible, in light of the admission of the extramarital
    affair by the appellant, I find that if the appellant is seeking to
    rely on one of his relationships (with the sponsor in this appeal close
    bags, this requires an extermination of the relationship at all
    material times. I find that the chronology in this appeal does not
    support a finding that the appellant and the sponsor had been in a
    relationship akin to marriage since January 2013...."

89. Whilst those findings of fact were preserved, both the appellant and
    her partner have given evidence seeking to undermine those findings of
    fact. Ms Sharma has not sought to address that evidence in her closing
    submissions. She acknowledged that their evidence had not been
    consistent and had been discrepant and whilst she did not address the
    specifics of that evidence, she submitted that it could be due to
    problems of language and an element of not understanding what they had
    been asked rather than being evasive as submitted by Ms Isherwood.

90. I have had the opportunity to hear both of the parties give their
    evidence and where they have given evidence concerning their past
    history, I am satisfied that their evidence is not consistent as to the
    important events in the history and chronology.

91. I give by way of example, the appellant's evidence that he was not
    aware of G's birth until she was born in May 2013 and that the
    relationship with E did not start until he was detained in 2015. The
    appellant's partner's evidence was entirely to the contrary. She stated
    in her oral evidence that she did not tell the appellant that he was
    the father of G until late March 2015 when she went to visit him in
    custody and that this was the first time that he knew. That evidence
    was given to explain why he had not mentioned G when he was arrested.
    That is wholly inconsistent with the appellants evidence. The
    inconsistency could not be accounted for in the way Miss Sharma
    suggested.

92. A further inconsistency in her account relates to when his relationship
    ended with K and the circumstances. She claimed in evidence that her
    relationship with E broke down because he found out that he was not
    father of G. She further stated that ensued between her and E which was
    overheard by K and that she had left the appellant due to this however,
    this is contrary to the account given that K left in July 2014 which is
    a number of months after the date the incident occurred.

93. As to the date when the relationship began with the appellant, E had
    previously set out in her witness statement that the relationship had
    begun in 2013. When this was put to her, she denied saying this,
    claiming that English was not a first language only "a friendship" but
    that the solicitor had "put another thing." I do not find that that
    account is supported by the material before the tribunal. The FtTJ
    recorded at [20] that E adopted her witness statement dated 16 January
    2018 and the contents of it as "true and accurate". There was no
    attempt made to change any of the contents of the witness statement on
    the basis that it was inaccurate in any way.

94. As to the appellant's relationship with EEA national K, the FtTJ found
    that there was no evidence that the parties had been in a relationship
    or to support them living together in a property before her departure
    from the UK. There was a typed letter from K, but the judge recorded
    that the envelope was not provided and that she did not attend the
    hearing. Nor was there any documentary evidence in their joint names in
    the tenancy agreement for the property which it was asserted that they
    lived, was in the joint names only of the appellant and E.

95. Despite the oral evidence from both the appellant and E that the
    appellant is still in touch with K and they are on good terms and that
    correspondence still arrived at the property addressed to K in her
    name, no further evidence has been provided in support of any
    cohabitation at that address.

96. Consequently, having considered the evidence and the findings of fact
    previously made by the FtTJ, it is not been demonstrated that they have
    been undermined in any material respect. It follows that I am not
    satisfied that the appellant or E have given a credible and consistent
    account as to the nature of their relationship and when it began.

97. Nor am I satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that he was ever
    in a genuine relationship with K given the lack of credible evidence as
    to the relationship, as before the FtTJ and the failure to provide any
    further cogent evidence in support. Neither advocate has sought to
    address the issue as to whether this was a "marriage of convenience" by
    reference to the necessary legal test and it has not been pursued on
    this basis before the Upper Tribunal by the respondent. However, in the
    light of the findings made by the FtTJ as preserved and my assessment,
    it remains the position that he has not demonstrated by any credible
    evidence that the relationship, if genuine at the time it began,
    subsisted in any material way by way of cohabitation or otherwise.

98. I consider that it is more likely than not that the difficulties in the
    evidence are caused by the parties seeking to conceal the true nature
    of the relationship at a time when the appellant was asserting that he
    was in a relationship with K. This does not undermine the other
    findings made by Judge Mayanara in the decision made on the EEA
    application that relates to E, in which the judge noted that the
    respondent did not challenge the genuineness of the relationship
    between E and her EEA national partner, L.

99. Notwithstanding those findings, I am required to consider the evidence
    as to the appellants relationship with his partner and children who are
    now 6 and 3 years of age. The FtTJ, whilst forming a negative view of
    the appellant did not make any findings of fact as to the circumstances
    of the children or their relationship with the appellant nor the
    current relationship between the appellant and the sponsor.

100. Having considered the evidence in its totality I am satisfied that it
    demonstrates that the appellant and E are in a genuine and subsisting
    relationship. As Miss Isherwood acknowledged in her closing
    submissions, there are a large number of documents in the bundle which
    demonstrates that they have been living together at the same address
    for a number of years. Whilst that by itself may not be weighty
    evidence, the birth of their second child in 2016 supports the evidence
    of the appellant and E as to the continuing cohabitation and
    relationship. There is also independent evidence in the form of letters
    from the school where the children attend and the church that both
    parties present as a couple along with their children as a family unit.



101. I now turn to the evidence concerning the appellant's relationship
    with the two children. I have taken into account the evidence of the
    appellant. He was asked about his relationship with his two children
    and he stated that he had a fatherly relationship with both children
    and that they did things together. They called him "their hero". He
    said they do "everything together". When asked to give further detail,
    he said that when they are not at school and at home they go to the
    library or after school it is bad weather, and he teaches them; goes
    through books with them. He said he studied education for his 2nd
    degree. He said that his input and improved G's work that she was the
    "best in class". He said his input help them in school and that G is
    ahead of other children the class.

102. He described her bringing a card home every Friday and that he would
    go to the teachers at school and discuss children there. He thought
    that he had visited their previous school three times in the present
    one four times.


103. He was asked how much time he spent with the children and stated that
    when it home, they are all together. He stated that E worked as a
    security officer and that when she works on a Friday night he looks
    after the children and during school holidays.

104. When asked if the children had ever been apart from him, he said the
    only time was when the eldest child went to stay with his sister. This
    was last year, and it was the only time that he'd been apart from his
    children save for that when he was in detention between January and
    March 2015. He was asked to describe how G reacted to him being in
    detention. He stated "it was reported at school that she was not eating
    and feeling sick and when she was at school, she was saddened she was
    crying. She did not want to tell people that her father was in
    detention, but she did tell the teacher."

105. The evidence of E set out at paragraph 14 of her witness statement,
    describes them sharing joint parental responsibility for their two
    daughters and that they both made decisions regarding major and daily
    aspects of their life. She stated S had always been actively involved
    in their life by dropping them at school and picking them up after
    school. He attended meetings at school when needed and helped with
    homework. It was said that G was ahead of the class because of extra
    lessons of father was giving her home. At paragraph 15 she stated that
    they went to church together as a family each week sometimes S would go
    with both daughters when she was tired. He cares for the children and
    does domestic work at home. They go to the GP and hospital together
    when the children are not feeling well.


106. The evidence of the appellant and E provide a picture of a subsisting
    family unit. However given the general lack of credibility as to other
    parts of the evidence, I have considered whether there is any evidence
    that could be viewed as independent of the parties. In this respect,
    there are a number of letters from the children's schools, nursery, and
    friends which lends support and weight to that evidence. There is a
    letter from the nursery (April 2016) which evidences the parental
    relationship between the appellant and his children (and also supports
    the relationship with E). It confirms that both regularly bring and
    collect G from nursery, and this also refers to the time when she was a
    baby. It further confirms that the appellant plays a parental part in
    G's life (page 72). There are letters from the church (page 321) from
    2016 confirming the family attend together and that G was baptised at
    church with the family. There are further up-to-date letters, from 2018
    and 2019 confirming that both parents are involved in the upbringing of
    their children (pages 45 - 46).


107. At page 3 of the additional bundle there is a letter from G herself
    and refers to the activities that she hunter father undertake and
    family life she has with him.

108. Consequently, having considered the evidence in its totality, I am
    satisfied that there is a genuine subsisting relationship between the
    appellant and both children and that they live together as a
    functioning family unit.

109. By virtue of section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009, in making decisions on removal, the Secretary of  State  must
    have regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
    children who are in the UK.

110. The House of Lords, in ZH (Tanzania) v Home Secretary [2011]2 AC 166  ,
    held that, in the application of  article  8(2),  the  children's  best
    interests should be treated  as  "a  primary  consideration",  to  give
    effect to article 3.1 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child.
    Nationality and the rights of citizenship are of particular  importance
    in assessing the best interests of any child. Thus, the  decision-maker
    must ask whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  live  in
    another country, and to be deprived of the opportunity to exercise  the
    rights of a British citizen. However, even if it is found to be in  the
    best interests of the child to remain in the UK,  that  factor  can  be
    outweighed by the strength of "countervailing considerations" in favour
    of removal (per Lady Hale at [29] - [33]).

111.  In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC
    74, Lord Hodge, delivering the judgment of the  Court,  summarised  the
    principles to be applied, at [10]:

         "(1)     The best interests of a child are an integral part of  the
         proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

         (2)      In making that assessment, the best interests of  a  child
         must be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
         primary consideration; and the child's best  interests  do  not  of
         themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

         (3)      Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed
         by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no   other
         consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)      While different judges might approach the question of  the
         best interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
         oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to  avoid
         the risk that the best interests of a child  might  be  undervalued
         when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)      It is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
         circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests before one
         asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the force of
         other considerations;

         (6)       To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
         examination of all relevant factors when the interests of  a  child
         are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

         (7)      A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
         is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."



112. I have carried out an assessment of the best interests of the children
    based on the evidence and in accordance with Section 55 of the 2009
    Act. There is no dispute that the best interest must be considered and
    assessed in isolation form other factors, such as parental misconduct
    (see Kaur (children's best interests/public interface) [2017] UKUT00014
    (IAC).

113. In the light of my assessment that appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with the two children concerned, it would
    plainly be in the best interests of the children for their current
    stable environment, in which both parents are present playing their
    respective parts, to continue. I take their best interests into account
    as a primary consideration. It would not be in their best interests for
    the children to be parted from the appellant, either on a temporary
    basis or on a permanent basis given the nature of the relationship and
    the effect upon G when they were separated in 2015.

Discussion:

114. It is accepted on behalf of the applicant that he cannot meet the
    Rules for the reasons set out in the FtTJ decision. Miss Sharma
    conceded that he could not meet the requirements under Appendix FM and
    under Paragraph 276ADE. The relevant findings under Paragraph 276ADE
    are as follows:

      1) The appellant is over 18 years of age and has not continuously
         resided in the United Kingdom for 20 years given his arrival in the
         UK in February 2011 as a student. Therefore, he cannot meet
         paragraph 276 ADE (1)(i)-(v).


      2) As to whether there were very significant obstacles to his
         reintegration to Nigeria, the FtTJ found that there were no such
         obstacles for the reasons set out at paragraphs 65 - 66.


      3) The judge found that the appellant had spent the majority of his
         life in Nigeria where he had family to whom he could return. It did
         not been suggested that he had lost any connection to his country
         of origin that would suggest significant obstacle to integration
         there. There was no evidence he was a stranger in his family and
         the judge did not accept that he did not keep in touch with his
         family after he came to the United Kingdom. He has children in
         Nigeria from his previous relationship. The judge found that the
         appellant was a healthy man and was not suffering from any medical
         condition that would be likely to impair his ability to
         independently meet the needs of day-to-day living. Even if he did
         not have any familial ties in Nigeria, the judge found that he
         would be capable of living independently. The judge found that he
         had linguistic, cultural and family attachments to Nigeria and that
         any loss of connection to Nigeria in the time that he had been in
         the United Kingdom would be quickly recovered.


115. Miss Sharma advances the appellant's case based on  Article  8  outside
    of the rules. Applying the test set out in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  54,  I
    find that the appellant has formed a family life with her partner E and
    British children. His removal to Nigeria would be an interference  with
    the family life they share, but would be in accordance  with  the  law,
    given that the appellant is an overstayer since his leave ended in July
    2014. The issue is whether his removal would be proportionate.

116. As to the consideration of proportionality, I am  required  to  address
    the public interest considerations set out at section 117B of the  NIAA
    2002.

Sections 117A - D NIAA 2002.

117. Sections 117A-D NIAA 2002 have set out public  interest  considerations
    which a court or tribunal must take into account  in  an  appeal  based
    upon article 8:

         "117A Application of this Part


         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.


         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and


             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
         the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases


         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.


         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)      Little weight should be given to-"


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.


         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.


         117D Interpretation of this Part


         (1)      In this Part-


         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;


         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-


             (a) is a British citizen, or


             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;


         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-"


             (a) is a British citizen, or


             (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).


118. By reference to those factors, the appellant does speak English  (s117B
    (2)) and has in the past been able to financially  support  himself  by
    his employment as evidenced by the salary  slips,  he  provided.  I  am
    satisfied that on the basis of his work history provided  he  would  be
    financially independent if he remained in the UK.

119. As to when he formed his relationship with his partner,  I  have  found
    that neither the  appellant  nor  his  partner  have  given  consistent
    evidence as to when that relationship started  but  on  the  chronology
    provided it would have been  at a time when his leave was precarious  (
    as a student) or  unlawful  when  was  an  overstayer:  s117B  (4)  and
    therefore little weight should be attached to that relationship and the
    private life established. In addition, the FtTJ Judge  found  that  the
    appellant had attempted to utilise all possible avenues  to  remain  in
    the UK.

120. Both advocates agree that I should decide whether s.117B(6)(b)  of  the
    2002  Act  is  satisfied,  i.e.  whether  it  is  reasonable  for   the
    appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom. If it is satisfied, I
    would allow the appeal on  human  rights  grounds  on  the  basis  that
    s.117B(6)(b) is satisfied. If not, I would be required to consider  the
    overall proportionality balance.

121. I have therefore considered the decisions relevant to the
    consideration of S 117B (6).

122. In JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to  leave"  UK)  Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  72
    (IAC) a Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal held inter alia:

         "33.     We have seen how, in KO (Nigeria), the Supreme Court had
         regard to the respondent's IDI in its examination of section 117B
         (6). In his submissions, Mr Malik drew our attention to the latest
         relevant publication of the respondent; namely "Family Migration:
         Appendix FM Section 1.0b"...


         36.      There are a number of things to say about this IDI. First,
         it cannot override ordinary principles of statutory construction.
         If, applying those principles, a court or tribunal determines that
         a statutory provision falls to be interpreted in a particular way,
         the fact that the IDI may take a different view is irrelevant.


         37.      Second, the IDI does not cite KO (Nigeria) in support of
         the proposition that it is only where the child would be required
         to leave the United Kingdom that EX.1. (b) or section 117B (6)
         falls to be considered. The citation of KO (Nigeria) merely
         recognises that, in deciding what would be reasonable, one must
         have regard to the fact that one or both parents is liable to
         removal under immigration powers (see paragraph 27 above).


         38.      Third (and relatedly), a previous version of the IDI, pre-
         dating KO (Nigeria), contained statements to the effect that if the
         departure of a parent would not result in the child being required
         to leave the United Kingdom, the question of whether it was
         reasonable to expect the child to leave would not arise. This was
         noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in SR (subsisting parental
         relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 334 (IAC) . At
         paragraph 50 of her decision, Judge Plimmer said that "This aspect
         of the 2018 IDI provides an untenable construction of the plain and
         ordinary meaning of EX.1. and section 117B (6)". At paragraph 51,
         she held that "Self-evidently, section 117B (6) is engaged whether
         the child will or will not in fact or practice leave the UK". For
         the reasons we have given, nothing in KO (Nigeria) affects the
         correctness of her conclusion.


         39.      We do not consider our construction of section 117B(6) can
         be affected by the respondent's submission that, in cases where -
         on his interpretation - the subsection does not have purchase (i.e.
         because the child would not in practice leave the United Kingdom),
         there would nevertheless need to be a full-blown proportionality
         assessment, compatibly with the other provisions of Part 5A of the
         2002 Act, with the result that a person with parental
         responsibility who could not invoke section 117B(6) may,
         nevertheless, succeed in a human rights appeal.


         40.      Such an assessment would, however, have to take account of
         the immigration history of the person subject to removal; so there
         could well be a very real difference between the outcome of that
         exercise, and one conducted under section 117B (6). But the real
         point is that this submission does not begin to affect the plain
         meaning of subsection (6). If, as we have found, Parliament has
         decreed a particular outcome by enacting section 117B (6), then
         that is the end of the matter.


         41.      We accept that this interpretation may result in an
         underserving individual or family remaining in the United Kingdom.
         However, the fact that Parliament has mandated such an outcome
         merely means that, in such cases, Parliament has decided to be more
         generous than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998. It
         can be regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part 5A of
         imposing greater consistency in decision-making in this area by
         courts and tribunals. The fact that section 117B (6) has such an
         aim was expressly recognised by Elias LJ at paragraph 44 of MA
         (Pakistan) ...


         80.      Our assessment of the appellant is that she is both
         dishonest and unscrupulous, each to a high degree. She has
         flagrantly defied the law of the United Kingdom by overstaying her
         leave for a large number of years, without bothering to seek to
         regularise her status; by making entry clearance applications that
         she knew full well were predicated on an entirely false basis; and
         in gaining access to the United Kingdom ...


         96.      We therefore conclude that, on the facts of this case, it
         would not be reasonable to expect the appellant's children to leave
         the United Kingdom, in the event of her removal. This means the
         appellant's appeal succeeds. It does so because Parliament has
         stated, in terms, that the public interest does not require her
         removal, in these circumstances. It does so despite the fact that,
         absent section 117B (6), the appellant's removal would be
         proportionate in terms of Article 8 of the ECHR."


123. I have not been provided with the guidance by either of  the  advocates
    nor have I been addressed upon it. The relevant  Home  Office  guidance
    entitled: "Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as a
    Partner or Parent) and Private  Life:  10-Year  Routes",  version  4.0,
    published 11 April 2019. the guidance states:

         "Will the consequence of refusal of the  application  be  that  the
         child is required to leave the UK?


         The decision maker must consider whether the effect of  refusal  of
         the application would be, or would be likely to be, that the  child
         would have to leave the UK. This will not be  the  case  where,  in
         practice, the child will, or is likely to, continue to live in  the
         UK with another parent or primary carer. This will be likely to  be
         the case where for example:


           o the child does not live with the applicant


           o the child's parents are not living  together  on  a  permanent
             basis  because  the  applicant  parent  has  work   or   other
             commitments which  require  them  to  live  apart  from  their
             partner and child


           o the child's other parent lives in the  UK  and  the  applicant
             parent has been here as a visitor and therefore  undertook  to
             leave the UK at the end of their visit as a condition of their
             visit visa or leave to enter


         If the departure of the parent or carer would  not  result  in  the
         child being required to leave the UK, because the child will (or is
         likely to) remain living here with another parent or primary carer,
         then the question of whether it is reasonable to expect  the  child
         to leave the UK will not arise. In these  circumstances,  paragraph
         EX.1. (a) does not apply.


         However,  where  there  is  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship between the applicant and the child,  the  removal  of
         the applicant may still disrupt their relationship with that child.
         For that reason, the decision maker will  still  need  to  consider
         whether, in the round, removal of the applicant is  appropriate  in
         light of all the real-life circumstances of the case,  taking  into
         account the best interests of the child as a primary  consideration
         and the impact on the child of the applicant's departure  from  the
         UK, or them having to leave the UK with them. If it  is  considered
         that refusal would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
         applicant, the child or their family, leave will fall to be granted
         on the basis of exceptional circumstances.


         Would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?


         If the effect of refusal of the application would be, or is  likely
         to be, that the child would have to  leave  the  UK,  the  decision
         maker must consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK.


         Where there is a qualifying child


         A child is a qualifying child if they are a British child  who  has
         an automatic right of abode in the UK, to  live  here  without  any
         immigration restrictions as a result of their citizenship, or a non-
         British citizen child, who has lived in the  UK  for  a  continuous
         period of at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of
         application, which recognises that over time children start to  put
         down roots and to integrate into life in the UK. The starting point
         is that we would not normally expect a qualifying  child  to  leave
         the UK. It is normally in a child's best  interest  for  the  whole
         family to remain. "


124. It is clear from the above extract that the guidance  does  not  appear
    to take account of the decisions in JG or KO.

125. Therefore, I determine the Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    facts set out at above, the guidance in KO and JG, the guidance and the
    best interests of the Appellant's children, both of  whom  are  British
    Citizens. My assessment of the best interests of the  children  is  set
    out earlier in the decision. They are a primary consideration and not a
    "trump card".

126. I observe that the FtTJ appeared to be state that the appellant  and  E
    could leave the  UK  with  the  children  on  a  temporary  basis  (see
    paragraphs 87). It is unclear whether the judge  was  stating  that  is
    reasonable for  a  child  to  accompany  one  of  his  or  her  parents
    temporarily to that parent's home country whilst the  parent  makes  an
    entry clearance application. This question is unlikely to  arise  in  a
    case where both parents of a qualifying child  face  removal.  It  does
    arise on the facts of this appeal, where one  parent  of  a  qualifying
    child is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom (as a settled person)
    who is therefore able to act as sponsor to the parent facing removal in
    an entry clearance application.

127.  The Tribunal in JG at paras 89-91 stated:

         "89.      Section  117B  (6)  concerns   an   assessment   of   the
         reasonableness of a child's leaving the United Kingdom. It does not
         expressly demand an assessment of reasonableness  by  reference  to
         the length of time the child is expected to be outside  the  United
         Kingdom. In the light of paragraphs 18 and 19 of KO (Nigeria),  the
         child's destination and future are to be assumed  to  be  with  the
         person who is being removed.  In  a  case  where  the  respondent's
         position is that the person who is being removed can be expected to
         make  an  entry  clearance  application,  does  this  require   the
         Tribunal's assessment to take this  into  account,  in  determining
         whether it would be reasonable for the child to leave?  There  may,
         obviously, be a good deal of  difference  between  a  child  living
         outside the United Kingdom for a matter of  months  and  facing  an
         indefinite period abroad.


         90.      We did not hear submissions  on  this  specific  question.
         Certainly, Mr Malik did not advance it as  a  reason  why,  if  his
         construction of  section  117B  (6)  were  not  adopted,  it  would
         nevertheless be reasonable for the children to leave.


         91.      In the circumstances, we do not consider it  necessary  to
         resolve the question; at least, in its stark  form.  The  Chikwamba
         principle is predicated on the assumption  that,  where  there  are
         children, it is not envisaged that they would be expected to go and
         stay  with  the  parent  concerned,  whilst  the  latter  makes  an
         application for entry clearance. To  envisage  otherwise  would  be
         almost to stand the principle on its head."


128. Whilst the Tribunal did not hear submissions on  the  point  I  do  not
    consider that the S117B(6) properly read  supports  any  analysis  that
    such  parents of qualifying children can reasonably  leave  the  United
    Kingdom for a  temporary  period  whilst  the  parent  makes  an  entry
    clearance application and thus should being  excluded  from  benefiting
    from s.117B(6). The section does not  read  in  that  way  and  in  the
    absence of any words of qualification, I am satisfied that  "leave  the
    United Kingdom" in s.117B(6)(b) refers to a child  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom in order to live permanently out of the United Kingdom..

129. Miss Isherwood submits that the  Tribunal  should  consider  the  "real
    world analysis". At paras 18-19 of KO (Nigeria) the  following  is  set
    out:

         "18.     On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
         seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where
         the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here and having to leave. It is only if, even on  that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:


             "22.      In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."


         19.      He noted at (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made  a  similar
         point in considering  the  "best  interests"  of  children  in  the
         context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


             "58.      In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the
             best interests of the children must be made on the basis  that
             the facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has
             no right to remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"


         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."


130. Para 19 of the judgment in KO (Nigeria) approves  of  para  58  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment in EV (Philippines) where  Lewison  LJ  said
    that "the best interests of a child must be assessed on the basis  that
    the facts are as they are in the real world" and that  "If  one  parent
    has no right to  remain,  but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
    background against which the assessment is conducted".

131. I therefore conclude that any assessment of the facts "as they  are  in
    the real world" must include consideration of whether it is  reasonable
    for the parent who is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom to leave
    the United Kingdom with the parent facing removal.  It seems to me that
    Miss Ishwerwood is correct  in her submission and that  the  Tribunal's
    duty to assess the facts as  they  are  in  the  real  world  does  not
    preclude it from considering whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  a
    British citizen parent of a qualifying child to enjoy family life  with
    the child and the parent facing removal outside the United  Kingdom  in
    reaching  its  conclusion  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    qualifying child to leave  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of
    s.117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act.

132. In considering the circumstances of each  of  the  children,  the  fact
    that they are British citizens is an important factor. I remind  myself
    of paragraph 30 of ZH (Tanzania) which I take into  account  and  which
    reads as follows:

         "30.     Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of
         particular importance in assessing the best interests of any child.
         The UNCRC recognises the right of every child to be registered  and
         acquire a nationality (Article 7) and  to  preserve  her  identity,
         including her nationality (Article 8). In Wan, the Federal Court of
         Australia, pointed out  at  para  30  that,  when  considering  the
         possibility of the children accompanying their father to China, the
         tribunal had not considered any of the following matters, which the
         Court clearly regarded as important:


             (a) the fact that the  children,  as  citizens  of  Australia,
             would be deprived of  the  country  of  their  own  and  their
             mother's citizenship, 'and  of  its  protection  and  support,
             socially, culturally and medically, and  in  many  other  ways
             evoked  by,  but  not  confined  to,  the  broad  concept   of
             lifestyle' (Vaitaiki v Minister  for  Immigration  and  Ethnic
             Affairs [1998] FCA 5 , (1998) 150 ALR 608, 614);


             (b) the resultant social and linguistic  disruption  of  their
             childhood as well as the loss of their homeland;


              (c)      the loss of educational opportunities  available  to
             the children in Australia; and


             (d) their resultant isolation  from  the  normal  contacts  of
             children with their mother and their mother's family."


133. If the appellant's children were to go to live in Nigeria,  they  would
    lose out on the opportunities of growing up in the United Kingdom,  the
    country of their nationality, the loss of educational opportunities and
    any medical services available to children in the United Kingdom.

134. Neither child speaks any of the Nigerian languages referred to  in  the
    evidence and therefore there will be language barriers that  they  both
    will face. Their parents speak different languages themselves and  come
    from different regions in Nigeria, although I accept  that  English  is
    spoken in Nigeria.  I take account of their respective ages which are 6
    and 3 years of age. The eldest child G is in mainstream  education  and
    according to the reports she  is  doing  well  in  her  education.  The
    youngest child has started nursery although in view of her young age, I
    take into account that her life is very much dependant upon that of the
    adults. However, the circumstances are different for  G  who  is  in  a
    different  position  and  is  more  attached  and  integrated  via  her
    education, her friendships and her church attendance. Her ties  to  the
    UK are considerable.

135. Both children were born in the UK and have not been to Nigeria or  have
    any experience of that country. By way  of  comparison,  both  children
    have other family members in the UK in  the  form  of  the  appellant's
    sister with whom they have some contact.   Whilst  I  accept  that  the
    appellant and his partner have relatives living in Nigeria, it has  not
    been established that the children have  any  meaningful  relationships
    with any relatives that are living in Nigeria.

136. I take into account that both children are  in  good  health  and  that
    whilst it is been stated that G has had some problems in 2016, it  does
    not appear that this affects her functioning in any  material  way  and
    that this would not prevent  her  living  in  a  different  country.  I
    further take into account that the FtTJ found that the appellant  could
    re-establish himself in Nigeria in the light of his retained links with
    the country and her findings as to why there were no  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration.

137. My analysis of the evidence above is that the appellant has  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with both his partner and the children. The
    specific issue that requires  determination,  however,  is  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the appellant's children to leave the UK:
    s117B (6) of the NIAA 2002. I find that JG requires a  hypothesis  that
    they would leave. Both children are British citizens. They are now aged
    6 and 3 years.  I find, for the reasons set out in JG and KO  (Nigeria)
    that the issue has to be  determined  separately  from  their  father's
    conduct and as a result of the assessment that I  have  made  above,  I
    find that on balance that it would be contrary to their best  interests
    but I also find that it would be unreasonable to expect them  to  leave
    the UK. Whilst the  respondent  relied  upon  the  appellant's  general
    conduct, both paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and S117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 are
    directed  solely  to  the  position  of  the  child  and  contain   "no
    requirement to consider the criminality or misconduct of a parent as  a
    balancing factor".

138. It follows, therefore, that the public interest does  not  require  the
    appellant's removal, notwithstanding the adverse findings made. As  the
    tribunal observed in JG at [39-41]:

         "39.     We do not consider our construction of section 117B(6) can
         be affected by the respondent's submission that, in cases  where  -
         on his interpretation - the subsection does not have purchase (i.e.
         because the child would not in practice leave the United  Kingdom),
         there would nevertheless need to be  a  full-blown  proportionality
         assessment, compatibly with the other provisions of Part 5A of  the
         2002  Act,  with  the  result   that   a   person   with   parental
         responsibility  who  could  not   invoke   section   117B(6)   may,
         nevertheless, succeed in a human rights appeal.


         40.      Such an assessment would, however, have to take account of
         the immigration history of the person subject to removal; so, there
         could well be a very real difference between the  outcome  of  that
         exercise, and one conducted under section 117B (6).  But  the  real
         point is that this submission does not begin to  affect  the  plain
         meaning of subsection (6). If, as we  have  found,  Parliament  has
         decreed a particular outcome by enacting  section  117B  (6),  then
         that is the end of the matter.


         41.      We accept  that  this  interpretation  may  result  in  an
         underserving individual or family remaining in the United  Kingdom.
         However, the fact that Parliament  has  mandated  such  an  outcome
         merely means that, in such cases, Parliament has decided to be more
         generous than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998. It
         can be regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part 5A of
         imposing greater consistency in decision-making  in  this  area  by
         courts and tribunals. The fact that section 117B (6)  has  such  an
         aim was expressly recognised by Elias LJ  at  paragraph  44  of  MA
         (Pakistan)."




Notice of Decision


139. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  to  be  re-
    made as follows:
    Pursuant to section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act (as amended),  the  public
    interest does not require  the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him, his partner or children.   This  direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed [pic]
                                        Date    17 /7/2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
