
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21439/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 May 2017                           |On 30 May 2017                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                       mrs eIshah ahmed mohammed asem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Khan, Counsel, instructed by Parkview
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Yemen, applied for entry  clearance  as  an
    adult dependent relative under para EC-DR1.1. of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that she was the sponsor's mother.  In a
    decision dated 9 August 2016 the  respondent  refused  her  application
    because she had not shown she was related as claimed.  Her appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Robertson who in a decision sent
    on 25 January 2017 dismissed it.

2.   Judge Robertson accepted that the appellant had  established  that  she
    was related as claimed and  also  found  that  the  appellant  met  the
    financial and accommodation requirements of the Rules.  The judge  also
    accepted that the medical evidence established that  the  appellant  is
    severely disabled, that she requires  "urgent  and  permanent  personal
    care" and that the level of care  she  requires  is  not  available  in
    Yemen, both on the public and private levels.  The judge dismissed  the
    appeal  nevertheless  because  she   was   not   satisfied   that   the
    appellant/sponsor had given a credible account of how care was provided
    to the appellant and by whom between 2013,  after  she  was  discharged
    from hospital and  mid-2016,  when  she  was  readmitted  to  hospital,
    particularly given that it was their account that the appellant and the
    lady with whom it was said she resided with lived in a garage and  were
    both elderly and seriously  ill  (paras  27-28).   The  judge  attached
    adverse weight to the fact that the appellant and sponsor  provided  no
    evidence from the people who were said to have cared for the  appellant
    in Aden and the sponsor had not shown she had used best  endeavours  to
    trace her brothers in Yemen.  The judge noted that despite  making  use
    of the Red Cross to try and trace her mother, father  and  brothers  in
    2008, she had made no efforts to trace her siblings  since,  concluding
    at 30 IV that "[i]n the absence of reliable evidence to  the  contrary,
    there is nothing to suggest that the Sponsor's siblings  (the  sons  of
    the Appellant) are not with her in the  Yemen".   The  judge  concluded
    therefore that the appellant had not shown that there was no person  in
    Yemen who could reasonably provide  her  with  the  personal  care  she
    requires in Yemen and so failed to meet the  requirements  set  out  in
    para E-ECDR.2.5.

3.   The judge also found that the appellant failed to meet  the  conditions
    set out in E-ECDR.3.1 which include the requirements that the appellant
    must provide evidence that she will be adequately cared for in  the  UK
    without recourse to public funds.  The  judge  made  reference  to  the
    respondent's guidance on the elderly dependent relative  provisions  in
    which it is stated at para 2.3.4(e) that when the sponsor  proposes  to
    provide personal care, planned care arrangements for the applicant must
    be provided, together with the costs of such care  (para  30  VI).   At
    para 30 VII the judge stated:

         "The Appellant has significant care needs.   Although  the  Sponsor
         has signed an undertaking  that  she  will  provide  care  for  the
         Sponsor, in evidence it was clear that she herself had  significant
         health difficulties.  When it was  put  to  her  that  she  herself
         required help, and that therefore whether she was able  to  provide
         care to someone who has the health needs described in  the  medical
         evidence was in issue, she said that she was caring for her son  so
         she could care  for  her  mother.   However,  when  describing  the
         effects of refusal of her  mother's  application  on  her  and  her
         mother, she also stated that she (the Sponsor) had  been  bedridden
         for almost 12 months after the decision was issued and had to  have
         additional care from social services for herself.  The Sponsor also
         stated that there were other times when she was provided with  care
         for herself and a nanny for her son when she  could  not  care  for
         him.  She said that she had friends, some of  whom  ran  charities,
         who had put together a rota to care for her when she was  not  able
         to care for herself and they had guaranteed that  they  would  help
         her with her mother.  However,  there  was  no  evidence  from  her
         friends, and this is  evidence  that  could  reasonably  have  been
         provided."

     The judge went on to  consider  whether  the  appellant  could  succeed
    outside  the  Rules  on  the  basis  of   compelling   or   exceptional
    circumstances, concluding  that  the  public  interest  outweighed  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights to respect for private and family life.

4.   The grounds of appeal are lengthy and  oddly  ordered  but  in  summary
    allege that the judge materially erred in the following respects:-

    (i)  in failing to accept the sponsor's written and  oral  evidence  of
         her contact with the Saudi authorities;


    (ii) in unreasonably inferring that simply  because  there  might  have
         been somebody who had tended to the appellant's care that they  are
         now necessarily able and willing to continue to provide the care;


    (iii)    in  erroneously  stating  that  in  order  to  meet  the  care
         requirements of the Rules an applicant  needed  to  establish  "how
         care was provided and why it cannot now be provided";


    (iv) in finding  that  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  the  sponsor's
         siblings are not with the  appellant  in  Yemen  -  based,  it  was
         submitted, on pure speculation;


    (v)  in failing to have regard to the medical reports which made  clear
         that the care the appellant has received in Yemen is  insufficient,
         unstable and unsuccessful;


    (vi) in misconstruing the respondent's guidance at para 2.3.4(e), which
         does not require an applicant to provide planned care arrangements;
         and, finally,


    (vii)    in failing to carry out an adequate proportionality assessment
         - "[t]he judge bases her Article  8  assessment  on  the  erroneous
         premise that the Immigration Rules have not been met".


      I  am  grateful  to  both  parties  for  their  helpful  and  targeted
    submissions.

5.   It is not in dispute that the appellant is severely disabled.  She  has
    had three brain strokes.  She  suffers  from  Polycythemia  Vera  (PV),
    viral meningitis and other less severe conditions.  She  is  completely
    immobile and utterly incapable of performing everyday self-care.

6.   As much as the appellant's circumstances have my  sympathy,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.

7.   In relation to (i), I accept that the judge may have fallen into  error
    in assessing whether  it  was  the  sponsor  who  contacted  the  Saudi
    authorities.  It was incorrect of the judge to  state  that  there  was
    "absolutely no evidence before me,  other  than  the  [sponsor's]  oral
    evidence" that she had done  the  contacting.   The  sponsor  had  also
    stated this in her witness statement  and  the  ECO  had  recorded  the
    sponsor as contacting the MOD in Saudi Arabia on  "whether  they  could
    evacuate her mother from  Yemen".   Nevertheless,  although  the  judge
    described this consideration as adverse to the sponsor's credibility, I
    fail to see that it had a material bearing on the judge's  reasons  for
    not accepting the evidence regarding whether or not the  appellant  was
    being cared for by her brothers in the Yemen or on the failure  of  the
    appellant and sponsor to explain how the appellant had been  cared  for
    between 2013 and mid-2016.  They were the material issues and on  those
    issues the judge was entitled to have regard to the evidence as a whole
    and to not consider that the  appellant  had  provided  a  satisfactory
    explanation.  As regards (ii), I fail to see that  there  was  anything
    unreasonable in the judge inferring from the absence of evidence  about
    past care of the appellant that she could not be satisfied that she was
    presently without adequate care.

9.   As regards (iii) and indeed (vi), it is  true  that  the  judge  placed
    specific importance on the failure of the appellant  to  establish  how
    care was provided and why it cannot now be provided.  It  is  submitted
    that in doing so the judge  wrongly  assumed  that  there  was  such  a
    specified evidential requirement in either the Rules or the Home Office
    guidance.  However, in attaching importance to  the  lack  of  evidence
    about past care, I do not consider the judge was reading into the Rules
    evidential requirements that are not there.  The Rules  focus  entirely
    on the present circumstances (at the date of decision).  It has  to  be
    shown that an applicant:

         "must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because (a) it is not available and  there  is  no
         person in that country who can reasonably provide it; or ...".

10.  In my view, the judge was aware that this was  the  relevant  rule  and
    all that the judge was doing in  highlighting  the  evidence  regarding
    past care was explaining why she considered that it had not been  shown
    that the appellant was in fact failing to receive the required level of
    care from her sons and/or others.

11.  As regards (iv), I cannot accept that the  judge's  findings  regarding
    the appellant's son were entirely speculative.  It was not  in  dispute
    that the appellant had sons. The judge clearly took into  account  that
    it was the appellant's and sponsor's evidence was that  they  were  not
    helping her and were not in contact with her.   Having  regard  to  the
    evidence as a whole,  however,  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had established that her sons were out of  the  picture.   In
    this regard it was open to the judge to attach particular weight to the
    fact that the sponsor had not sought the  help  of  the  Red  Cross  to
    locate her siblings, only her mother.

12.  As to (v), and the allegation that the judge failed to have  regard  to
    the medical reports which attested that the appellant was not receiving
    adequate care, the judge noted at para 2 that she had had regard to the
    appellant's bundle (which  included  the  medical  evidence)  and  made
    specific reference to the  medical  evidence  in  paras  3  and  22-23,
    specifically quoting from the medical letter of 28 April 2016  in  para
    23.  At para 28 the judge made a specific finding that:-

         "28. Whilst I accept that the medical evidence establishes that the
             Appellant is severely disabled by her medical conditions,  and
             that there is  confirmation  that  she  requires  'urgent  and
             permanent personal care'  and  that  the  level  of  care  she
             requires 'is not available in Yemen, both on  the  public  and
             private levels',  what  is  not  established  by  the  medical
             evidence is how care was being provided  between  2013,  after
             the Appellant was discharged from hospital, and mid-2016, when
             she was readmitted to the hospital, particularly if  both  the
             Appellant and the lady with whom she is said to  have  resided
             with  in  a  garage  were  both  elderly  and  seriously  ill-
             treatment."


     At para 30 III she specifically identified what she considered  lacking
    in the medical evidence:-

         "In order to establish this, I would need evidence from  those  who
         have provided this care as to why it can no longer be provided.  In
         the medical evidence it is stated that 'it is  agreed  that  it  is
         imperative that (the Appellant) leaves  Yemen  as  soon  as  it  is
         possible for her and joins her  daughter  in  the  United  Kingdom,
         where life is safe for her  and  where  she  can  be  spending  her
         remaining years in  the  tender,  loving  care  and  mercy  of  her
         daughter, who we are certain knows and understands her best.   (The
         Appellant) is confined to one room, trapped and  alone'.   However,
         despite this, the medical evidence does not  address  how  she  was
         provided with care between 2013 and when she was readmitted in 2016
         and why this care is no longer available."

13.  Whilst it is somewhat odd for the judge to have stated at para 28  that
    the medical evidence confirms that the level of care is  not  available
    in Yemen, both on the public and private levels, it is clear  that  the
    judge's primary finding was that it had not been established  that  the
    level of care the appellant had been receiving was unavailable;  indeed
    Mr Khan did  not  seek  to  suggest  otherwise.   It  cannot  be  said,
    therefore, that the judge  failed  to  take  adequate  account  of  the
    medical evidence; she simply did not accept that it had been  shown  to
    reflect the true state of affairs.  The  judge's  adverse  findings  of
    fact on this matter were reasonably open to her.

14.  In short, I consider that the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  it
    had not been established that the appellant met the requirements of  E-
    ECDR.2.5 because she had failed to show there was no  person  in  Yemen
    reasonably able to provide her with personal care.

15.  What I have referred to above as ground (vii) moves matters on  to  the
    judge's finding that the appellant also failed to meet the requirements
    of E-ECDR.3.1 regarding evidence that the appellant can  be  reasonably
    cared for.  I am unable to  accept  that  the  judge  misconstrued  the
    relevant  requirements  of  the  Rules  or  erroneously  required   the
    appellant to show  planned  care  arrangements.   What  the  judge  was
    concerned about was not the absence of planned  care  arrangements  but
    the lack of evidence to show that the sponsor  could  provide  adequate
    care.  Paragraph 30 VII was  unequivocal  regarding  this  matter:  see
    para 3 of this determination above].

16.  Such an assessment was based on a proper understanding of the  relevant
    Rules.  Para E-ECDR.2.4 stipulates that an applicant must require long-
    term personal care to perform everyday tasks.  Para E-ECDR.3.1 requires
    an applicant  to  provide  evidence,  inter  alia,  that  they  can  be
    "adequately.... cared for in the UK by the sponsor without recourse  to
    public funds".  The requirement of  care  by  the  sponsor  to  provide
    personal care to perform everyday tasks is  regrettably  a  requirement
    that the sponsor, through no fault of her own, is unable to  meet.   Mr
    Khan has correctly pointed out that that in assessing the  likely  care
    needs of the appellant in the UK, one  must  not  have  regard  to  NHS
    treatment, but from the medical evidence as regards the appellant,  the
    treatment she would need would extend well  beyond  NHS  treatment  and
    would include attendance to  help  with  her  performance  of  everyday
    tasks.  Provision of those would involve additional recourse to  public
    funds as defined by para 6 and (b) and (c) of the sub-head  on  "public
    funds".  In addition, from the evidence before the judge  the  sponsor,
    far from being able to provide care to everyone else, was  in  need  of
    care herself.

17.  As regards ground (vii)  then  (which  takes  issue  with  the  judge's
    dismissal of the appeal on Article  8  grounds),  it  was  advanced  in
    unpromising terms in the written grounds and before me by Mr  Khan,  in
    seeking to rely on a failure to  accept  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.  She did not. That aground as advanced  thus
    falls away. However, I have examined  on  my  own  motion  the  judge's
    reasons for concluding that the appellant had not shown  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances warranting  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules.  Given the judge's primary findings of fact,  it  had  not  been
    established that the appellant was being inadequately cared for at  the
    date of decision  nor  had  it  been  established  that  she  could  be
    adequately cared for without recourse to public funds and detriment  to
    the economic wellbeing of the UK.  It also seems to me that  the  judge
    was entitled to consider  that  although  the  situation  in  Aden  was
    unstable and the security situation there likely to put life and health
    at risk, against that there was evidence  that  there  could  be  grave
    consequences if the appellant were granted entry  clearance  to  travel
    because she was in an extremely vulnerable physical  condition  and  in
    the medical letter dated 28 April 2016 it was  stated  that  "a  fourth
    stroke will mean that our patient will  be  subjected  to  certain  and
    immediate death".

18.  For the above reasons, although it is impossible considering this  case
    not to feel great sympathy for the appellant who  clearly  is  in  very
    frail health and for the sponsor who is also in  very  poor  health,  I
    conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially  err  in  law  and  her
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 26 May 2017

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

