
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/21911/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On April 30, 2018                            |On May 03, 2018               |
|                                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                MR ALI RASHID
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McCready, Counsel, instructed by KM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on March 22, 2011 as a Tier  4
    student with leave to remain until October 20 of 2014. He then  applied
    for further leave to remain in the same  capacity  but  the  respondent
    refused his application on December 1, 2014.

 3. On January 9, 2015 the appellant submitted a  further  application  for
    leave to remain albeit on this occasion it was on private life grounds.
    The respondent refused this application on May 5, 2015.

 4. On April 26, 2015 the appellant married his wife and on October 2, 2015
    he lodged further submissions for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds but again the respondent refused his application.

 5. The appellant then lodged his current application on family and private
    life grounds on December 15, 2015 which was refused by  the  respondent
    on September 5, 2016.

 6. The appellant appealed that decision and the appeal came  before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal McCall on May 23, 2017  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on June 7, 2017 the  Judge  dismissed  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 7. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on June 20, 2017 and on December
    19, 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bird found it arguable  there
    had been an error in law because (a) the Judge had arguably  failed  to
    explain what inconsistencies he had found in the evidence or put  these
    inconsistencies to the witnesses and (b) the Judge  failed  to  explain
    why the appellant's explanation as to how he had obtained the  FIR  was
    not adequate.

 8. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated January 10, 2018 in which
    he  pointed  to  the  fact  that  the  Judge  had  identified  numerous
    inconsistencies in the evidence and had given  clear  reasons  for  the
    adverse finding on the FIR. The respondent argued that the grounds  had
    no merit and merely disagreed with the adverse outcome of the appeal.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr McCready adopted his skeleton argument  that  he  submitted  on  the
    morning of the hearing.

10. He argued that at the appellant's appeal hearing the Judge had to  deal
    with the fact that the appellant and his wife both  claimed  that  they
    had been threatened by the sponsor's family because their families  had
    opposed the appellant's marriage to his wife because she  was  British.
    At paragraph 23 the Judge had found the appellant and sponsor had given
    inconsistent evidence regarding threats  received  from  the  sponsor's
    family stating that the appellant claimed to have  been  threatened  by
    her brothers whereas the sponsor stated that she had been threatened by
    her brother, sister and mother.

11. Mr  McCready  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erroneously  reached  a
    conclusion that this was an inconsistency whereas in fact each  witness
    had been speaking about who had threatened them personally. Mr McCready
    further submitted that if this issue was  important  the  inconsistency
    should have been  put  to  the  witnesses.  Whilst  he  accepted  other
    inconsistencies were found, Mr McCready  submitted  that  in  assessing
    credibility the Judge had to have regard to  all  inconsistencies  when
    considering credibility in the round.

12. Mr McCready further submitted that the Judge had erred in his  approach
    to the FIR. The Judge stated at paragraph 33 of his  decision  that  he
    was not satisfied the document was authentic but failed to explain  why
    he rejected the appellant's account of how he came into  possession  of
    it and wrongly sought corroborative evidence  of  something  which  the
    appellant could not obtain. There was no  evidence  the  appellant  had
    been asked anything about the document or what had  happened  after  it
    had been issued but the Judge had gone on to make  adverse  credibility
    findings on that point.

13. Mr McVeety relied on the Rule 24 letter and submitted  that  the  Judge
    had identified numerous inconsistencies in paragraphs 21 and 22 of  his
    decision. Those inconsistencies severely undermined the credibility  of
    the case and even if the Judge  had  wrongly  approached  the  evidence
    about who threatened whom it was not material as  there  were  numerous
    other inconsistencies that undermined the claim.

14. With regard to  the  FIR,  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  fact  the
    appellant could not explain how the document had been obtained and what
    had happened after the document had been issued  meant  the  Judge  was
    entitled to make the adverse finding he  did.  He  submitted  that  the
    Judge had not speculated about the FIR as  was  been  suggested  by  Mr
    McCready.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

15. The appellant had applied to remain on the  basis  of  his  family  and
    private life with his wife. Despite being  advised  to  formally  claim
    asylum the appellant did not  pursue  this  but  instead  pursued  this
    aspect of his claim at the oral hearing.

16. Both representatives drew my attention to paragraph 22 of  the  Judge's
    decision. He had already noted at paragraph 20 that both the  appellant
    and his wife appeared reluctant to answer questions regarding  who  had
    threatened them and noted at times they were vague.

17. I considered the record  of  proceedings  and  am  satisfied  that  the
    Judge's record of proceedings mirrors the content of  paragraph  22  of
    his decision. The Judge noted the following inconsistencies:

      a) The sponsor claimed she had had regular telephone contact with  her
         family until May 2017 even  though  she  had  stated  in  her  oral
         evidence that her family first threatened her when they married  in
         2015. The Judge found this answer inconsistent with  her  claim  to
         speak to her family on the telephone regularly.

      b) Initially in cross-examination the sponsor claimed that it was  her
         brother and sister who made the threats to her but  she  then  said
         that her mother  was  also  involved  despite  the  fact  that  she
         regularly spoke to her on the telephone.

      c) The appellant had stated that it was his wife's  two  brothers  who
         had threatened  him  and  that  these  threats  had  been  made  by
         telephone shortly after they had married. He reiterated during  his
         evidence that it was his wife's brothers, who  were  aged  over  30
         years of age that had made the threats. He made no reference to the
         sponsor's sister or mother making such threats.

      d) The sponsor claimed that  her  relationship  with  the  appellant's
         brother in the United Kingdom had deteriorated after their  wedding
         in 2015 whereas the appellant stated that  he  maintained  a  close
         relationship with  this  brother  and  his  brother  had  not  only
         provided him with a place  to  live  but  had  also  supported  him
         financially since his studies came to an end in 2014.

      e) The sponsor claimed that she financially  supported  the  appellant
         and disputed his brother provided any financial support.

18. I accept Mr McCready's submission that when asked about who had made  a
    threat  it  is  a  "jump"  to  say  the  appellant  and  sponsor   gave
    inconsistent answers as they were only being asked who had made threats
    to them personally as against who has threatened the other person.

19. I have to assess the evidence in the round and  as  demonstrated  above
    there were other matters which raised sufficient doubt  to  the  extent
    that regardless of this issue it was  clearly  open  to  the  Judge  to
    reject the appellant's claim about a threat. This was  not  a  scenario
    where the Judge only rejected the claim on  the  basis  that  they  had
    given different answers about who threatened them. Whilst that did form
    part of his decision there were numerous other inconsistencies that led
    the Judge to conclude they were not being honest. The first ground does
    not amount to a material error in such circumstances.

20. The second ground concerned the  FIR  which  had  been  produced.  This
    document was a report by the appellant's brother, in Pakistan, that the
    sponsor's brothers had  attacked  this  brother  over  the  appellant's
    marriage.

21. The  appellant  was  questioned  how  this  document  was  obtained  in
    circumstances where he was not speaking to his  family  and  he  stated
    that the police must have given it to his friend. At paragraph  33  the
    Judge went on to say that he did not find  it  credible  the  appellant
    would have known about this report if he had been in fear  of  his  own
    family.

22. Mr McCready submitted this point was  not  put  to  the  appellant  but
    bearing in mind he had no contact with his family in Pakistan it  seems
    a finding open to the Judge bearing in mind  the  relationship  he  had
    with his family.

23. Having discovered there was an FIR the Judge  made  a  further  adverse
    finding that no steps were taken by  the  appellant  to  see  what  had
    happened.

24. Mr McCready submitted this evidence was not available to the  appellant
    but no effort had been made by the appellant to find out what had  gone
    on after that date. Mr McCready submitted that the Judge had speculated
    but the Judge's finding on this point was open to the Judge.

25. In any event, the Judge went on to consider their claim on the basis it
    was credible and concluded there was no evidence to suggest  that  they
    could not return to another part of Pakistan. Bearing in mind the  size
    of Pakistan and  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  that  either  the
    appellant or the  sponsor's  family  had  any  influence,  the  Judge's
    conclusion in paragraph 34 they could relocate was one that was open to
    him.

26. In the circumstances I do not find any error of law.

    DECISION

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.

Signed                              Date     30/04/2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award in this because the appeal was dismissed.

Signed                              Date     30/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
