
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU222892016
     HU222912016
     HU222922016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd August 2017                        |On 10th August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            JG (first Respondent)
                           AS (second Respondent)
                            KS (third Respondent)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr B Sillah (Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge Juss of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 10th January 2017.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FtT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are citizens of Sierra Leone.  They are siblings born 6th
    August 1998, 10th May 1999, 17th October 2001 respectively.

 4. The Claimants applied on 25th May 2016, for entry clearance  to  enable
    them to join the Sponsor in the UK.

 5. The applications were refused on 23rd August 2016.  It was not accepted
    that adequate maintenance or accommodation would be  available  in  the
    UK, and therefore the requirements of paragraph 297 of the  Immigration
    Rules were not satisfied.  Because photocopied birth  certificates  had
    been produced, rather than originals, it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Claimants were related to the Sponsor as claimed.   Article  8  of  the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights was  considered,  and  it  was
    accepted that refusal of  entry  clearance  may  result  in  a  limited
    interference with family life, but it was contended that  the  decision
    was  justified  and  proportionate  in  the  interests  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control.

 6. The Claimants appealed, and their appeals were heard by the FtT on  6th
    January 2017.  The appeals were allowed.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that it was  not  clear  whether
    the FtT was purporting to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules,
    but in any event the FtT did not have jurisdiction to do so, and it was
    contended  that  the  FtT  had  not  had  regard  to   the   evidential
    requirements of the rules, and had  failed  adequately  to  reason  the
    conclusion.

 8. It was clear that the appeal had been allowed under Article 8,  but  it
    was contended that the FtT reasoning was inadequate, and there  was  no
    acknowledgment of the public interest.  There was no attempt to conduct
    a balancing exercise, considering the rights of the  Claimants  against
    the competing public interest.  There was no mention of section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  Judge  Macdonald  who
    found it arguable that the FtT reasoning was inadequate  because  there
    was no reference to the public interest and no mention of section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. The Sponsor attended to represent the Claimants.  He was accompanied by
    Mrs Sesay, a family friend, who wished to assist as a McKenzie  friend.
    Mrs Aboni had no objection, and I agreed to allow Mrs Sesay  to  assist
    the Sponsor.

12. Mrs Aboni submitted that the FtT decision should be set aside  for  the
    reasons contained within the grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal
    was granted.

13. It was contended on behalf of the Claimants, that the FtT had not  made
    a mistake of law, and therefore the decision should stand.

14. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The relevant  Immigration  Rule  to  be  considered  in  this  case  is
    paragraph 297, but the application made  by  the  Claimants  for  entry
    clearance, is deemed to be a human rights application.   Therefore  the
    refusal is a refusal of a human rights claim, and the  only  Ground  of
    Appeal available is that the decision is unlawful under  section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998.

16. It was therefore incumbent upon the FtT to consider Article  8  of  the
    1950 Convention, but in so doing,  the  FtT  was  obliged  to  consider
    whether the relevant Immigration Rule was satisfied.  If paragraph  297
    was satisfied, this did not automatically mean that  the  appeals  must
    succeed, but satisfying the Immigration Rule is a significant factor in
    favour of the applicant for entry clearance.

17. In this case I find the FtT was therefore correct to assess maintenance
    and accommodation which had been put in issue in the refusal  decision.
    It appears that there was no dispute as to relationship before the FtT.



18. The FtT found  that  the  maintenance  and  accommodation  requirements
    contained within paragraph  297  were  satisfied.   Those  requirements
    entail  the  applicant  for  entry  clearance  proving  that   adequate
    maintenance and accommodation would be available.

19. It is not clear what is meant in the Grounds of Appeal, at paragraph 1,
    when  there  is  reference  to  the  evidential  requirements  of   the
    Immigration  Rules.   This  may  be  a  reference  to  the   evidential
    requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE, which  relate  to  applications
    made pursuant to  Appendix  FM.   This  was  not  an  application  made
    pursuant to Appendix FM.

20. The FtT has allowed these appeals pursuant to Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.  The FtT did not err in  considering  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements as an important factor.  I find no realistic
    challenge  has  been  made  to  the  FtT  conclusions   that   adequate
    maintenance and accommodation will be available for the Claimants.

21. The FtT recognised that because the Claimants were  minors  when  their
    applications were made, and the third Claimant is still a minor at  the
    date of the Upper Tribunal hearing, their best interests are a  primary
    consideration and were considered as such by the FtT.

22. I do not accept the contention that the  FtT  has  provided  inadequate
    reasoning.  I find the conclusions reached in relation  to  maintenance
    and accommodation are adequately reasoned.  The Secretary of State  may
    disagree with the conclusions, but has not shown that there is an error
    of law.

23. I do not find that the FtT  reasoning  in  relation  to  Article  8  is
    inadequate.  The Secretary of State correctly points out that  the  FtT
    has made no reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act.   This,  without
    more, is not an error of law, provided that the FtT has had  regard  to
    the considerations contained in section 117B.

24. In my view, the FtT does consider the public interest,  and  conduct  a
    balancing exercise.  The FtT specifically  refers  to  the  five  stage
    Razgar approach at paragraph 29.  The public interest is considered  at
    paragraph 30,  the  FtT  considering  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country, the prevention of crime, the  protection  of  the  rights  and
    freedoms of others, and finds "no hint whatsoever of any wrongdoing  or
    illegality by any of the parties concerned."

25. In considering the public  interest  the  FtT  took  into  account  the
    finding  that  the  Claimants  could  be  adequately   maintained   and
    accommodated.   Maintenance  of  effective  immigration   controls   is
    referred to in section 117B(1), and  I  conclude  that  this  has  been
    adequately considered.

26. Section 117B(2) confirms  that  it  is  in  the  public  interest  that
    individuals seeking to enter the UK can speak English.   This  has  not
    been specifically mentioned in the FtT decision and I find this  is  an
    error, but it is not material.  This  is  because  the  Claimants  were
    minors when they made their application, and it  is  relevant  to  note
    that there is no requirement in paragraph 297 for children  seeking  to
    enter under that provision to be able to speak English.

27. Section 117B(3) confirms it is in the public interest that  individuals
    seeking to enter the UK  are  financially  independent.   The  FtT  has
    considered this, taking into account that the Claimants  are  children,
    and specifically finding  that  they  will  be  adequately  financially
    maintained by the Sponsor.

28. The remaining sub-sections of section 117B have no  application  to  an
    entry clearance application.

29. For the reasons given above, I find  no  material  error  of  law,  and
    therefore the decision of the FtT stands.





Notice of Decision

The FtT did not materially err in law.  The  FtT  decision  stands  and  the
appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  direction  is  made  because  the
Claimants  were  minors  when  they  made  their  applications   for   entry
clearance, and is made pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed                              Date 4th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made by the FtT.  As the decision of  the  FtT  stands,  so
does the decision not to make a fee award.




Signed                              Date 4th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
