
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: HU/22734/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 December 2018                   |On 15 January 2019                 |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                HUMPHREY [C]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Nigeria
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Ross, of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal against a decision by Designated
    FtT Judge Murray, promulgated  on  28  December  2017,  dismissing  his
    appeal on human rights grounds against refusal of entry clearance.

 2. Ground 1 is taking account of an irrelevant factor, the  provisions  of
    appendix FM of the immigration rules, which could  not  apply,  as  the
    appellant's wife has only limited leave to remain in the UK.

 3. Ground 2 is error in assessing the best interests of the 4 children  of
    the appellant and sponsor, specified in 3 sub-paragraphs:

         (i)      failure to  recognise  that  the  presence  of  2  of  the
         children in the UK for over 7 years is a very weighty factor;

          (ii)    unclear findings at [34] on whether the starting point  is
         that it is in the best interests of the children to be in the UK or
         in Nigeria; "although the FtT took account of the best interests of
         the children, the ground focuses on how  the  best  interests  have
         been assessed";

         (iii)    inadequacy of reasoning, because if it  was  in  the  best
         interests of the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK,  it  would  be
         disproportionate not to admit the appellant.

 4. Mr Ross adopted the grounds, and said  that  the  FtT  failed  to  take
    account of a report by Dr Boyle, Chartered  Psychologist,  and  of  the
    need to  take  account  of  the  views  of  the  children;  there  were
    comprehensive reasons to set aside the decision; and the case should be
    remitted  for  rehearing.   Replying  to  the   submissions   for   the
    respondent, he said that  the  best  interests  of  the  children  were
    paramount; if considered properly, the appeal should have been allowed;
    in principle, children should have direct contact  with  both  parents;
    and communications by skype and similar methods were no substitute.

 5. Having considered also the submissions for the  respondent,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the appellant has shown that the  decision  of  the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law, such that it  ought
    to be set aside.

 6. The  FtT  began  with  the  extent  to  which  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of appendix FM of the immigration rules.   It  would  have
    been an error to start anywhere else.  Ground 1 is not well founded.

 7. The judge recognised at [24], and elsewhere, that  2  of  the  children
    have been here for over 7 years.  The weight to be given to that factor
    was, within reason, up to her.  Ground 2 (i) is only insistence that it
    should have carried the day.

 8. Ground 2 (ii) is at best a complaint about form,  not  substance.   The
    FtT found at [31] that the children  were  managing  well  without  the
    appellant in the UK, but their best interests would be served by  being
    in Nigeria with both parents.  No  error  has  been  suggested  in  the
    finding that there was nothing in the  allegations  about  difficulties
    over living in Nigeria.

 9. Ground 2 (iii) is only another way of insisting on the same point.

10. As Mr Govan submitted, the judge referred to the  psychological  report
    at [15] - [17] and [23]; there is  no  complaint  of  failure  to  take
    account of it in the grounds; and the  submissions  did  not  point  to
    anything in the report which showed error in the  judge's  conclusions.



11. It is true that children  should,  so  far  as  possible,  have  direct
    contact  with  both  parents,  and  that  skype  is  not  an   adequate
    substitute.  However, that does not automatically  overcome  everything
    in the rules which may have  the  effect  of  separating  parents  from
    children.  These points have little  force  where,  as  the  respondent
    submitted, the  separation  is  the  choice  of  the  parents,  not  an
    imposition by the SSHD.

12. The best interests of the children were correctly taken by the  FtT  to
    be a primary  but  not  paramount  consideration.   That  part  of  the
    submissions for the appellant went too far.

13. The appellant has shown no error of law in the conclusion that  he  did
    not have a right to enter the UK, other than  through  compliance  with
    the immigration rules.  The FtT's decision shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            Dated 21 December 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




