
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/22637/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 November 2018                    |On 28 December 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                  FORHAD [H]
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singer of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1987.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent  made  on  15  September  2016  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis of  family  and
    private life.  He claimed to be married to a British citizen and to  be
    living together in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 2. The application was  refused  under  the  suitability  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules because the respondent  considered
    that the appellant had fraudulently taken a TOEIC  speaking  test  with
    Educational Testing Service by the use of a proxy test taker.


 3. Further,  although  it  was  accepted  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with  his  wife  there  are  no  insurmountable
    obstacles for the appellant, his wife, step-daughter born in 2008 and a
    son born in 2016 to continue their lives in Bangladesh.  His  wife  and
    son are British citizens, his step-daughter is a Bangladesh citizen.


    First tier hearing

 4. He appealed.


 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 24 May 2018 Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Zahed dismissed the appeal.  He found that the  appellant
    had used deception in his TOEIC  test  and  used  the  CAS  he  thereby
    obtained to get further leave to remain.


 6. He went on to find that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    appellant and family living in Bangladesh given the family support both
    he and his wife have there.

 7. He sought permission to appeal.  In a decision made on 9 October 2018 a
    judge found no arguable error in relation to the finding  of  deception
    in the taking of the  test  and  refused  permission  on  that  ground.
    However, the judge considered it arguable that inadequate consideration
    had been given to the children's circumstances and  granted  permission
    on that ground only.

    Error of law hearing

 8. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Everett agreed with Mr  Singer
    that inadequate consideration had, indeed, been given to the children's
    circumstances.  Whilst brief  reference  had  been  made  to  the  best
    interests of the two year old son who is a British  citizen,  with  the
    finding that at such a young age his life is centred on his parents and
    with the help of extended family there it is reasonable for him to live
    in Bangladesh, it is not apparent that any consideration was  given  to
    the best interests of the step-daughter who is nearly 10 years  of  age
    and has been in the UK for over 5 years. I agreed.

 9. Further, no reference had been  made  to  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction - Family Migration - Appendix FM,  Section  1.0(B)  "Family
    Life as a Partner or Parent and Private Life, 10 Year Routes" (February
    2018) which provides that  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the UK with the applicant parent facing  removal
    unless the parent has  committed  significant  or  persistent  criminal
    offences falling below  the  thresholds  for  deportation  set  out  in
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or has a very  poor  immigration
    history having repeatedly and deliberately breached the Rules.

10. By failing to make adequate findings  on  material  matters  the  judge
    erred.

11. Both parties agreed that the appropriate course was for the case to  be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal so that proper findings can be  made
    on the best interests of both children and the reasonableness of return
    and proportionality. As indicated, the findings of deception in respect
    of the TOEIC decision stand.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  under  section  12  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Statement
    paragraph 7.2 to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing.
    The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  consider  the  case
    are not to include Judge Zahed.

13. No anonymity order made.


Signed:                                            Date: 18 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



