
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/22903/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9 January 2020                    |On 25 February 2020                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                   [W P W]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Naik QC and Mr A Bandegani instructed by
                    Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kovats QC, instructed by the Government Legal
Department


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction under rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008

The disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  members  of  the
public to identify RX, J or RN is prohibited.  This  order  applies  to  the
appellant, respondent and all other persons. Failure  to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

INTRODUCTION

 1. This decision relates to an appeal against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal ("the FtT") promulgated on 14 November  2018,  dismissing  the
    appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the   Home
    Department's ("the SSHD") decision  of  30  August  2016  refusing  the
    appellant's human rights claim. On the same occasion, the SSHD  made  a
    decision refusing to revoke a  deportation  order  in  the  appellant's
    name, signed on 23 February 2015.

 2. On the 1 April 2019, the Upper Tribunal set aside  the  FtT's  decision
    ("the error of law decision") and directed that the  re-making  of  the
    decision in the appeal should be undertaken by the Upper Tribunal

 3. The respondent now submits that the Upper Tribunal should re-visit, and
    depart from, its error of law decision of 1  April  2019  and  conclude
    that the FtT did not err in law, the consequence being that  the  FtT's
    decision of 14 November 2018 would stand.  We consider this  submission
    in Part 1 of this decision. In Part 2 of this decision we  re-make  the
    decision in the appeal.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND - AN OVERVIEW

 4. The appellant was born on 3 August 1978 and is a national of Jamaica.

 5. His eldest son, RX, was born in the United Kingdom on 1 September  1997
    to SY.

 6. On 13 May 2000, the appellant was refused leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor but was  granted  temporary  admission  until  the
    following day.  He failed to report as required  and  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On 16 December 2000, the appellant and SY  married  in
    the United Kingdom. They separated in 2003.

 7. In 2004, the appellant began a relationship with JH.   J  was  born  of
    that relationship  in  May  2008.   In  2006,  the  appellant  made  an
    application to the SSHD for indefinite leave to remain as the father of
    RX, but that application was refused by the SSHD in November  2009.  An
    appeal against the decision was dismissed by the FtT on 27  April  2010
    and, thereafter, by the Upper Tribunal on 28 September 2010.

 8. On 4 July 2013, the SSHD granted the appellant limited leave to  remain
    in  the  United  Kingdom  for  30  months,  as  a  consequence  of  his
    relationship with  J  (it  being  concluded  that  he  had  a  parental
    relationship with J and that it was not reasonable to expect J to leave
    the United Kingdom).

 9. On 13 February 2014, the appellant was convicted of supplying  Class  A
    controlled drugs and was sentenced to forty months' imprisonment.  As a
    consequence, on 24 May 2014 the SSHD served notice on the appellant  of
    his liability to  deportation.   In  response,  on  19  June  2014  the
    appellant raised a human rights claim, relying  upon  his  relationship
    with his children and JH.   On  23  February  2015,  the  SSHD  made  a
    decision to deport the appellant and  also  refused  his  human  rights
    claim.  The decision notice concluded  by  certifying  the  appellant's
    human  rights  claim  pursuant  to  section  94B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

10. Challenge was brought to  the  section  94B  certification  by  way  of
    judicial review proceedings issued on  24  March  2015  (JR/3490/2015).
    Within the confines of the judicial review proceedings further evidence
    was put forward in support of the appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  claim.
    The SSHD made a supplementary decision on 30 April  2015,  refusing  to
    treat the further evidence as a fresh claim pursuant to  paragraph  353
    of the Immigration Rules, refusing to revoke the deportation order  and
    maintaining the section 94B certification. Permission to bring judicial
    review proceedings challenging the decisions  of  23  February  and  30
    April 2015 was refused on the papers by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on
    18 August 2015.  Upon renewal, the application for judicial review  was
    stayed to await the Court of Appeal's decision in Kiarie and Byndloss v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1020.  The matter  thereafter  came  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blum on 22 June 2016, who  also  refused  permission  to
    bring judicial review proceedings.

11. In August 2016, the appellant made  further  submissions  to  the  SSHD
    asserting, inter alia, that his relationship with JH  had  broken  down
    and that Social Services had  initiated  a  child  protection  case  in
    relation to both J and the appellant's then unborn child  (RN).  On  30
    August  2016,  the  SSHD  made  a  decision  refusing  to  revoke   the
    appellant's deportation order, as  well  as  refusing  the  appellant's
    human's human rights  claim.  The  SSHD  accepted,  however,  that  the
    further submissions amounted to a fresh human rights claim pursuant  to
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  Once  again,  the  appellant's
    claim was certified pursuant to section 94B of the 2002 Act.

12. The SSHD gave notice of intention to remove the appellant to Jamaica on
    7  September  2016.  In  response,  the  appellant  lodged   a   second
    application for judicial review, this time challenging the decision  to
    remove him (JR/9647/2016).  By way of an order dated 5 September  2016,
    Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy refused to stay the appellant's  removal.
    The appellant was removed from the UK to Jamaica on 7 September 2016.

13. On 4 October 2016, the appellant submitted an appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the assistance of a pro-bono  organisation.,  challenging
    the decision of 30 August 2016 to refuse his human rights  claim.   He,
    subsequently, instructed solicitors in the UK and, on 22 February 2018,
    the Legal Aid Agency granted prior authority  to  instruct  a  forensic
    psychiatric expert, an independent social  worker  and  an  independent
    probation officer.

14. In the meantime, in November 2016 the appellant's son RN  was  born  to
    JH.

15. On 29 January 2018, the appellant  lodged  a  further  application  for
    judicial review  (JR/666/2018),  challenging  the  SSHD's  decision  to
    maintain the section 94B certification and the FtT's  decision  not  to
    stay the appeal proceedings. The return of the appellant to the UK  was
    sought by way of relief.  In a decision of 31 March 2018  (reported  as
    [2018] UKUT 165),  the  Upper  Tribunal  (constituted  of  the  instant
    panel): (i) refused permission to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings
    challenging  the  FtT's  decision  to  refuse  to   stay   the   appeal
    proceedings; and, (ii) stayed the proceedings insofar as challenge  was
    brought to maintenance of the section 94B certification and refusal  by
    the SSHD to return the appellant to the United  Kingdom  prior  to  the
    disposal of his appeal.

16. The appeal before the FtT was heard substantively by the  President  of
    the FtT and Resident  Judge  Campbell  on  25  and  26  June  2018  and
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on  14  November  2018  (the  FtT's
    decision"). On 13 December 2018, permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the 14 November 2018  was  granted  by
    the President of the FtT.

17. As identified above, in a decision promulgated on  1  April  2019,  the
    Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of the FtT and directed that  the
    re-making of the decision in the appeal should  be  undertaken  by  the
    Upper Tribunal. On 9 May 2019, the Upper Tribunal ordered that:

         "Pursuant to s. 25 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
         2007, the Respondent shall revoke the s. 94B certificate  and  take
         all necessary steps to facilitate and fund the  Appellant's  return
         from Jamaica to the United Kingdom as soon as practicable for  both
         parties (without prejudice to the Respondent's ability to  issue  a
         fresh certificate per s. 94B if so advised)."

18. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18 June  2019  having  been
    "granted immigration bail". The deportation order against the appellant
    remains in force.

PART 1: SSHD'S REQUEST THAT THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DEPART FROM THE ERROR OF  LAW
DECISION

  19. As we have already identified, the SSHD now makes a request  that  the
      Upper Tribunal re-visit its decision of 1 April 2019 setting aside the
      FtT's decision and, contrary to its earlier finding, conclude that the
      FtT did not err in law - the consequence of this being that the  FtT's
      decision would stand.

Issue of Jurisdiction

  20. It is not in dispute that in circumstances where  the  Upper  Tribunal
      has not finally disposed of an appeal, it has jurisdiction  to  depart
      from, or vary, its decision that the FtT made an error of law such the
      FtT's decision should be set aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
      Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ("TCEA 2007")  -  AZ  (error
      of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 00245.

  21. Ms Naik submits that the Upper Tribunal should take a staged  approach
      to the exercise of such jurisdiction, the burden at  the  first  stage
      being on the SSHD - as the party requesting departure from  the  error
      of law decision - to demonstrate "the existence  of  very  exceptional
      circumstances necessary for the UT to exercise  its  jurisdiction";  a
      burden which Ms Naik describes in her skeleton  argument  as  being  a
      "very high threshold".  Ms Naik further asserts that  it  is  only  in
      circumstances where the Upper Tribunal  concludes  that  this  initial
      threshold has been surpassed that it should  go  on  to  consider  the
      merits of the SSHD's  underlying  assertion  that  the  error  of  law
      decision is wrong and should be departed from.

  22. Insofar as Ms Naik avers that the  Presidential  Tribunal  in  AZ  was
      seeking to erect a gateway threshold to the  operation  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal's jurisdiction to depart from, or  vary,  its  error  of  law
      decision, we reject this submission. Having identified the  following,
      at [52] of AZ, as being the operative issue "...in what  circumstances
      will a party be permitted by the Tribunal to raise a matter, at a  re-
      making stage, which, if accepted,  would  lead  to  a  change  in  the
      written error of law decision", the Tribunal concluded as follows:

          "53.   The answer is precisely that given  in  Practice  Direction
              3.7. It will only be in a "very exceptional" case  that  this
              should occur.

           54.   The Upper Tribunal would be hobbled if its error  of  law
              decisions could  be  routinely  re-visited  in  cases  where,
              pursuant to Practice Direction 3, the Tribunal proceeds to re-
              make the decision in the appeal, rather  than  remitting  the
              case to the First-tier Tribunal.  Neither  the  Secretary  of
              State nor those who were  appellants  before  the  First-tier
              Tribunal would gain anything of legitimate value from such  a
              state of affairs. The overriding objective  of  dealing  with
              cases fairly and justly would be imperilled. "

  23. Practice Direction 3.7 of the Practice Directions for the  Immigration
      and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal,
      made on 10 February 2010 ("the Practice Direction") reads:

           "The written reasons [for finding that the  First-tier  Tribunal
           made an error of law, such that its  decision  fell  to  be  set
           aside only] shall be incorporated in full in, and form  part  of
           the determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  re-makes  the
           decision. Only  in  very  exceptional  cases  can  the  decision
           contained in those written reasons be departed from or varied by
           the Upper Tribunal which re-makes  the  decision  under  section
           12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007 Act." [emphasis added]

  24. The position, therefore, is as follows.  Before  it  has  re-made  the
      decision in an appeal pursuant to section  12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the  TCEA
      2007, the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to depart from, or vary, its
      decision that the FtT made  an  error  of  law  such  that  the  FtT's
      decision should be set aside under section 12(2)(a) of the TCEA  2007.
      The exercise the Upper Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to  depart  from,  or
      vary, an error of law decision prior to re-making the  decision  under
      section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the TCEA 2007 is intensely fact  specific  and
      will only be exercised in very exceptional cases. Whilst  the  use  of
      the phrase "very exceptional cases" in AZ and the  Practice  Direction
      is not to be treated as importing a gateway threshold to the  exercise
      of such jurisdiction, it is intended to  make  plain  the  expectation
      that the Upper Tribunal will exercise its jurisdiction to depart  from
      an error of law decision in only a tiny minority of cases.

  25. Those appearing before the Upper Tribunal  should  consider  carefully
      whether to make of an application that the Upper Tribunal depart  from
      an error of  law  decision.  Advancing  of  an  argument  that  cannot
      conceivably be an "exceptional case" is an  abuse  of  the  Tribunal's
      process. If the Tribunal henceforth concludes  that  its  process  has
      been abused, it will not hesitate  to  recognise  this  by  exercising
      relevant powers, including as to costs.

  26.  Whilst  we  are  hesitant  to  give  guidance  as  to  the  sort   of
      circumstances that might, or might not, lead  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
      depart from, or vary, an error of law  decision  prior  re-making  the
      decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the TCEA 2007, we do  think  it
      necessary to emphasise that the existence of such  a  jurisdiction  is
      not an opportunity for  a  party  to  re-make  submissions  that  have
      already been made, or to make submissions that ought to have been made
      at the time the Upper Tribunal were initially considering its error of
      law decision. Insofar as guidance can be  given  as  to  the  sort  of
      circumstances  that  might  found  a  "very  exceptional  case",   the
      scenarios akin to the issues that rules 43, 45 and 46 of the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  are  designed  to  address  may
      offer some assistance. For example  if,  following  an  error  of  law
      decision but before the re-making stage, a binding  authority  emerges
      from the Supreme Court or Court  of  Appeal,  which  means  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was wrong, it  would  be  desirable  to  revisit  the  former
      decision, rather than proceed to  a  re-making  stage  that  would  be
      otiose. One might also  envisage  a  situation  where  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision was set aside on the basis of apparent  procedural
      unfairness, but where it subsequently emerges that there was  no  such
      unfairness.

Discussion and Decision

  27. Returning to the instant case, it is prudent to set out the background
      to the SSHD's application.

  28. The appellant remained outside of the United Kingdom for the  duration
      of the FtT proceedings. A preliminary issue before the FtT was whether
      the appellant's appeal could  be  determined  fairly  and  effectively
      without his presence in the United Kingdom,  applying  the  principles
      set out in Kiarie and Byndloss [2017] UKSC and AJ  (s94B:  Kiarie  and
      Byndloss Questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 115. The  instant  appeal  was
      treated by the FtT as a lead "section 94B" appeal and was heard  by  a
      Presidential panel.

  29. Before the FtT, the appellant relied upon a detailed witness statement
      and gave oral evidence via video link from the British High Commission
      in Kingston, Jamaica. Further evidence was provided to the FtT in  the
      form of witness statements from the RX, RX's maternal grandmother, the
      appellant's brother and the appellant's friend. There was no  evidence
      before the FtT from either JH, J or RN. The  appellant's  relationship
      with JH broke down prior to his deportation and JH  did  not  wish  to
      engage in the appeal process. The appellant also relied  upon  reports
      from four professional witnesses: Dr Basu - a medical practitioner and
      forensic psychiatrist; Ms Haque - an independent probation officer; Ms
      Brown - an independent social worker and Ms  Kakonge  -  a  barrister,
      specialising in private and public law children proceedings.

  30. In concluding that the appeal proceedings were fair and effective, the
      FtT's primary focus was on the second question  posed  in  AJ  (s.94B:
      Kiarie and Byndloss questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00115 i.e. "whether
      the appellant's absence from  the  United  Kingdom,  as  a  result  of
      deportation or other removal pursuant to the section 94B  certificate,
      is likely to  present  "difficulties  in  obtaining  the  professional
      evidence which...can prove crucial in achieving its success"" .

  31. The FtT summarised its conclusions as follows, at [10]:

         "[10] Secondly, has the appellant's absence materially impaired the
         production of expert and other professional evidence, upon which he
         would otherwise have relied? The answer here  is  clearly  no.  The
         appellant has been able to  obtain  and  rely  upon  a  psychiatric
         report, a report from an independent probation  officer,  a  report
         from an independent social worker and  a  report  described  as  an
         independent family law expert opinion,  prepared  by  Counsel.  The
         psychiatric report and the report from the probation  officer  were
         prepared following contact with the appellant via video link.  Each
         expert expressed some reservations  but  each  reached  conclusions
         which we summarise below and have taken into account. So far as the
         report from the independent social worker is concerned, the  expert
         felt unable to undertake an  assessment  of  the  strength  of  the
         appellant's relationship with his daughter J. She considered that a
         full assessment would be  in  the  best  interests  of  J  and  the
         appellant's infant son RN and that observation of the appellant and
         his children together would be required for this purpose.  However,
         a salient feature of this aspect of the case is the decision of the
         appellant's former partner and  the  mother  of  the  two  children
         concerned, JH, not to cooperate with the independent social  worker
         or permit contact between the social worker and  the  children  for
         assessment. Similarly, JH, was not prepared herself to speak to the
         expert. Her stance has severely limited the scope of the report. We
         deal with this particular issue more fully below,  when  we  assess
         the report in detail. We are clear, however, that it is the lack of
         cooperation on the part  of  the  mother  of  the  appellant's  two
         youngest children that  has  caused  the  limitation  and  not  the
         appellant's absence from the United Kingdom. As we  discuss  below,
         we consider that the appellant has had steps available  to  him  to
         seek to deal with the impasse and to take formal steps to enable  a
         full assessment to be made. The indirect contact he  currently  has
         with his daughter and son is reliant upon the cooperation of  their
         mother and arrangements are fragile, but such fragility is far from
         uncommon and is a feature  in  many  cases  in  the  family  court.
         Overall, although all four authors of the reports drew attention to
         difficulties caused by the appellant's absence, we find that  there
         was no material impairment in relation to the production of  expert
         and other professional evidence."

  32. The FtT considered the second AJ question in more detail at  [119]  to
      [130], concluding:

      i) The appellant's presence in  Jamaica  did  not  provide  a  serious
         impediment to the preparation of either Dr Basu's evidence or  that
         of Ms  Haque.  Dr  Basu's  conclusions  were  consistent  with  the
         findings made by Ms Haque and those found in the OASys report [120-
         122];

     ii) Ms Brown spoke to the appellant via Skype and directly to  RX.  She
         was not able to meet with JH, J or RN because of  unwillingness  on
         JH's part The appellant's removal to Jamaica was not the  operative
         cause of the limitations in Ms Brown's report. Ms Brown had  access
         to written records including personal case notes showing  that  the
         children [123-125];

    iii) Since removal, contact by the appellant with the children has  been
         limited and managed by JH. The appellant is anxious not to  disrupt
         the relatively fragile contact  arrangements.  Nevertheless,  since
         the breakdown in his relationship with JH, he has  had  opportunity
         to seek  an  order  from  the  family  court  putting  the  contact
         arrangements on a more formal footing, which might have  led  to  a
         fuller assessment if access were given to the  two  children  [126-
         127];

     iv) The appellant is able to apply for a  specific  issue  order  under
         section 8 of the Children  Act  1989  from  Jamaica.  Although  the
         prospects of success are uncertain, an application  to  the  Family
         Court might still be made. Exceptional case  funding  for  such  an
         application is available from the Legal Aid  Agency  and,  although
         the  appellant  and  his  solicitors  have  been  advised  that  an
         application  for  such  funding  is  unlikely  to  succeed  it  is,
         nevertheless, relevant that no such application has been made,  nor
         has an application been made to the Family Court [127-128];

      v)  There  is  no  evidence  to  support  the  contention  that   JH's
         unwillingness to allow Ms Brown access to the children would be any
         different if the appellant were in the UK [128];

  33. At [130], the FtT found in conclusion that  although  the  appellant's
      removal to Jamaica had led to difficulties in relation to  the  expert
      evidence, "those difficulties fall far short of showing there has been
      procedural unfairness".

  34. In the error of law decision of 1 April 2019, we concluded as  follows
      on the issue of whether the appellant's appeal before the FtT had been
      fair and effective:

          "[48] Moving on, the central feature of the second AJ question  is
           the extent to which the appellant's  ability  to  prosecute  his
           appeal by  the  obtaining  of  professional  evidence  has  been
           hampered by him being outside  of  the  UK.  The  importance  of
           obtaining professional evidence should not be underestimated. As
           Lord  Wilson  identified  at  [55]  of  Kiarie:  "every  foreign
           criminal who appeals against a deportation order by reference to
           his human rights must negotiate a formidable hurdle  before  his
           appeal will succeed: ...  He  needs  to  be  in  a  position  to
           assemble and present powerful evidence."

           [49] A superficial analysis of the evidence would  suggest  that
           far from being hampered by being outside the UK,  the  appellant
           has benefited from this  fact  in  combination  with  the  FtT's
           decision to treat his appeal as a test case. Unusually,  in  our
           experience, he has secured  public  funding  on  an  exceptional
           basis  to  allow  for  the  instruction  of  four   professional
           witnesses and has assembled a legal team of considerable repute.
            In our  view,  however,  a  more  considered  analysis  of  the
           evidence ineluctably leads to the contrary conclusion.

           [50] Whilst we concur with the FtT in its consideration  of  the
           evidence from Dr Basu and Ms Haque, we depart from its  analysis
           of the evidence from Ms Brown, an independent social worker, and
           Ms Kakonge, a barrister specialising in children's proceedings.

           [51] One of the central pillars advanced  by  the  appellant  in
           support of his claim to the FtT that deportation would lead to a
           breach of Article 8 ECHR, was the  significant  impediment  that
           deportation would cause to the continuation of his  family  life
           with J and RN, his British citizen children born to JH.  It  was
           conceded  by  the  SSHD  that  deportation  would   impede   the
           development of such family life, and the FtT found that it would
           be unduly harsh for J and RN to live in Jamaica [139].

           [52] Within the confines of a consideration of  the  Immigration
           Rules  (paragraph  399(a)(i)(b))  and  the  2002  Act   (section
           117C(5)) the FtT was required to determine whether it  would  be
           unduly harsh to require either J or  RN  to  remain  in  the  UK
           without  the  appellant.  At  [139],  the  FtT  identifies  this
           consideration as being "the critical question" in the appeal. It
           is also of significance that when considering the aforementioned
           provisions, the Supreme Court, in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53,  observed  that
           they "raise a factual issue seen from the point of view  of  the
           child" [22].

           [53] The consequence of JH's stance, submits Ms Naik,  was  that
           the appellant was denied the opportunity  to  provide  the  best
           evidence on "the critical issue". Indeed, the  only  substantive
           evidence that he  could  provide  on  this  issue  was  his  own
           testimony, based on the limited  interaction  he  has  with  his
           children via Facetime, which itself has been controlled by JH.

           [54] How then could this appellant seek  to  demonstrate,  other
           than by way of his own personal  testimony,  that  it  would  be
           unduly harsh for his children (one or both) to remain in the  UK
           without him? The most obvious source of evidence on  this  issue
           would be from JH, the person undertaking the day to day care  of
           the children and in an ideal position to observe the  real-world
           effects of the appellant's deportation on  them.  This  evidence
           could be supported by others who share in such  knowledge,  such
           as other family members. Whilst the children are of  an  age  at
           which they could not be expected to provide  evidence  of  their
           own accord, the appellant could also seek to  rely  on  evidence
           from professional witnesses such as counsellors  or  independent
           social workers, who have had interaction with the  children  and
           JH.

           [55] However, as the FtT observed, JH refused to engage  in  the
           appeal proceedings and did not provide the necessary consent  to
           allow Ms Brown (the independent social  worker)  access  to  the
           children. Ms Brown indicated that she was not  able  to  comment
           directly upon JH's parenting capacity and considered that it was
           not possible to coherently assess the impact and effect upon the
           children of the appellant's absence without being able to assess
           them directly. Ms Brown's report also identifies that JH has had
           mental health difficulties in the past, leading to the appellant
           becoming J's primary carer for a time, and  that  subsequent  to
           the relationship between the  appellant  and  JH  breaking  down
           Southwark  Social  Services  Children's   Department   initiated
           safeguarding measures due to concerns  over's  JH's  ability  to
           care for J.

           [56] That the appellant has been hampered  in  his  attempts  to
           adduce the best evidence in support  of  his  appeal  is  clear.
           This, though, is far from being determinative  of  the  question
           that we must answer. Neither Article 8 ECHR nor the  common  law
           doctrine of procedural fairness  requires  access  to  the  best
           possible procedure on the appeal, but access to a procedure that
           meets the essential requirements of effectiveness and  fairness.
           What is effective and fair must always be viewed in context  and
           will depend upon the facts and  circumstances  of  a  particular
           case.

           [57] At [127] and [128], the FtT found that  the  appellant  had
           not been denied the opportunity to provide evidence relevant  to
           the assessment of the consequences of  his  deportation  on  the
           children (i.e. on the critical question) because he  could  have
           put the  arrangements with the children on a more formal footing
           prior to his deportation  and,  in  any  event,  he  could  have
           applied from Jamaica for a specific issue order under section  8
           of the Children Act 1989.  The existence of such  opportunities,
           when taken in conjunction with (a) the fact  that  it  was  JH's
           stance that directly led to the limitations of Ms Brown's report
           and (b) that there was no evidence that JH's stance would be any
           different if the appellant were present in the UK, led  the  FtT
           to conclude that difficulties in relation to the expert evidence
           fell "...far short ... of showing that there has been procedural
           unfairness".

           [58] We have considered for ourselves the weight to be  attached
           to the  existence  of  such  opportunities  in  our  overarching
           assessment of whether [there] has  been  a  fair  and  effective
           appeal.

           [59] As identified above, the appellant's relationship  with  JH
           broke down in the summer of 2016. He  approached  solicitors  in
           June 2016 in relation to the possibility of  obtaining  a  child
           arrangements order; however,  he  did  not  pursue  this  avenue
           because JH was not hindering his contact with J  at  that  time.
           This approach is entirely in accord with the opinion provided by
           Ms Kakonge in which he identifies that there "must be a  genuine
           dispute about contact between parents for the court to grant  an
           application  for  a  child  arrangements  order".  As   to   the
           opportunity for the appellant to  apply  for  a  specific  issue
           order from Jamaica so as to obtain permission for  the  children
           to be assessed by the professional witnesses, this  is  a  topic
           which is also the subject of Ms Kakonge's opinion. To summarise,
           on this issue Ms Kakonge opines that such an "application has an
           unrealistic  prospect  of  success"  which  is  to  be  directly
           contrasted with the position if the appellant were to be present
           in the UK, whereby the  assessment  of  the  children  could  be
           undertaken, absent JH successfully  applying  for  a  prohibited
           steps order  to  prevent  it.  Ms  Kakonge  also  identifies  an
           additional hurdle  to  the  obtaining  of  such  an  order  from
           Jamaica, that being the likely absence of  the  availability  of
           public funding for the making of such an application.

           [60] We remind ourselves that the respondent has not  sought  to
           provide evidence contradicting the opinion of Ms Kakonge and, in
           such circumstances, it falls to be accepted, given  the  absence
           of any reason to reject it. We  conclude  that  the  whilst  the
           appellant did have an opportunity to put the  arrangements  with
           his  children  on  a  'more  formal  footing'   prior   to   his
           deportation, and that there was an avenue open to him via the UK
           Family Court to obtain  an  order  requiring  JH  to  allow  the
           assessment of his children by Ms Brown, in the real world  there
           were significant, if not insuperable, obstacles to the obtaining
           of a positive outcome in relation to such applications.




          Conclusion

           [61] We now return, as we must, to the overarching assessment of
           whether the appellant has  had  a  fair  and  effective  hearing
           before the  FtT.  We  take  in  to  account  all  those  matters
           identified  above   including,   but   not   limited   to,   the
           circumstances which led to the appellant's deportation including
           the apparent lawfulness of the  deportation  order  set  in  the
           proper context of the ongoing Kiarie litigation and the eventual
           outcome of such litigation. We take full  account  of  the  fact
           that  the  appellant  has  had  access  to  high  quality  legal
           representation throughout, as well as the availability of public
           funding for the duration of the legal proceedings, that  he  was
           able to assemble a significant amount of evidence in support  of
           his claim and that he was able to provide oral evidence  to  the
           FtT via video link.

           [62] Nevertheless, the very particular  features  of  this  case
           lead us to conclude that the proceedings before the FtT breached
           the procedural safeguards protected by Article 8  ECHR  and  the
           common law duty of procedural fairness.

           [63] At the heart of the appeal before the FtT  -  the  critical
           issue - was the determination of  whether  it  would  be  unduly
           harsh to require either J or RN to remain in the UK without  the
           appellant. This raises "a factual issue seen from the  point  of
           view of the  child".   The  threshold  that  the  appellant  was
           required surpass in order to make out his case in this regard is
           high and his prospects of doing so were  seriously  hampered  by
           JH's refusal to engage in the proceedings or to allow  Ms  Brown
           to undertake an assessment of  the  children.  This  denied  the
           appellant the opportunity to obtain the  best  evidence  on  the
           critical issue in his appeal. Had the appellant been in the  UK,
           the opportunity for Ms Brown to directly assess J and  RN  would
           have been available to him, even if JH had taken the same stance
           in refusing to engage in the proceedings. The appellant  has  no
           remedies available  to  him  in  the  Family  Court  that  could
           materially improve his prospects of obtaining such  evidence  on
           the critical issue.

           [64] On the information before us there is no mechanism for  the
           appellant to improve his position on the  evidence  relating  to
           the critical issue in the appeal whilst he remains  outside  the
           United Kingdom.  Given what we have said above, this  inevitably
           leads us to the conclusion that the appellant's appeal cannot be
           'effective' unless he is in the United Kingdom.

           [65] For these reasons, we conclude that  the  decision  of  the
           First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law. Given  the  nature
           of the error  we  exercise  our  discretion  to  set  the  FtT's
           decision aside. "

  35. In support of the contention that we should now depart from the  error
      of law decision and conclude that the FtT's decision should stand,  Mr
      Kovats submits that there was no basis in law for the  Upper  Tribunal
      to  speculate  on  the  appellant's  prospects  of   success   in   an
      application, made to the Family Court  from  Jamaica,  for  permission
      allowing a professional witness access to  the  children.  He  asserts
      that Ms Kakonge's opinion, which formed the foundation  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal's rationale for setting aside the FtT's decision: (a)  cannot
      lawfully be  treated  as  evidence  because  it  is  no  more  than  a
      submission on domestic law;  (b) even if it is  evidence,  it  is  not
      admissible because the opinion therein is irrelevant; and/or, (c)  the
      opinion must be treated as being of no weight.  Mr  Kovats  sought  to
      emphasise the FtT's finding that it was JH's refusal to cooperate with
      Ms Brown that led to Ms Brown's inability to assess the children,  not
      the appellant's absence from the UK.

  36. Relying on the Supreme  Court's  decision  in  Kennedy  (Appellant)  v
      Cordia (Services) LLP (Respondent) (Scotland) [2016] 1  WLR,  Ms  Naik
      asserts that if Ms Kakonge's Opinion is found to contain 'submissions'
      on matters of law it should nevertheless "be taken into account by  an
      experienced judge,  who  can  readily  treat  the  statements  as  the
      opinions of a skilled witness as to practice, and make up his own mind
      on the legal question."  She submits that  Ms  Kakonge's  Opinion  was
      admissible as evidence both before the FtT and the Upper Tribunal  and
      that it is of sufficient evidential value to permit the Upper Tribunal
      to conclude that the proceedings before  the  FtT  were  not  fair  or
      effective.

  37. Replying, in written post-hearing submissions, Mr Kovats urged caution
      on placing reliance on the decision in  Kennedy,  observing  that  the
      Supreme Court were there considering a "Scottish  case"  and  did  not
      indicate that "Scots law on the admissibility of skilled witnesses  is
      identical to English law".  It was  further  submitted  that,  in  any
      event, the decision in Kennedy provided an illustration as to why  the
      FtT did not fall into error in the instant case;  the  Upper  Tribunal
      having lost sight of the FtT's  finding  that  it  was  JH's  lack  of
      cooperation that led to Ms Brown's inability to assess  the  children,
      not the appellant's absence from the UK.

  38. Taking Mr  Kovats'  primary  submission  first  i.e.  that  the  Upper
      Tribunal unlawfully treated Ms Kakonge's written Opinion as if it were
      evidence, we accept that some passages in Ms Kakonge's written Opinion
      do stray into the realm of legal submission. However, neither the  FtT
      nor  the  Upper  Tribunal  attached  any  evidential  weight  to  such
      passages.  Even  a  superficial  analysis  of  Ms  Kakonge's   Opinion
      discloses large tracts of evidence bearing on core issues that the FtT
      and the Upper Tribunal had to consider. In particular, we find that Ms
      Kakonge's opinion as to the practical impediments facing the appellant
      in any attempt to access and obtain suitable relief  from  the  Family
      Court whilst living in Jamaica, is evidence as to legal  practice  and
      not, as Mr Kovats sought to suggest, submission on matters of domestic
      law.

  39. Before we leave this ground of challenge, we think it helpful to  make
      some observations about the Supreme Court's decision in Kennedy, given
      the reliance placed on  it  by  Ms  Naik.  As  a  consequence  of  the
      operation of section 41(2) of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005,  the
      decision is not binding on us in the instant appeal. Kennedy concerned
      an appeal to the Supreme Court from the Inner House of  the  Court  of
      Session. A decision of the Supreme Court on appeal from a Court of any
      part of the United Kingdom, other than  a  decision  on  a  devolution
      matter (which this case is not), is to be regarded as the decision  of
      a Court of that part of the United Kingdom. The Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)
      sitting in England & Wales is not bound  by  a  decision  of  a  Court
      sitting in the Scottish judicial system and, consequently, we are  not
      bound by any aspect of the decision in Kennedy.

  40. In any event, we have some difficulty  in  envisaging  how  the  legal
      principles underpinning the ratio in Kennedy can be readily applied in
      the instant jurisdiction. In Kennedy, the Court gave consideration  to
      the issue of whether the  skilled  witness  evidence  of  a  chartered
      member of the  Institute  of  Safety  and  Health  was  admissible  in
      relation to an employer's potential liability for an employee, a  home
      carer, who had slipped on snow and ice when on her way  to  visit  her
      client. In reaching its conclusion,  the  Supreme  Court  undertook  a
      detailed analysis of Scots law  of  evidence  in  civil  and  criminal
      cases. There was, though, no discussion of the corresponding rules  of
      evidence covered by the jurisdiction of  the  courts  in  England  and
      Wales,  let  alone  how  such  rules  apply  in  the  context  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the FtT or the Upper Tribunal.

  41. Moving on, as will be obvious from we have said above, we also  reject
      Mr Kovats' alternative  submission  that  Ms  Kakonge's  evidence  was
      irrelevant  and,  as  a  consequence,   inadmissible.   Putting   this
      submission in its correct procedural and legal context,  the  FtT  has
      the power to admit expert evidence  (rule  14(1)(c)  of  The  Tribunal
      Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules
      2014 (SI 2014/2604)) and it can admit  evidence  whether  or  not  the
      evidence would be admissible in a civil trial in  the  United  Kingdom
      (rule 12(2)(a) of the 2014 Rules).

  42.  The  central  consideration  for  the  FtT   when   determining   the
      admissibility of evidence is the relevance of  that  evidence  to  the
      issues before it. There is a presumption that  all  relevant  evidence
      should be admitted unless there is a compelling reason to the contrary
      (Ryder LJ in Atlantic Electronics Ltd v R  &  C  Commissioners  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 651 at [31]). Evidence is relevant to the determination of an
      appeal if it is capable of  bearing  on  an  issue  to  be  determined
      therein. Evidence of the likelihood of an  event  occurring,  such  as
      that given by Ms Kakonge, is necessarily speculative,  but  that  does
      not make it irrelevant. Furthermore, the fact that alternative, and Mr
      Kovats would say, determinative, evidence could have been provided  by
      the appellant in the form of a response to an application made to  the
      Family Court rather than placing reliance on Ms Kakonge's evidence  on
      the issue, does not render Ms Kakonge's evidence irrelevant. It  is  a
      matter going to the weight to be attached to  Ms  Kakonge's  evidence,
      not the admissibility of it.

  43. As to the assertion by Mr Kovats  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  not
      entitled to attach weight  to  Ms  Brown's  report,  given  the  FtT's
      finding that it was JH's refusal to cooperate that led to  Ms  Brown's
      inability to directly assess J and RN as opposed  to  the  appellant's
      absence from the UK,  we remind ourselves that the  question  for  the
      Upper Tribunal on appeal against a decision  of  the  FtT  brought  on
      procedural fairness grounds, is not whether the FtT  acted  reasonably
      or came to a  rational  conclusion,  but  whether  there  has  been  a
      deprivation of the right to a fair hearing (SH  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
      [2011] EWCA Civ 1284). This is a question which  admits  of  only  one
      correct answer. Whether there  has  been  procedural  fairness  is  an
      objective question (R (Citizens UK) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  1812).  If
      the FtT concludes that the appeal process has been fair and  effective
      but on appeal the Upper Tribunal concludes to the contrary, it follows
      that the Upper Tribunal must find that the FtT erred in law.  This  is
      the approach we took in our error of law decision and we can  find  no
      justification for departing from the conclusion we previously reached,
      having taken such an approach.

  44. For the reasons given above, we conclude  there  is  no  merit  in  Mr
      Kovats' application that we  should  depart  from  our  error  of  law
      decision. Furthermore, one only has to read what is set out  above  to
      appreciate that the submissions Mr  Kovats  now  seeks  to  make  were
      available to him at the time the error of law decision  was  initially
      being considered. Although the terms of  the  error  of  law  decision
      crystallised the Upper Tribunal's  rationale  for  setting  aside  the
      FtT's decision, particularly when compared to much  broader  challenge
      taken by the appellant in the  grounds  of  appeal,  that  is  not  an
      invitation for the losing party, in this case the SSHD, to reload  the
      barrels and take a more focused aim at the target.

  45. For all these reasons, we refuse the Secretary of State's  request  to
      depart from the error of law decision of 1 April 2019 and move  on  to
      consider whether the appellant's deportation would lead to a breach of
      Article 8 ECHR.

PART 2: RE-MAKING OF THE DECISION IN THE APPEAL

Legal framework

  46. The statutory provisions and Rules  relating  to  the  deportation  of
      foreign criminals are now familiar to all who practise in  this  field
      and have attracted a  large  amount  of  judicial  consideration.  The
      present case is of a less usual kind, in that it is concerned with  an
      application for revocation of a deportation order made by an appellant
      who has been deported pursuant to section 94B of the 2002 Act and then
      returned to the  UK  pursuant  to  an  order  of  this  Tribunal.  The
      deportation order remains in force despite the appellant's  return  to
      the United Kingdom.

  47. The Secretary of State's power to deport non-UK nationals derives from
      section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 ("1971 Act"), which reads:

          "A person who is not a British Citizen is  liable  to  deportation
         from the United Kingdom if -

         (a)  the Secretary of State deems his deportation to  be  conducive
         to the public good; or

         (b)  ..."

  48. Section 5(2) of the 1971 Act gives the Secretary  of  State  power  to
      revoke a  deportation  order  "at  any  time".  The  exercise  of  the
      deportation powers in the case of  non-nationals  who  commit  serious
      offences is governed by sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007.
      Pursuant to section  32(5):  "The  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
      deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section
      33)." The appellant falls within the definition of a foreign criminal.
      By section 32(6) of the UK Borders Act 2007, the  Secretary  of  State
      may not revoke a deportation order made in accordance with  subsection
      (5) unless, inter alia, one of the exceptions set out  section  33  of
      the Act applies. Exception  1  precludes  the  removal  of  a  foreign
      criminal in pursuance of a deportation order where such removal  would
      breach a person's ECHR rights. In the instant case it  is  the  rights
      afforded by Article 8 ECHR which are in issue.

  49. The proper approach to the Article 8 ECHR balancing exercise in a case
      such as this,  where  there  has  been  an  application  to  revoke  a
      deportation order, is to be found in paragraphs 390-392  and  398-399A
      of the Immigration Rules, as well as Part 5A (sections 117A-D) of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  The  deportation  and
      Article 8 regime of paragraphs 398-399A and section 117C of  the  2002
      Act apply not only to the initial decision to make a deportation order
      but also to a decision as to whether to revoke such an order once made
      (MR (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
      EWCA Civ 1598).

  50. We adopt and apply the reasoning of Leggatt LJ (with whom  the  Senior
      President of Tribunals and Hickinbottom LJ agreed) in CI  (Nigeria)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ  2027  at
      [20] and [21], that it is in general unnecessary  for  a  tribunal  to
      refer to the Immigration Rules in a case such as this, where there  is
      no dispute that the relevant provisions are reflected within Part  5A.



  51. We, therefore, turn to Part 5A of the 2002 Act. Section  117A  of  the
      Act  explains  when  Part  5A  applies  and  identifies   that,   when
      considering the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
      right to respect for  private  and  family  life  is  justified  under
      Article 8(2), the Tribunal must have regard  to  those  considerations
      listed in section 117B and, in cases  concerning  the  deportation  of
      foreign criminals as defined in section 117D, those considerations set
      out in section 117C.

  52. Section 117B provides that the maintenance of immigration  control  is
      in the public interest and provides for a list  of  matters  that  the
      Tribunal must consider as well as, in part, the weight that should  be
      attached thereto.

  53. Section 117C provides:

          117C Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

          2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

          3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

          4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

          5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

          6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2..."

  54. The provisions in Part 5A, taken together, are intended to  provide  a
      structured approach to the application of Article 8 ECHR (KO (Nigeria)
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53  at  [14])
      and produce a final result compatible with Article 8 (KE  (Nigeria)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1382  at
      [25] and Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]
      UKSC 58 at [36]).

  55. In NA  (Pakistan)  &  Another  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Jackson LJ provided guidance  both  on
      how to approach section 117C and on the relationship  between  section
      117C and the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights: -

         "36.     In relation to a medium offender,  first  see  whether  he
             falls within Exception 1 or Exception 2.  If he does, then the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  If there are, then the Article 8 claim succeeds.   If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim  fails.   As  was  the
             case under the 2012 rules  (as  explained  in  MF  (Nigeria)),
             there is no room for a general Article  8  evaluation  outside
             the 2014 rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

         37.      In relation to  a  serious  offender,  it  will  often  be
             sensible first to see whether his case involves  circumstances
             of the kind described in Exceptions 1 and 2, both because  the
             circumstances so described set  out  particularly  significant
             factors bearing upon respect for private  life  (Exception  1)
             and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because that may
             provide a helpful basis on which an  assessment  can  be  made
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  as  is  required
             under section 117C(6).  It will then be necessary to  look  to
             see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and
             2 are of  such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
             conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by the
             circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy
             the test in section 117C(6).

          "38.    Against that background, one may ask what is the  role  of
             the Strasbourg jurisprudence?  In  particular,  how  does  one
             take  into  account  important  decisions  such  as   ?ner   v
             Netherlands (2007) 45  EHRR  14  and  Maslov  v  Austria?   Mr
             Southey QC, who represents KJ and WM, rightly submits that the
             Strasbourg authorities have an important role to play.  Mr Tam
             rightly accepted that this is correct.  The answer is that the
             Secretary of State and the  tribunals  and  courts  will  have
             regard to the Strasbourg jurisprudence when applying the tests
             set out in our domestic legislation.  For example, a  tribunal
             may be considering whether it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  a
             child to remain in England without the deportee; or it may  be
             considering whether  certain  circumstances  are  sufficiently
             "compelling"  to  outweigh  the  high   public   interest   in
             deportation of foreign criminals. Anyone applying these  tests
             (as required by our own rules and legislation) should heed the
             guidance contained in the Strasbourg authorities.  As we  have
             stated above, the scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and paras.
             398-399A of the 2014 rules is to ensure  compliance  with  the
             requirements of Article 8 through a structured approach, which
             is intended to ensure that  proper  weight  is  given  to  the
             public interest in deportation whilst also  having  regard  to
             other relevant factors as identified  in  the  Strasbourg  and
             domestic caselaw.  The new regime is not intended  to  produce
             violations of Article 8."

Discussion and Decision

  56. We make our findings applying the legal framework set  out  above  and
      having considered all of the evidence before us even if  not  referred
      to, including documents served by the  appellant  in  support  of  the
      application for judicial review, the bundles prepared by  the  parties
      for the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  (including,  but  not
      limited to, witness  statements  made  by  the  appellant,  RX,  other
      relatives and supporters, reports from  four  professional  witnesses,
      assessments made by  the  National  Offender  Management  Service  and
      photographic evidence), as  well  as  the  additional  appeal  bundles
      provided by the parties for the purposes of the hearing of  9  January
      2020 (including, but not limited to, witness statements  drawn  up  by
      the appellant, RX, RX's grandmother and the appellant's brother, and a
      supplementary report of 19 December 2019 authored by  the  Independent
      Social Worker, Ms Brown). In addition, we heard oral evidence from the
      appellant and RX.

  57. Returning to Part 5A of the 2002 Act, it is not in dispute that  as  a
      consequence  of  the  appellant's  conviction  in  February  2014  for
      supplying Class A controlled drugs and subsequent  sentence  of  forty
      months imprisonment, he  is  a  foreign  criminal  as  defined  within
      section 117D of the Act. The deportation of foreign criminals such  as
      the appellant is in the public interest (section 117C(1)). The  weight
      to be attached to the public interest in  the  instant  case  is  more
      conveniently considered when we turn our minds to the  application  of
      section 117C(6) below.

Exception 1 - Section 117C(4)

  58. Ms Naik rightly did not contend, either in the skeleton argument of 30
      December 2019 or in oral submissions, that the appellant can meet  the
      requirements of Exception 1. It is, nevertheless, prudent  for  us  to
      set out why this is so.

  59. Most obviously, the appellant has not been lawfully  resident  in  the
      United Kingdom for most of his life i.e. "more than half" his life (SC
      (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ
      2112 at [53]). The appellant was nearly 22 years  old  when  he  first
      arrived in the UK in May 2000, and he is now 41 years old. Even had he
      remained lawfully in the United Kingdom  since  his  arrival  in  2000
      until todays date, he would still not meet the requirements of section
      117C(4)(a).  In any event, the appellant remained  unlawfully  in  the
      United Kingdom without leave to  remain  for  approximately  13  years
      after his arrival, only being granted 30 months leave to remain  on  4
      July 2013. This leave to remain was brought to an end by  the  signing
      of the deportation order.

  60. The second requirement in Exception 1 is  that  the  foreign  criminal
      (i.e. the appellant) must be "socially and  culturally  integrated  in
      the UK". The Court of Appeal in CI (Nigeria) considered the  scope  of
      the phrase "socially and culturally integrated"  in  section  117C(4),
      stating:

          57.    In assessing whether a "foreign criminal" is "socially  and
             culturally integrated in the UK", it is important to  keep  in
             mind that the  rationale  behind  the  test  is  to  determine
             whether the person concerned has established a private life in
             the UK which has  a  substantial  claim  to  protection  under
             article 8.  The  test  should  therefore  be  interpreted  and
             applied having  regard  to  the  interests  protected  by  the
             concept of "private life". The nature and scope of the concept
             was explained by the Grand Chamber of the  European  Court  of
             Human Rights in ner v The Netherlands (2006) 45 EHRR 14, para
             59, when it observed that:

                "... not all [settled] migrants, no  matter  how  long  they
                have been residing in the country from which they are to  be
                expelled, necessarily enjoy 'family life' there  within  the
                meaning of article 8. However, as article  8  also  protects
                the right to establish and develop relationships with  other
                human beings and the outside world and can sometimes embrace
                aspects of an  individual's  social  identity,  it  must  be
                accepted that the totality of social  ties  between  settled
                migrants  and  the  community  in  which  they  are   living
                constitute part of the concept of 'private life' within  the
                meaning of article 8." (citations omitted)

         58.      Relevant social ties obviously include relationships  with
             friends  and  relatives,  as  well  as  ties  formed   through
             employment  or  other  paid  or   unpaid   work   or   through
             participation in  communal  activities.  However,  a  person's
             social identity is  not  defined  solely  by  such  particular
             relationships  but  is  constituted  at  a   deep   level   by
             familiarity with and  participation  in  the  shared  customs,
             traditions, practices, beliefs, values, linguistic idioms  and
             other local knowledge which situate a person in a  society  or
             social group and generate a sense of belonging. ...

  61. Looking at the appellant's circumstances as a whole, we accept that he
      is "socially and culturally integrated in the UK". Given our  findings
      above regarding section 117C(4)(a) and those below made in relation to
      section 117C(4)(c), we do not propose to deal with this issue  in  any
      detail,  save  to  say  that  we  have  considered   the   appellant's
      circumstances as a whole including, but not limited to, the length  of
      time he has lived in the  United  Kingdom  the  relationships  he  has
      developed during that time, his immigration status including the grant
      of leave in 2013 founded on Article 8 grounds and the fact that he has
      engaged in criminal enterprise in the  UK,  been  deported  and  lived
      outside the UK  for  over  two  years.  Despite  the  deportation  we,
      nevertheless, accept that the appellant's social and integrative links
      to the UK have been sufficiently rebuilt since June  2019,  such  that
      the requirements of section 117C(4)(b) have been met.  In  particular,
      we find that significant weight should be attached to the  appellant's
      role in RX's, and his other children's, lives.

  62. Finally, turning to section 117C(4)(c) in Kamara v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813, the Court of Appeal said:



         "14.     ... The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative
             judgment to be made as  to  whether  the  individual  will  be
             enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the
             society in that other country is carried on and a capacity  to
             participate in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity  to
             be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis
             in that society and to build up within  a  reasonable  time  a
             variety of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the
             individual's private or family life."

  63. Having undertaken the broad evaluative judgment  required  of  us,  we
      conclude that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's integration into Jamaica.

  64. Unlike the position in many, if not most, deportation appeals we  have
      had the considerable assistance in our consideration of this issue  of
      evidence as to the circumstances that prevailed in Jamaica between his
      deportation in 2016 and his return to the UK  in  June  2109.   During
      that  time  the  appellant  resided  with  his  mother.   Whilst   the
      appellant's mother is currently in hospital in Jamaica,  there  is  no
      evidence that the appellant could not return to  live  in  the  family
      house if deported. Although the appellant provides  evidence  that  he
      was unable to find employment when in Jamaica, he does not state  that
      this situation arose because he was not an 'insider' in the country or
      unable to operate on a day to day basis in  the  country,  but  rather
      because he was "not in the right frame of mind" as  a  consequence  of
      being separated from his UK-based children. We, also, take account  of
      the fact that the appellant has a number of family members  living  in
      Jamaica, including five siblings and two children (who are  both  aged
      in their very early twenties). Additionally, the appellant  gave  oral
      evidence that he had access to a car  whilst  living  in  Jamaica  and
      referred to showing J around the country when she visited.  In  short,
      on the evidence before us, the appellant had a private and family life
      of real substance in Jamaica and there is nothing in the evidence that
      leads us to conclude that the same position would  not  arise  if  the
      appellant were now to be deported.

Exception 2 - Section 117C(5)

  65. It is the requirements of sections 117C(5) and 117C(6) that  form  the
      primary focus of this appeal. We turn first to consider the respective
      requirements of the former of these provisions.

  66. We conclude that the appellant does not have "a genuine and subsisting
      relationship with a qualifying partner". The role performed by  JH  in
      the appellant's life is at present as the mother and primary carer  of
      his children, J and RN, and  as  a  facilitator  of  the  relationship
      between J, RN and the appellant, including allowing the  appellant  to
      reside with her, J and RN when he visits the children in London.  When
      looked at as a whole, the appellant's relationship with  JH  does  not
      display the requisite qualities required to engage this  limb  of  the
      section 117C(5), and  no submission to the contrary was advanced.

  67. Moving on, there is no dispute that J  and  RN  are  both  "qualifying
      children", within the meaning ascribed to that term by section 117D(1)
      of the 2002 Act. RX is not a qualifying  child  for  the  purposes  of
      section 117C(5).

  68. We also find that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental
      relationship with both J and RN. A genuine and subsisting relationship
      with a child does not require  direct  parental  care  or  the  parent
      having an active  role  in  the  child's  upbringing.  It  is  a  fact
      sensitive exercise that requires looking at the circumstances  of  the
      relationship as a whole (Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
      AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661).

  69. We have already touched on the circumstances  that  prevailed  in  the
      appellant's relationship with J prior to his deportation in  2016.  He
      lived in the same household as J and JH between the time of J's  birth
      in 2008 until January 2014, at which time he  was  arrested  from  the
      family home. There were occasions during the  aforementioned  six-year
      period that the appellant was the sole parental carer for J, JH having
      been admitted to hospital twice in 2008. Both JH  and  J  visited  the
      appellant whilst he was in prison and the appellant  returned  to  the
      family home after release  in  November  2015,  after  which  time  he
      resumed normal parental and familial activities such as  taking  J  to
      school, household 'chores' and generally  engaging  with  J.  However,
      after the appellant  approached  social  services  in  2016  asserting
      erratic behaviour by JH, he was "kicked out" of the family  home.  The
      appellant, nevertheless, maintained his relationship with  J  at  that
      time, taking her school regularly until he was detained in preparation
      for his deportation.

  70. Upon his return to Jamaica, the appellant kept in regular contact with
      J using FaceTime and telephone. He also engaged with RN via  FaceTime.
      In July and August 2018, JH took J and RN  to  Jamaica  to  visit  her
      mother. The appellant saw J and RN on numerous  occasions  during  the
      month they were there, including over weekends when J would live  with
      the appellant, in JH's absence.  The appellant and J took trips around
      Jamaica and J met with her half-sisters.

  71. J and RN met the appellant at the airport upon his return to the UK in
      June 2019. Although the appellant now  resides  in  the  Midlands,  he
      visits the children regularly in London. There is  some  inconsistency
      in the evidence as to how often such visits are made,  but  we  accept
      the appellant's oral evidence that he travels to London to visit  them
      every other Friday and stays  with  the  children  and  JH  until  the
      following Monday evening,  at  which  time  he  travels  back  to  the
      Midlands because he has  to  sign  with  immigration  officials  every
      Tuesday, in Birmingham. When in London,  the  appellant  takes  J  out
      alone, for example taking her swimming, to the park, to church and  to
      J's favourite ice cream parlour. The appellant also takes J to  school
      on the Monday morning, and engages generally with J's school  and  her
      school life. The appellant also spends time with RN, although JH  will
      not allow him to take RN out of the house in her  absence  because  of
      the need for RN to be breastfed. The appellant does the  housework  at
      JH's property and helps with the cooking  and  cleaning  when  staying
      there.   RN  recognises  the  appellant,  calls  him  "daddy"  and  is
      generally close to him physically when the appellant  stays.   RX  has
      visited the family in  London  twice  since  the  appellant's  return,
      including attending RN's third birthday party. He did not do so  prior
      to the appellant's return in June 2019.

  72. Considering the nature of the appellant's relationship with J  and  RN
      as a whole, with particular focus on more recent events but set in the
      context of the historical relations, we accept, for  the  purposes  of
      section 117C(5), that the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with both J and RN.

  73. We now turn  to  consider  whether  the  effects  of  the  appellant's
      deportation on either J or RN "would be unduly harsh".

  74. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v  PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
      EWCA Civ 1213 Hickinbottom LJ reminded those tasked  with  considering
      section 117C(5) that:

         "46.     ... in section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act,  Parliament  has
             made clear its  will  that,  for  foreign  offenders  who  are
             sentenced to one to four years, only  where  the  consequences
             for the  children  are  "unduly  harsh"  will  deportation  be
             constrained. That is entirely consistent with article 8 of the
             ECHR.  It is important that decision-makers  and,  when  their
             decisions are challenged, tribunals  and  courts  honour  that
             expression of Parliamentary will."

  75. The correct approach to the consideration of "unduly harsh" in section
      117C(5) was recently considered by the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria),
      Lord Carnwath (with whom the other Justices agreed)  stating  that  on
      its face section 117C(5) raises a factual issue seen from the point of
      view of the partner or child. At [23] he went on to say:

          "23.   On the other  hand  the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
             clearly intended to introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an  element  of  comparison.
             It assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is
             a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant
             context.  "Unduly" implies something going beyond that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in
             IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55 and 64) can it be  equated  with  a
             requirement to show "very compelling reasons".  That would  be
             in effect to replicate the additional test applied by  section
             117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more"."

  76. Holroyde LJ further explained in PG (Jamaica) that:

          "34.  It  is  therefore  now  clear  that  a  tribunal  or   court
             considering section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on
             the  comparative  seriousness  of  the  offence  or   offences
             committed by the foreign criminal who faces  deportation,  but
             rather, on whether the effects of his deportation on  a  child
             or partner would go beyond the degree of harshness which would
             necessarily be involved for any child or partner of a  foreign
             criminal faced with deportation.  Pursuant to  Rule  399,  the
             tribunal or court must  consider  both  whether  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the child  and/or  partner  to  live  in  the
             country to which the foreign criminal is to  be  deported  and
             whether it would be unduly harsh for the child and/or  partner
             to remain in the UK without him."

  77. Accordingly, when  determining  whether  the  appellant's  deportation
      would be "unduly harsh" on J or RN, we have  not  had  regard  to  the
      seriousness of the offence committed by the appellant, other than that
      which is inherent in the distinction drawn by section 117C  itself  by
      reference to length of sentence.

  78. Moving on, Mr Kovats accepts  that  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  to
      require J and RN to live in Jamaica,  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
      deported. We concur. Both children are British citizens.  Whilst  they
      each have a number of paternal  and  maternal  relatives  residing  in
      Jamaica, they have only visited the country once for approximately one
      month. In our view, most significantly we remind ourselves  that  this
      is not a case in which the children's parents (i.e. the appellant  and
      JH) are in a genuine and subsisting relationship. JH  is  the  primary
      carer for both J and RN, and there is no evidence that she intends  to
      move to Jamaica. In our view, it would undoubtedly be  "unduly  harsh"
      for J and RN to be required move to  Jamaica,  leaving  their  primary
      carer mother behind in the United Kingdom.

  79. We now turn to consider the disputed  issue  in  relation  to  section
      117C(5): whether it would be "unduly harsh" for  either  J  or  RN  to
      remain in the UK without the appellant.

  80. The appellant was deported to Jamaica in September  2016  and  resided
      there until June 2019. J and RN remained in the UK  with  JH  at  that
      time, save the short visit they made to Jamaica,  referred  to  above.
      Whilst we  can  draw  some  assistance  from  the  circumstances  that
      prevailed during that period we remind ourselves that time  has  moved
      on and we must make our assessment on the current factual matrix.

  81. Ms Naik submits that it is in the best interests of both children  for
      the status quo to prevail i.e. for the appellant to remain in  the  UK
      and to have physical contact with the children. She  further  asserts,
      inter alia, that the appellant's removal from the UK would:  (i)  lead
      to safeguarding issues for both J and  RN;  (ii)  have  a  detrimental
      psychological impact on J, as it did when the appellant  was  deported
      in 2016; (iii) deprive J and RN of contact with RX; and, (iv) lead  to
      difficulties in RN developing any  meaningful  relationship  with  the
      appellant.

  82. It is trite that the children's best interests are to be treated as  a
      primary consideration. The SSHD "does not dispute that it would be  in
      [J's] best interests for the appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK"  and,
      albeit the SSHD observes that  the  evidence  in  relation  to  RN  is
      weaker, she takes the same position regarding RN's best interests.  We
      also accept that it is in the best interests of both children for  the
      appellant remain living in the United Kingdom, allowing him to play  a
      physical role in their lives.  We have  treated  the  children's  best
      interests as a primary consideration in our assessment of  whether  it
      would be "unduly harsh" for either  child  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom without the appellant.

  83. Moving on, we reject Ms Naik's submission that the appellant's removal
      would lead to safeguarding issues for either J or RN.  In  support  of
      her  contention,  Ms  Naik  relies  upon  what  she  submits  are  the
      consequences which flow from JH's "mental health  issues".  She  draws
      particular attention to information found in Ms  Brown's  reports  and
      elsewhere  relating  to  JH's  "explosive  and  quite  volatile"   and
      "erratic" behaviour which,  she  avers,  "can  be  dangerous".  Recent
      examples of JH leaving the "stove or  iron  on"  are  drawn  from  the
      appellant's evidence.

  84. Delving deeper into this submission, we accept the  evidence,  in  the
      form of a letter of 24 October 2008 from a health visitor employed  by
      Southwark NHS,  that JH was twice admitted to hospital for  post-natal
      depression in 2008, the second of those admissions  being  between  31
      August and 9 October 2008. We also accept that JH was the subject of a
      Mental Health Care Plan in 2009, which required her "mental state  and
      medication" to be monitored on a "2-3 weekly"  basis.   We  take  full
      account of  the  fact  that  there  were  five  separate  social  care
      assessments undertaken by the  local  authority  in  relation  to  the
      family between 2008 and 2016. In particular, in August 2016 both J and
      RN (RN being at that time unborn) were made the  subject  of  a  Child
      Protection Plan ("the Protection Plan") by Southwark  Social  Services
      Children's Department. The process leading to the Protection Plan  was
      instigated by a referral from the Tower Team Midwives, whose  concerns
      arose from a combination of JH's pregnancy and the team's knowledge of
      JH's postpartum psychosis after the birth of J. Whilst  this  referral
      was being processed, a referral was also  made  by  J's  school  which
      raised concerns over JH's presentation, in particular  observing  that
      she became aggressive and angry  at  school  staff  -  the  individual
      incidents being set out in the evidence before us,  all  of  which  we
      have taken into account. In addition, the  appellant  raised  concerns
      with Child Services at around the same time and,  separately,  a  duty
      social worker raised concerns about the appellant's  presentation.  We
      observe, and take into account, that at the time  of  his  immigration
      detention  and  subsequent  removal  in  September   2016,   Southwark
      Safeguarding and Community Services were  seeking  to  work  with  the
      appellant to assess his  parenting  capacity  and  to  enable  him  to
      address the domestic violence issues between himself and JH.

  85. The date  that  the  aforementioned  Protection  Plan  ceased  is  not
      disclosed on the evidence before us, save that it can be deduced  from
      an entry of 31 October 2017 in J's social services 'Person Case Notes'
      that as of that date neither J nor RN  remained  the  subject  of  the
      Protection Plan. J was, though, at that time the subject of a 'Care in
      Need Plan' to address her emotional and social needs in school.

  86. In our view, it is of significance that J and RN have lived with JH at
      all times since the appellant's deportation, save for a  short  period
      when JH was in hospital giving birth to RN, at which time J was looked
      after by relatives.  The last entry in the copy  of  J's  Person  Case
      Notes that has provided to the Tribunal, is dated  8  March  2018  and
      states "...advising case closure. The  outstanding  concern  is  [J's]
      behaviour in school and the school have a plan in place for  this  and
      the Educational Psychologist is engaged with [J]".

  87. We draw from all of the evidence before us, including but not  limited
      to that summarised above, that Social Services (which  includes  child
      services) have had significant involvement with the family, putting in
      place both Protection and Care in  Need  plans  when  it  was  thought
      necessary to do so. The absence  of  the  imposition  of  any  further
      Protection Plan or other safeguarding involvement by  Social  Services
      since October 2017, and possibly prior to this date, strongly supports
      a conclusion that no safeguarding concerns  arose  during  that  time.
      This coincides with the period the appellant was  living  in  Jamaica,
      and the period after his return during which he spends only a minority
      of his time in physical contact with J and RN.

  88. Whilst  the  absence  of  any  safeguarding  interventions  by  Social
      Services between October 2017 and the present day does not  inexorably
      lead to the conclusion that there will be no  safeguarding  issues  in
      the future, particularly if the appellant is removed from the  UK,  in
      our view it points strongly in that direction. If safeguarding  issues
      do arise, and we do not  accept  there  is  evidence  to  support  the
      contention that they will, then Social Services are well  equipped  to
      deal with them, as they have in  the  past,  even  though  JH  remains
      "suspicious" of social services. Our conclusion is supported  to  some
      extent by the appellant's own evidence on this  issue,  the  appellant
      stating in his witness statement of 13 December  2019:  "I  will  only
      ever say anything if I think the kids are at  risk,  which  I  do  not
      think they currently are".

  89. Turning to the issue of J's behaviour, with particular  focus  on  her
      behaviour in the school environment. The appellant asserts that  there
      was a decline in J's behaviour, which coincided with  his  deportation
      in 2016. He further asserts that since his return  J's  behaviour  has
      improved. He has spoken to the teachers at J's  school,  who  indicate
      that she is now doing well and is a pleasure to teach. He  fears  that
      there will be a decline in her behaviour if he is deported again.

  90. J's Person Case Notes disclose that there were  behavioural  incidents
      involving J in 2013 at her first primary school, an entry in the Notes
      dated 14 October 2013 stating "...there have been a  large  number  of
      incidents involving [J] this term, where other children have been hurt
      or upset." Broadly these incidents involved J pushing or kicking other
      children, including children much younger than herself.

  91. J transferred to a second primary school on 20  June  2016,  this  not
      being as  a  consequence  of  behavioural  incidents  involving  J.  A
      document  of  9  November  2016,  authored  by   Lambeth   Educational
      Psychology  Service,  identifies   further   significant   behavioural
      incidents at school involving J kicking,  hitting  and  calling  other
      children names. The document also expresses concern over J's emotional
      well-being. A record of a Southwark Council Strategy meeting, dated 13
      November 2016, states regarding J:

         "[J] has good attendance and appears to enjoy school. She  is  also
         well presented  and  it  appears  on  the  basis  of  the  school's
         observations that [J's] mother is able to meet her basic care needs
         ...School have no significant concerns regarding J's  welfare  when
         she is with them...she has an open relationship with staff  and  is
         able to approach them...School observes that  J  appears  to  be  a
         resilient child. ... School have witnessed altercations between the
         parents ... It is clearly of concern that J is likely to be exposed
         to ongoing disputes at home.  ...  [J]  has  positive  interactions
         with her peers and teachers as a whole  although  there  have  been
         incidents of her behaving in a  "spiteful"  way  or  hitting  other
         children."

  92. As indicated above, a Protection Plan was in place at  this  time  and
      the school developed strategies to assist J, including drama  therapy.
      The referral form  for  drama  therapy,  identifies  the  "Reason  for
      Referral" as follows: "J found it difficult to  settle;  it  has  been
      suggested that J was bullied at her previous school and  that  may  go
      some way towards explaining her actions here".

  93. Although strategies were put in place by the  second  primary  school,
      J's Person Case  Notes  describe  behavioural  incidents  involving  J
      continuing to occur, and a recommendation was made in June  2017  that
      an Educational Psychologist be put in place  if  the  strategies  then
      being deployed did not achieve the desired changes.  The  most  recent
      Person Case Note before us, authored in March  2018,  identifies  that
      there were still concerns about J's behaviour at that time and that an
      Educational Psychologist had been  engaged.  There  is  no  additional
      information relating to J's behaviour at school  in  the  school  year
      commencing September 2018 and J progressed into secondary education in
      September 2019. A letter from the college J attends, dated 19 November
      2019, refers to J's successful transition  into  secondary  education.
      There is no reference in the letter or elsewhere  to  any  behavioural
      incidents involving J in her secondary education.

  94. Having broadly recanted  the  circumstances  referred  to  above,  the
      Independent Social  Worker,  Ms  Brown  observes  that  J's  behaviour
      deteriorated quite rapidly in the absence of her father's  management,
      that he is a steadying and vital physical presence in J's  life,  that
      the appellant's physical presence in his children's lives  allows  him
      to be a direct observer into their ongoing welfare  and  that  he  has
      shown himself willing to approach the local authority, unlike  JH  who
      remains  suspicious.  She  continues  by  stating  that  much  of  the
      emotional and practical support provided to J has been  undertaken  by
      the appellant rather than JH, and the appellant acts as the protector.
      It  is  said  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  have  the   same
      detrimental effect on J as occurred when the appellant was  previously
      removed,  which  manifested  itself  at  school  in   aggressive   and
      confrontational behaviour. Ms Brown  concludes  that  the  appellant's
      removal would impact upon J's emotional and  psychological  wellbeing,
      and possibly her physical wellbeing if she began to self-harm or self-
      neglect.  J would be devastated and her education  and  future  career
      prospects may also be impacted upon by the appellant's removal.

  95. Bringing all of  this  together,  in  light  of  the  Supreme  Court's
      decision in KO (Nigeria), when considering  section  117C(5)  we  must
      assess whether the degree of harshness likely to be suffered by  J  in
      consequence of her father's deportation goes beyond that faced by  any
      child faced with deportation of a parent. In the  instant  matter,  in
      our conclusion when the evidence is looked at  as  a  whole  it  comes
      nowhere near surpassing this threshold.

  96. The documents  before  us  suggest  that  rather  than  it  being  the
      appellant's  deportation  that  was   solely   responsible   for   J's
      behavioural issues, they are rooted in a  much  more  complex  web  of
      intertwining events. The behavioural  issues  previously  occurred  in
      2013 and resurfaced at a time when J  had  recently  moved  to  a  new
      primary school, there were significant disputes between her parents in
      the familial  home  and  the  appellant's  deportation  was  proposed.
      Despite this  accumulation  of  adverse  circumstances,  there  is  no
      evidence that J self-harmed or that there was self-neglect, and we  do
      not accept that the evidence before us supports a contention that  the
      appellant's deportation would lead to such occurrences in the future.

  97. Whilst we accept that the appellant's deportation is likely to  impact
      on J's emotional and psychological wellbeing and that this may lead to
      a decline her behaviour such as occurred in 2013, 2016  and  2017,  in
      our view all children deprived of  a  parent's  company  during  their
      formative years will  find  that  experience  traumatic  and  will  be
      impacted  upon  emotionally  and   psychologically.   If   behavioural
      incidents involving J resurface at her secondary school then  we  have
      no doubt that the school, with the assistance of the local  authority,
      will take the necessary steps to address this as they have done in the
      past.

  98. In coming to our conclusion that the appellant's deportation would not
      be "unduly harsh" on J,  we  have  also  taken  full  account  of  the
      likelihood that J will be deprived of physical contact with her  half-
      brother RX. We accept that there was no contact  between  them  during
      the period that the appellant was living in Jamaica, and  that  it  is
      the appellant who has acted as a facilitator for  such  contact  since
      his return. We have also borne in mind, however, that even  since  the
      appellant's return there has only been minimal contact.

  99. As for RN, he is just three years old. As we have found above,  we  do
      not accept that it is likely  that  there  will  be  any  safeguarding
      issues in the absence of the appellant.  We  do,  however,  accept  Ms
      Brown's evidence that because RN's relationship with his  father  will
      be conducted exclusively by electronic means, he will have  particular
      difficulty further developing a relationship with his  father.  Whilst
      undoubtedly it would be preferable for all children to be  brought  up
      by  both  parents  in  a  close  physical  relationship,  the  matters
      identified above  as  the  consequences  for  RN  of  the  appellant's
      deportation are those that are likely to arise in every case  where  a
      young child is deprived  of  a  parent.   They  are  not  consequences
      characterised by a degree of harshness over and beyond those any child
      would experience when faced with the deportation of a parent and  they
      are not consequences which in our view are "unduly harsh".

 100. In summary, having considered the evidence as a whole we conclude that
      the requirements of section 117C(5) are not met.

Section 117C(6)

 101. We finally proceed to consider section 117C(6),  and  examine  whether
      there  are  "very  compelling  circumstances"  over  and  above  those
      described in Exceptions 1 and 2. If, in applying section 117C(6),  the
      conclusion is reached that the public interest  requires  deportation,
      the Tribunal is bound in law to give effect to this and  there  is  no
      further need for a proportionality assessment.

 102. The public interest is movable and in certain cases must be approached
      flexibly for the reasons outlined in Akinyemi v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2098 ('Akinyemi No. 2'),  at  [39]
      to [52].  A full assessment of the public interest  must  be  balanced
      against an assessment of the Article 8 factors said, either  on  their
      own or cumulatively, to constitute "very compelling circumstances" for
      the purposes of section 117C(6).

 103. Although section  117C(6)  sets  an  "extremely  demanding"  test,  it
      nonetheless requires "a wide-ranging exercise", so as to  ensure  that
      Part 5A produces a result compatible with Article 8 (NA  (Pakistan)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  662).  The
      wide-ranging exercise  required  means  that  a  foreign  offender  is
      permitted to rely on matters relevant to one or  both  Exceptions,  as
      well as the ability to meet these in conjunction  with  other  factors
      collectively (NA (Pakistan) at [32]).   Although  the  Exceptions  are
      self-contained  and  exclude  further  consideration  of  the   public
      interest (see KO (Nigeria)), in order to determine whether the  public
      interest is defeated  by  "very  compelling  circumstances",  a  case-
      specific analysis of the public interest is necessary (MS  (s.117C(6):
      "very compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122 at [17]
      - [20] and [28] - [30]).

 104. In determining the weight to be attached to  the  public  interest  we
      have had regard to section 117C(2) i.e. the more serious  the  offence
      the greater  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The  appellant's
      sentence of forty months imprisonment, after a guilty plea  for  which
      credit was given by the sentencing judge, is towards the higher end of
      the range covered by section 117C(3). We give this due weight.

 105. We accept that the appellant feels remorse for his  actions  and  that
      whilst in prison he undertook courses in  IT,  business,  English  and
      mathematics.  He has also engaged fully with the Probation Service. In
      his report of 20 June 2018, Dr Basu observed that  the  appellant  was
      not deemed to present a serious enough risk to  warrant  either  local
      multiagency risk management or a multiagency public protection  panel.
      Dr Basu's own assessment of the risk of the appellant  reoffending  is
      that the risk is low.  The risk that  he  could  cause  serious  harm,
      should he reoffend, would, it is said, depend on  the  offence  itself
      and the  circumstances  pertinent  to  the  appellant.  His  financial
      circumstances were most associated with his risk  of  causing  serious
      harm by selling drugs and his  relationship  circumstances  were  most
      related to his risk of causing serious harm by abuse, in the  form  of
      conduct  towards  a  partner  or  children.   Ms  Haque,  a  qualified
      probation officer, also  addressed  the  issue  of  the  risk  of  the
      appellant reoffending and causing serious harm, in her report  of  the
      21 June 2018. She concluded that the appellant posed a low  to  medium
      risk of reoffending in a similar manner in the  future,  i.e.  selling
      drugs  within  the  community.   Overall,  he  posed  a  low  risk  of
      reoffending in general, consistent with the OASys Assessment conducted
      in November 2016.  She found that the appellant posed a low to  medium
      risk of serious harm  to  the  public,  in  respect  of  drug  related
      matters, and a low to medium risk of harm to future intimate partners.

 106. Over 18 months has passed since the above reports were  prepared  and,
      in that time, which includes a  period  of  over  6  months  when  the
      appellant has lived in the UK, the appellant has not, on the  evidence
      before us, been involved in any criminal  activity.   Looking  at  the
      evidence  as  a  whole,  we  are  prepared  to  accept  that  he   has
      rehabilitated  and  now  poses  only  a   low   risk   of   offending.
      Nevertheless, this a matter of only marginal weight in our assessment,
      there being no justification for departing from the ordinary  position
      identified in  SE  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256).

 107. In such  circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the  public  interest  in
      deporting the appellant remains strong, despite his rehabilitation and
      the low risk of him reoffending.

 108. When considering factors  bearing  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
      proportionality balance, we have  had  regard  to  all  those  matters
      referred to in our consideration of sections 117C(4) and 117C(5),  but
      also remind ourselves that following Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58, those persons with  anything  less
      than Indefinite Leave  to  Remain,  have  a  "precarious"  immigration
      status for the purposes of section 117B(5). In the  instant  case  the
      appellant has not had Indefinite Leave to Remain  in  the  UK  at  any
      point in time. There are no  "particularly  strong  features"  to  his
      private life and, accordingly, we attach little  weight  such  private
      life.

 109.  We  do,  however,  accord  significant  weight  to  the   appellant's
      relationships with J and RN and to the children's best  interests.  We
      take account of the adverse consequences the  appellant's  deportation
      would have on J and RN, which we have discussed above, and accept that
      the opportunities for physical contact between the  children  and  the
      appellant will only occur if JH visits Jamaica and takes the  children
      with her. Such visits, we accept, are likely to be non-existent or  at
      best rare.

 110. Although RX is an adult, we accept that he shares a family  life  with
      the appellant, and we attach significant weight to this  relationship.
      RX and his best friend were attacked in January 2016.  RX was  stabbed
      and spent several days  in  hospital.  The  appellant  visited  RX  in
      hospital regularly and every day after his release from hospital.   RX
      was placed in a  witness  protection  programme  towards  the  end  of
      February 2016. In August 2016, RX's friend, the other  victim  in  the
      attack, was stabbed and killed in South London. After the  appellant's
      deportation he and RX maintained contact by telephone,  Messenger  and
      Facebook. When RX's involvement  in  the  witness  protection  program
      ended, he moved into independent accommodation, where he struggled. He
      subsequently moved to live with  his  maternal  grandmother  in  April
      2019. He has also obtained  employment,  working  nights.   Since  the
      appellant's return to the United Kingdom in June 2019  he  has  shared
      accommodation with RX and RX's maternal grandmother. RX no longer  has
      a significant relationship with his mother.

 111. In her report of December 2019, Ms Brown opines that as a  consequence
      of his recent traumatic experiences, RX has reverted to  a  "childlike
      state...  with  flawed  decision  making  and  uncertainty",  that  he
      "requires his father's reassurance and physical protection"  and  that
      he is a "very vulnerable adult who is unlikely  to  stabilise  himself
      without  continuing  family  support".  We  accept  that  RX   remains
      vulnerable and that the appellant is now providing him  with  support.
      We  also  accept,  and  take  into  account,  that   the   appellant's
      deportation would have an adverse impact on RX's emotional  wellbeing.
      RX would, nevertheless, remain living with  his  maternal  grandmother
      and to that extent he would continue to receive at least some familial
      support. There is also no reason to believe that the appellant and  RX
      would not maintain regular contact by telephone and  social  media  if
      the appellant were living in Jamaica, as they previously did, although
      we accept that this is no  substitute  for  the  appellant's  physical
      presence in the UK.

 112. Drawing all of this together, having considered all  factors  weighing
      in the appellant's side of the balance cumulatively we,  nevertheless,
      conclude that the weight of the public  interest  in  this  particular
      case requires deportation because it cannot be  said  that  there  are
      "very compelling circumstances" over  and  above  those  described  in
      Exceptions 1 and 2.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and we set it aside.



We re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed:
M O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 24 February 2020
