
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22808/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 10 October 2019                  |On 17 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                   Guy [H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Sarker, instructed by Adam Bernard Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast, born  on  7  June  1972.  He
applied for entry clearance to the UK under Appendix FM of  the  immigration
rules on the basis of his family life with his wife [OA].

The application was refused on 19 October 2018.  The  respondent  considered
that the appellant could not meet the eligibility  relationship  requirement
of paragraphs E-ECP.2.1 to 2.1 because the sponsor,  the  appellant's  wife,
was a national of the Ivory Coast and was not settled  in  the  UK  but  had
discretionary leave. The respondent considered that the  appellant  had  not
demonstrated any compassionate or compelling circumstances that would  merit
a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

The appellant appealed that decision. In his grounds of appeal he  submitted
that the sponsor ought to have  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
herself but her solicitors had made an error and had  failed  to  appeal  in
time. Further, he and the sponsor had had a daughter in  May  2005  who  had
passed away and they had been unable  to  have  a  child  since  then.  They
wanted to start IVF treatment but could not do that unless  he  was  in  the
UK. He had previously resided lawfully in the UK but  had  returned  to  the
Ivory Coast  to  comply  with  immigration  control.  The  ECO  should  have
considered such circumstances to be compassionate and exceptional.

In an Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) Appeal Review, the  ECM  maintained  the
decision,  concluding  that   the   appellant's   circumstances   were   not
exceptional.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  determined
on  the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Louveaux  in  a   decision
promulgated on 17 June 2019. The judge had before him a bundle of  documents
including evidence that the appellant had lived, studied and worked  in  the
UK from at least January 2003 to 2014,  a  marriage  certificate  indicating
that the appellant and sponsor were married in the Ivory Coast on 23  August
2007, photographs of the  marriage,  transcripts  of  messages  between  the
appellant and sponsor in May  2019,  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  been
living, studying and working in the UK  and  a  tenancy  agreement  for  the
appellant and the sponsor.

The judge found that the appellant did not meet  the  immigration  rules  as
the sponsor was  not  settled  in  the  UK.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
appellant had previously lived in the UK but did not find any evidence of  a
relationship between the appellant and sponsor beyond  a  marriage  ceremony
in 2007. He found there to be no evidence of cohabitation,  no  evidence  of
how the relationship was sustained from 2014 onwards and no evidence of  the
existence and death of a child. Accordingly  he  found  that  there  was  no
family life between the appellant and sponsor, but that in any  event  there
was no evidence as to why the IVF treatment could not be undertaken  in  the
Ivory Coast and no evidence why the sponsor could not relocate to the  Ivory
Coast. The judge concluded that the respondent's decision  to  refuse  entry
clearance was not disproportionate and he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human
rights grounds.

The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge's refusal to accept the  relationship
was harsh, that the judge  had  overlooked  the  fact  that  the  bundle  of
evidence contained the couple's baby's birth certificate and that the  judge
had applied too high a standard of proof.

Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had  overlooked
the birth certificate in the appellant's appeal  bundle  and  therefore  may
have reached a different decision on family life under Article 8.

At the hearing Mr Sarker produced the original full  version  of  the  birth
and death certificate for the appellant and sponsor's  baby  confirming  her
birth on 24 May 2005 and her death the same day,  naming  the  appellant  as
the informant on the death certificate. Mr  Sarker  submitted  that  if  the
judge had considered the birth certificate in the  appeal  bundle  he  would
have found that  there  was  family  life  between  the  appellant  and  the
sponsor. He would then  have  had  to  consider  if  there  were  compelling
circumstances. The judge therefore erred in law. In re-making  the  decision
the appeal should be allowed on the basis of the  compelling  circumstances,
namely the loss of the couple's child, the fact that  the  couple  had  been
together for 18 years and trying to conceive for 12 years  as  confirmed  in
the consultant's letter at page 180 of the appeal bundle and the  fact  that
the sponsor was now 43 years of age. The sponsor had been in  the  UK  since
2004, having come to the UK on a student visa and qualified  at  university,
and she was now working for  Samsonite  and  had  discretionary  leave.  The
appellant had been in the UK lawfully from 2001 until 2014  and  had  gained
qualifications whilst here. The need for IVF was a medical issue  which,  if
combined with the couple's family life and the loss of  their  child,  would
outweigh the public interest in refusing entry clearance.

Mr Walker agreed that the judge had made a material error of law by  failing
to consider the birth certificate and other evidence. Although  he  was  not
able to concede the appeal as such, he agreed that the  decision  to  refuse
entry clearance was disproportionate in all  the  circumstances,  given  the
evidence of family life and the immigration history  of  the  appellant  and
sponsor and the other compelling factors.

In light of the concessions made by Mr Walker, there is no need  for  me  to
say anything more. The judge clearly erred in law  by  failing  to  consider
material evidence showing that there was family life between  the  appellant
and the sponsor. The judge's decision is therefore set aside.  In  re-making
the decision, and in light of Mr Walker's  agreement  that  the  refusal  of
entry clearance was disproportionate given the compelling  circumstances  in
this case, I accept that the respondent's decision is  not  a  proportionate
one  and  is  in  breach  of  the  appellant's  Article  8   human   rights.
Accordingly, I allow the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

Signed:[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 11 October
2019
