
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: HU/22978/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2018                            |On 20 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                laxmi raj rai
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A O'Callaghan, Counsel instructed by N C
Brothers & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the refusal  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer and the Entry Clearance Manager in Nepal to grant him
    entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as the dependent of his
    mother.  The facts are set out in the First-tier Tribunal inter alia at
    paragraph 7:

         "Mrs Rai said (unchallenged) that her husband would have settled in
         the United Kingdom and the appellant says so too."

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on
    the following grounds:

         "The Appellant is the adult son of a former member of  the  Brigade
         of Gurkhas.  The Judge  accepted  that  he  and  his  mother,  that
         soldier's widow, enjoyed family life together not only at the  date
         that she left Nepal to settle in the UK but also at the date of the
         hearing.  Arguably in the light of that finding it is apparent from
         the decision that although  the  Judge  referred  to  Rai  v  Entry
         Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA  Civ  320  he  failed  to  apply  the
         principles set out therein.  The key question then  became  whether
         the Appellant would have settled in the UK  but  for  the  historic
         wrong given that  the  Appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
         clearance at the same time as his mother.  It is arguably difficult
         to see any reason why that should not have  been  answered  in  his
         favour.  Arguably there was no public  interest  in  the  Appellant
         being refused entry clearance in the circumstances, and the Judge's
         approach to s117A-B was flawed."

 3. The respondent served a Rule 24 reply.  It says this:

         "(1) The respondent to this appeal is the Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department.  Documents relating to this appeal should
             be sent to the Secretary of State for the Home Department,  at
             the above address.

         (2)  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
             permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to determine the
             appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing."

 4. At the hearing today Ms Fijiwala has confirmed that the respondent does
    not seek to oppose the  setting  aside  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, but she has sought to raise for the first time  a  suggestion
    that the appellant's father  would  not  have  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom had he been allowed to do so.  It is much too late for any such
    suggestion to be made.  The point of the Rule 24 reply  process  is  to
    put the appellant on notice of any arguments on which the Secretary  of
    State may seek to rely at the resumed hearing.

 5. In all the circumstances, that being plainly the only  point  in  issue
    and  having  been  unopposed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  am
    satisfied that the proper outcome is to set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and allow the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Signed:  Judith  A J C Gleeson               Date:        15 February 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



