
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22168/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2020                      |On 17 July 2020                      |
|At a remote hearing via Skype        |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MASTER A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  respondent  (A)
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

      1. The respondent ('A') is a minor, having been born in 2004.   He  is
         15 years old but will shortly turn 16.  In this decision I refer to
         medical evidence relevant to his younger siblings.  For  all  these
         reasons, I make an anonymity order.

      2. In this decision, I remake the substantive decision on whether  the
         appeal brought by A, against a  decision  of  the  entry  clearance
         officer  ('ECO')  dated  28  September  2018,  refusing  his  entry
         clearance application to join  his  parents  and  siblings  in  the
         United Kingdom ('UK'), should be  allowed  or  dismissed  on  human
         rights grounds.

      3. In a decision promulgated on 9 March 2020,  Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')
         Judge King gave reasons for setting aside a decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 21  August  2019  ('the  2019  FTT'),
         allowing A's appeal on human rights grounds.  A transfer order  for
         the matter to be re-made by another UTJ was made on 10 March  2020.



Parties

      4. The ECO appealed against the decision of the 2019 FTT and therefore
         remains the appellant.  For  convenience,  I  shall  refer  to  the
         appellant as the ECO.  The ECO was represented  by  Mrs  Pettersen,
         who attended the hearing remotely by Skype.

      5. A is a citizen of Nigeria who continues to reside there.  Both  his
         parents are Nigerian citizens.   He  resided  with  his  mother  in
         Nigeria, for the first three years of his life, before she left  in
         2007 to join his father and to study in the  UK.   His  father  had
         been in the UK from 2015.  A was left with an aunt (and her family)
         in Nigeria.  His parents visited him there in 2008 and in 2018.  In
         2010 A went to live with an uncle (and his family) in South Africa.
          He was very  unhappy  there  and  was  the  subject  of  sustained
         bullying as a result of being a 'foreigner'.  In 2018, he  returned
         to live with  his  aunt  in  Nigeria.   His  aunt  and  her  family
         emigrated to America in March 2020 and A currently resides in their
         home with someone A and his parents refer to as 'the house help'.

      6. A's parents and younger siblings reside together in the UK.     A's
         two brothers (B and P) were  born  in  the  UK  in  2009  and  2011
         respectively.  B was registered as a  British  citizen  earlier  in
         2020, having lived in the UK for 10 years from his birth.

      7. A was not legally represented but his parents attended the  hearing
         remotely by Skype to provide evidence on his behalf.

Background

      8. In a decision sent on 1 June  2017  ('the  2017  FTT'),  FTT  Judge
         Thomas allowed A's mother's appeal against the refusal  to  provide
         her with leave to remain in the UK, on human rights  grounds.   The
         2017 FTT made important findings of fact, which form  the  starting
         point for my consideration  of  the  relevant  factual  matrix.   I
         summarise those findings below.

          i) A's parents' evidence was credible.

         ii) A's mother came to the UK in 2007 as a  student.   After  four
             years she was awarded an LLB degree at East London University.
              During her time as a student she worked  in  accordance  with
             her visa conditions.  A's father came to the UK  in  2005  but
             had not worked.  Both have qualifications, speak  English  and
             would be able to work if given the opportunity to do  so.  A's
             mother  overstayed  her  leave  in  2014  before   making   an
             application  to  remain  pursuant  to  Article  8  (which  was
             ultimately granted).

        iii) B and P were born in the UK.   They  have  significant  global
             developmental delay giving rise to complex educational, social
             and mental needs, in relation to which they have received wide-
             ranging educational, social care and medical  support  in  the
             UK.

         iv) In addition, P  was  born  with  a  swollen  face  and  has  a
             diagnosis of lymphatic malformation left cheek / sidewall  and
             left anisometropia  /  amblyopia.   He  has  received  medical
             treatment at Great Ormond Street Hospital and was  then  at  a
             crucial stage of his treatment.

          v) It would not be in the  best  interests  of  the  children  to
             return to Nigeria given the support they rely upon in the UK.

         vi) The countervailing factors outweighed the public interest such
             that the decision to remove the family would breach Article  8
             of the ECHR, and  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  human  rights
             grounds.

      9. Following the 2017 FTT decision, A's parents together with B and  P
         were each granted leave to remain outside of the Immigration  Rules
         for a period of 30 months, in a letter dated 9 October 2017.   This
         letter states: "You can apply to renew  this  leave,  and  you  may
         become  eligible  to  apply  for   indefinite   leave   to   remain
         (settlement) after 120 months if you qualify."

     10. In an application dated 2 July 2018, A applied for entry  clearance
         to join his parents and brothers in the UK.  This was refused in  a
         decision dated 28 September 2018.  The sole reason offered  by  the
         ECO for A not meeting the requirements of the Immigration Rules  is
         this: the ECO was not satisfied that A's  parents  are  in  the  UK
         "with limited leave on a route that leads  to  settlement".   In  a
         decision dated 27 February 2019, the Entry Clearance Manager upheld
         the ECO's decision observing that the  decision  would  not  breach
         Article 8 because  it  would  not  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences for A.

     11. Although the 2019 FTT allowed A's appeal,  this  decision  was  set
         aside by UTJ King.  He summarised the updated circumstances of  the
         family  from  evidence  provided  by  A's   parents.    The   ECO's
         representative at the time did not dispute the credibility  of  the
         evidence but was concerned that  it  did  not  present  the  entire
         picture.   UTJ  King  observed  that  the  evidence  regarding  A's
         circumstances   would   benefit   from    greater    clarity    and
         particularisation, and the hearing was adjourned for  that  reason.
         A's parents have sought to provide additional evidence  by  way  of
         email.  The relevant evidence can be summarised as follows:

          i) short emails and  letters  from  A's  parents  describing  A's
             current circumstances - these explain that the  family  A  had
             been residing with in Nigeria had left Nigeria permanently  on
             20 March 2020 to settle in America;  A has remained  in  their
             family home on his own with the 'the house help' (confirmed to
             be 18 years old);

         ii) a short email and  a  longer  letter  from  A  explaining  the
             frustration, pain and loneliness he feels  living  in  Nigeria
             without any family to turn to;

        iii) a letter from A's uncle in  South  Africa  explaining  that  A
             suffered  "incessant   bullying"   by   schoolmates   due   to
             "xenophobic tendencies"; he also  explained  that  the  family
             came under severe financial pressure and in any event A had to
             return to Nigeria as his visa expired  (and  presumably  could
             not   be   renewed   because   of   the   family's   financial
             circumstances);

         iv) letters from the  husband  of  A's  aunt  (with  whom  he  was
             residing  in  Nigeria  until  their  departure   to   America)
             explaining that he believes A to be a  vulnerable  child,  who
             has suffered adversely because of his lengthy separation  from
             his own family; and would suffer further when they  leave  for
             America; copies of flight details appearing  to  confirm  that
             the family left Lagos for Houston on 20 March 2020

          v) progress reports from A's school,  Dee  Unique  International;
             this describes his parents having paid  his  school  fees  and
             having been kept updated on his progress: although he performs
             well enough academically, he is lonely and  troubled  and  has
             received counselling; his anxiety increased during  the  first
             term of 2020; the school believe  he  is  underperforming  and
             have expressed concern for him  during  the  impending  school
             closure as a result of the global pandemic;

         vi) a letter from A's grandmother and supporting medical  evidence
             to the effect that it would be difficult for her to  care  for
             A;

        vii) messages between A and various  family  members  and  messages
             between family members concerning A;

       viii) payslips confirming that A's mother has  been  employed  since
             October 2019 as a key worker for children 16+ specialising  in
             housing and wellbeing;

         ix) payslips and a contract of employment confirming A's  father's
             full-time employment as a key worker for  children  16+  since
             August 2019;

     12. The evidence submitted to the UT must be considered  together  with
         the evidence submitted to the  2019  FTT.   This  includes  witness
         statements from A's mother and father, both dated 23 July  2019  in
         which they describe A's extreme sadness  and  increasing  emotional
         trauma, particularly as the family he was residing with in  Nigeria
         were soon to emigrate to America; they described themselves as very
         hard-working, both in employment, living in a  four  bedroom  house
         and in a position to maintain and accommodate A.

     13. This matter was listed for a telephone case management  hearing  on
         an expedited basis before UTJ Bruce  on  25  June  2020.   At  that
         hearing A's parents asked for a hearing as soon as possible because
         A was living in Nigeria with 'the house help' and  was  all  alone.
         They made it clear that they were  happy  for  the  hearing  to  be
         conducted remotely, using Skype.  Mr Walker represented the ECO  at
         this hearing and agreed that the matter  should  be  expedited  and
         conducted remotely.  The matter was listed on  an  expedited  basis
         given the circumstances.

Hearing

     14. As set out above, this hearing took place remotely  by  Skype  from
         Bradford IAC. At the beginning of the hearing I  took  the  parties
         through the documentation available to  me.   Mrs  Pettersen  noted
         that there was additional evidence, not available to  the  FTT  and
         made it clear that she had no  objection  to  this  evidence  being
         admitted.  I gave Mrs Pettersen additional  time  to  consider  the
         2017 FTT decision.  This was not available in her  papers  but  she
         was able to retrieve it from the Home Office's system.

     15.  After  preliminary  discussions,  Mrs   Pettersen   accepted   the
         following:

          i) A had a right of appeal on human rights  grounds.  His  family
             life with his parents and siblings in  the  UK  was  accepted,
             notwithstanding their geographical  distance.   Mrs  Pettersen
             therefore did not dispute that A's right to  family  life  was
             engaged under Article 8.

         ii) Mrs Pettersen also accepted  this  proposition:  although  the
             appeal was on human rights grounds, A's ability to demonstrate
             that he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  was  in
             the particular circumstances of this appeal, determinative.  A
             positive finding in respect of each  of  the  requirements  of
             para 301 of the Immigration Rules would amount  to  a  finding
             that there was family life  and  that  the  refusal  of  entry
             clearance betrayed a disproportionate lack of respect for that
             Article  8  right.   In  other  words,  compliance  with   the
             Immigration Rules would mean that there  was  nothing  on  the
             SSHD's side of the scales to show that the  refusal  of  entry
             clearance could be justified: see TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India)
             v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.  If the requirements of para  301
             are met, Mrs Pettersen accepted there would be no need  to  go
             on to conduct an Article 8 balancing exercise because this was
             one of those cases where meeting the rule would be  sufficient
             for the appeal to be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

        iii) Mrs Pettersen  accepted  that  the  parents  could  adequately
             maintain, accommodate and care for A, in the UK.

         iv) Mrs Pettersen noted that the ECO did not accept this initially
             but conceded that both parents been  given  limited  leave  to
             enter "with a view to settlement".  Mrs Pettersen was  correct
             to make this concession because the terms of the letter  dated
             9 October 2017 are clearly to that effect.  This  specifically
             addresses future applications by stating  in  terms  "if  your
             circumstances remain the same, following a  continuous  period
             of lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom for  10  years
             and subject to meeting the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rules at the time, you  may  apply  for  indefinite  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom."

          v) It followed, and Mrs Pettersen expressly  accepted,  that  the
             only remaining issue in dispute related to whether the test in
             para 301(i)(c) was met i.e. are there "serious family or other
             considerations making the exclusion of" A "undesirable"?

         vi) In determining that issue Mrs Pettersen accepted the following
             important matters: the 2017 FTT's findings  are  an  important
             starting  point;  and  thus  far,  the  parents  had  provided
             credible evidence regarding the circumstances  of  A  and  his
             family in the UK.

     16. A did not have legal representation but I explained  the  issue  in
         dispute and the high threshold to be met to his  parents.   I  then
         asked  A's  mother  questions  in  order  to  clarify  the  current
         circumstances of A and his family.  I provide  a  summary  of  that
         evidence here.

          i) A's parents and P had made an in-time  application  to  extend
             their current leave (this is not necessary  for  B  who  is  a
             British Citizen).

         ii) She and her husband continue to be employed  as  key  workers.
             She brings home approximately �1500 per month and her  husband
             brings home around �1300 per month

        iii) B was coping well.  Although  he  continued  to  have  special
             educational needs he was doing well  at  school.   B  suffered
             from asthma and was severely ill with this when  they  visited
             Nigeria last year.  Although there had been improvement in P's
             condition, a further lump had reappeared and the  family  were
             awaiting a re-referral to Great Ormond Street Hospital.  There
             were improvements but a great  deal  of  uncertainty  remained
             surrounding P's medical position. They  could  not  return  to
             live in Nigeria because  of  the  medical  conditions  of  the
             children.

         iv) A lived with his aunt and  her  family  after  returning  from
             South Africa but they left  to  live  in  America  permanently
             toward the end of March.  A now lived with 'the house help' on
             his own  and  was  suffering  terribly.   His  loneliness  and
             anxiety was  made  even  worse  as  a  result  of  the  global
             pandemic.  He had not been  able  to  attend  school  and  was
             desperate and often in a state of heightened anxiety.

          v) There had been previous attempts to obtain entry clearance for
             A in 2008 but these were unsuccessful  for  a  combination  of
             reasons.

     17. Mrs Pettersen cross-examined A's mother very briefly, and  only  in
         relation to two themes.  First, A's mother confirmed that the  aunt
         and her family had definitely emigrated to America in  late  March.
         Second, A's mother explained that her own mother (A's 62  year  old
         grandmother) lived a long distance away from A and  was  unable  to
         care for him because of her medical condition.   It  was  explained
         that she was very unwell indeed and  was  awaiting  surgery,  which
         could not take place because of the pandemic.  A's mother explained
         that her mother's health was a "major concern" for her,  and  there
         was just no prospect of her being in  a  position  to  care  for  a
         teenage boy.

     18. A's  father  gave  very  brief  evidence:  he  confirmed  that  A's
         grandmother in Nigeria was unable to look after him.  He emphasised
         that they had tried everything but there was no one else  available
         to look after A.  Mrs Pettersen did not cross-examine A's father.

     19. I then heard  brief  submissions  from  Mrs  Pettersen.   She  only
         addressed the single issue in dispute.  She acknowledged  that  A's
         parents' evidence was credible and did not  seek  to  impugn  their
         evidence or the documentary evidence relied  upon.   She  submitted
         that when that evidence was taken at its highest, it could  not  be
         properly  said  that   there   are   "serious   family   or   other
         considerations making  the  exclusion  of"  A  "undesirable".   Mrs
         Pettersen highlighted the following matters: A was safe and  secure
         in accommodation in Nigeria and  had  the  company  of  'the  house
         help'; he had  the  option  of  moving  to  be  with  his  maternal
         grandmother; he was doing well enough at a school paid for  by  his
         parents and the bullying he sustained  had  ceased.   Mrs  Petersen
         accepted that this is not a case in  which  it  could  properly  be
         suggested that A's family in the UK could  reasonably  relocate  to
         Nigeria: she accepted the 2017 FTT  findings  in  this  regard  and
         accepted that  the  compelling  circumstances  in  support  of  A's
         younger brothers remaining in the UK had  not  materially  changed.
         Rather, Mrs Pettersen submitted that the status quo could  continue
         without any breach of the Immigration Rules or  Article  8  of  the
         ECHR.

     20. I gave A's mother an opportunity to respond to those submissions on
         A's behalf.  She emphasised that A's distress had escalated  during
         the pandemic to such an extent that she was constantly anxious  and
         worried about him.  She explained that both  her  and  her  husband
         were worried not just as A's parents but also in the light of their
         expertise as key workers for vulnerable children in the  UK.   They
         are very worried that A  is  becoming  increasingly  vulnerable  to
         grooming and bad influences without parental oversight.  A's mother
         emphasised that her own mother was barely well enough to look after
         herself and simply could not care for a teenage boy; indeed she has
         made it clear to them that she simply would not  be  able  to  look
         after him.

     21. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.   At  the
         end of the hearing both Mrs Pettersen  and  A's  parents  confirmed
         that they had a full and fair opportunity to put  their  respective
         cases, and were satisfied that the  remote  hearing  had  proceeded
         fairly and smoothly.

Legal framework

     22. The only ground of appeal is human rights.  A relies on  Article  8
         of the ECHR and asserts that the decision to refuse  to  grant  him
         entry clearance is not a proportionate  response  to  the  need  to
         maintain  immigration  control.  A  submits  that  this  is  not  a
         proportionate response, because he  can  demonstrate  that  at  all
         material times, including as at the date of  hearing,  he  met  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules, specifically para 301.  This
         reads as follows (my emphasis):

             "301.    The requirements  to  be  met  by  a  person  seeking
             limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with  a
             view to settlement as the child of a parent or  parents  given
             limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with  a
             view to settlement are that he:

                  (i)  is seeking leave to enter to  accompany  or  join  or
                  remain with a parent or parents in one  of  the  following
                  circumstances:

                      (a)  one parent is present and settled in the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and the other parent is being or has  been
                      given limited leave to enter or remain in the  United
                      Kingdom with a view to settlement; or

                      (b)  one parent is being or has  been  given  limited
                      leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a
                      view to settlement and has  had  sole  responsibility
                      for the child's upbringing; or

                      (c)  one parent is being or has  been  given  limited
                      leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a
                      view  to  settlement  and  there  are   serious   and
                      compelling family or other considerations which  make
                      exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                      arrangements have been made for the child's care; and

                  (ii) is under the age of 18; and

                  (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried
                  and is  not  a  civil  partner,  and  has  not  formed  an
                  independent family unit; and

                  (iv) can, and will,  be  accommodated  adequately  without
                  recourse to  public  funds,  in  accommodation  which  the
                  parent or parents own or occupy exclusively; and

                  (iva)    can, and will, be maintained  adequately  by  the
                  parent or parents without recourse to public funds; and

                  (ivb)    does not qualify for limited leave to enter as  a
                  child of a parent or parents given limited leave to  enter
                  or remain as a  refugee  or  beneficiary  of  humanitarian
                  protection under paragraph 319R; and

                  (v)  (where an application is made for  limited  leave  to
                  remain with a view to settlement)  has  limited  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the United Kingdom; and

                  (vi) if seeking leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                  Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity."

     23. The wording at para 301(i)(c), "serious and  compelling  family  or
         other considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable"
         mirrors the wording to be found in the parallel provision  at  para
         297(i)(f).  The former provision applies to an applicant  (like  A)
         with a parent with limited leave, who is seeking limited  leave  to
         enter.  The latter applies to  an  applicant  with  a  parent  with
         indefinite leave to  remain  ('ILR')  or  settled  status,  who  is
         seeking  indefinite  leave  to  enter.   Mundeba  (s.55  and   para
         297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC)  (Mr  Justice  Blake  and  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Dawson) confirms that  the  relevant  test  in  para
         297(i)(f) is a high one.  Blake J emphasised the high threshold  to
         be met at [34]:

             "In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more than
             the parties simply desiring a  state  of  affairs  to  obtain.
             'Compelling' in the context of paragraph  297(i)(f)  indicates
             that  considerations  that  are   persuasive   and   powerful.
             'Serious' read with 'compelling' together  indicate  that  the
             family or other considerations render  the  exclusion  of  the
             child from the United Kingdom undesirable. The analysis is one
             of degree  and  kind.  Such  an  interpretation  sets  a  high
             threshold that excludes  cases  where,  without  more,  it  is
             simply the wish of parties to be together however natural that
             ambition that may be."

     24. The headnote in Mundeba includes the following:

             "The exercise of the duty by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
             assess an  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  to
             whether there are family or other  considerations  making  the
             child's   exclusion   undesirable   inevitably   involves   an
             assessment of what the  child's  welfare  and  best  interests
             require.

             Where an immigration decision engages Article  8  rights,  due
             regard must be had to the UN Convention on the Rights  of  the
             Child. An entry clearance decision  for  the  admission  of  a
             child under 18 is "an action concerning  children...undertaken
             by...administrative authorities" and so by Article 3 "the best
             interests of the child shall be a primary consideration".

             Although the statutory duty under s.55  UK  Borders  Act  2009
             only applies to children  within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty
             doubtless explains why the Secretary of  State's  IDI  invites
             Entry Clearance Officers to consider  the  statutory  guidance
             issued under s.55.

             Family considerations require an  evaluation  of  the  child's
             welfare including  emotional  needs.   'Other  considerations'
             come in to play where there are other  aspects  of  a  child's
             life that are serious and  compelling  for  example  where  an
             applicant is living in an  unacceptable  social  and  economic
             environment.  The focus needs to be on  the  circumstances  of
             the child in the light of his or her age,  social  backgrounds
             and developmental history  and  will  involve  inquiry  as  to
             whether:-

          a) there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

          b) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

          c) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care;

             The  assessment  involves  consideration  as  to  whether  the
             combination of  circumstances  are  sufficiently  serious  and
             compelling to require admission."

     25. The approach to the high threshold required to be met together with
         the remaining guidance (summarised in the  headnote  above)  as  to
         para 297(i)(f), applies with equal force to para 301(i)(c).

Factual findings

     26. I heard live evidence from two witnesses, A's  mother  and  father.
         Having had the opportunity to  cross-examine  them,  Mrs  Pettersen
         acknowledged that they  provided  credible  evidence.   I  entirely
         agree.  Their own evidence is consistent with documentary evidence.
          Their evidence has been found to be credible by the 2017  FTT  and
         the 2019 FTT.  The reasoning provided by the 2017 FTT  is  detailed
         and cogent. Mrs Pettersen accepted that there is no  reason  to  go
         behind the 2017 FTT's findings.  As to the up to date  evidence,  I
         accept the evidence before me in its entirety.  I have already  set
         that evidence out at [11], [12] and [16] above.  I  refer  to  that
         evidence in more detail  below  when  applying  the  relevant  test
         below.

Discussion

General approach to para 301 of the Immigration Rules

     27. Mrs Pettersen confirmed that there is a single  issue  in  dispute,
         which turns on the application of the high test in para  301(i)(c).
         For the sake of completeness, Mrs  Pettersen  accepted  that:  para
         301(i)(a) does not apply because both parents are  here;  301(i)(b)
         does not apply because both parents have been  responsible  for  A;
         301(i)(c) applies because at least one parent  (but  in  this  case
         both parents) have been given limited leave to  remain  in  the  UK
         with a view to settlement.  As observed in  Buydov  v  ECO,  Moscow
         [2012] EWCA Civ 1739 at [13], the condition of sole  responsibility
         exists only where there is but a single sponsoring parent in the UK
         whom the applicant seeks to join.  The scheme of  para  301  is  to
         treat differently applications to join one parent and  applications
         to join both parents. If the application is to join  both  parents,
         there  is  no  investigation   required   of   responsibility   for
         upbringing. In effect, the rules assume that between them they have
         full responsibility.

     28. Mrs Pettersen conceded that A's parents have been  given  leave  to
         remain "with a view to settlement" and "suitable arrangements  have
         been made for the child's care" for the purposes of para 301(i)(c),
         and the remaining requirements of para 301  are  met.   It  follows
         that I only need consider whether there are "serious and compelling
         considerations rendering the exclusion of the  child  undesirable",
         which I now turn to.

Serious  and  compelling  considerations  rendering  the  exclusion   of   A
undesirable

     29. This is not a case in which there was a forced separation between A
         and his parents; they chose to leave Nigeria when  they  each  did,
         without him.  I accept that  they  have  been  making  attempts  to
         reunite with him but this has not been  consistent.   However,  the
         family situation in the UK has not been  easy  or  straightforward,
         given the special education needs and medical conditions of  B  and
         P.

     30. I bear in mind that A's parents have the  means  to  visit  him  in
         Nigeria and have done so in the past.  The prospects of such visits
         in the immediate future are unclear, in the light of the  pandemic.
          In any event  I  agree  with  A's  parents  that  although  he  is
         relatively safe and secure in his accommodation in Nigeria,  he  is
         in immediate need of day to day parenting and care in  the  context
         of a family environment.  He is still 15 (albeit he will soon  turn
         16).  Significantly, A has had to deal with many challenges in  his
         young life and continues to do so:  he was left  in  Nigeria  as  a
         young child when his parents came to the UK; he relocated to  South
         Africa,  where  he  was  desperately  unhappy  and  bullied  for  a
         sustained period; within a relatively short time  of  returning  to
         Nigeria, the family he lived with were making plans to emigrate  to
         Nigeria; that family emigrated to Nigeria in late March leaving him
         in their home with 'the house help' but without  any  other  family
         member or person able to  provide  him  with  the  requisite  basic
         parental care a child his age needs.

     31. I entirely accept that A's particular history  when  combined  with
         his particular circumstances render  him  a  vulnerable  child.   I
         accept his own evidence that he feels sad,  desperate,  lonely  and
         frustrated.  He has articulated his feelings  in  a  heartfelt  and
         compelling manner in his letter  dated  22  March  2020.   Here  he
         explains that when his family visited him in Nigeria in  2018,  his
         parents boosted his confidence and made him feel much better  after
         many years of bullying and not valuing himself.  He described their
         departure as "very painful".  I have no doubt  that  his  pain  and
         suffering has increased since the departure of  his  aunt's  family
         combined with the  closure  of  his  school  as  a  result  of  the
         pandemic.  The school was concerned about A and made this clear  in
         their letters.  A was doing well  at  school  but  underperforming.
         The school was however more concerned  about  A's  emotional  needs
         than  his  academic  achievement.   A  was  receiving  support  and
         counselling at school and that has ceased for many months now. As A
         said in his letter, he needs his family "now more than ever".

     32. There is ample and  cogent  evidence  that  reuniting  A  with  his
         parents would be in his best interests.  As a starting  point,  the
         best interests of a child are usually best  served  by  being  with
         both parents.  The best interests in family reunification  in  this
         case acquire a particular force on the facts, taking account of the
         emotional difficulties encountered by A over  the  course  of  many
         years and at present.

     33. There are serious and  compelling  reasons,  from  the  appellant's
         point of view, for him to be provided with urgent parental care and
         support.  Mrs Pettersen has conceded that a  family  reunion  could
         not reasonably take place in Nigeria, in the light of the  family's
         circumstances.  I entirely accept the parents'  evidence  that  A's
         grandmother is simply too unwell to look after A.   When  outlining
         her circumstances in Nigeria, A's mother provided a straightforward
         account - she is clearly very worried about  her  mother's  failing
         health and the risks she faces as a result of the pandemic.  A  has
         no one to care for him - as he said 'the house help' is only 18 and
         there to look after the home.  I am satisfied that there is no  one
         available in Nigeria to  provide  A  with  the  parental  care  and
         support he urgently needs.

     34. Mrs Pettersen submitted that A was safely accommodated  in  a  home
         with 'the house help' and this did not give  rise  to  serious  and
         compelling circumstances.  I accept that A is physically  safe  and
         has suitable accommodation to live  in.   He  is  also  financially
         supported by his parents who also pay his school fees.    There  is
         no current evidence of neglect or abuse but A has been  the  victim
         of sustained bullying in the past, and importantly,  currently  has
         serious and compelling unmet emotional  needs  which  require  pro-
         active parental care and love.

     35. A and his parents strongly desire reunification in the UK.  That is
         not  enough  to  meet  the  requisite  high  threshold.   In   this
         particular  case  there  are  serious   persuasive   and   powerful
         considerations present.  A has an overwhelming emotional  need  for
         parental  care  and  attention.   His  parents  have  clearly  been
         responsible for him, albeit from a distance for many years but  the
         day to day parenting responsibilities have fallen on  other  family
         members in Nigeria and South Africa.  That state of affairs changed
         fundamentally when the aunt's family emigrated in March this  year,
         leaving A without any de facto day to day parental support for  the
         first time.  He has suffered and continues to suffer emotionally as
         a result.  His age, history, and current  circumstances  mean  that
         his emotional needs are high.  Yet  there  is  no  one  in  Nigeria
         available to meet those needs.

     36. Having had regard to all of the evidence I  am  satisfied  that  it
         would be in the best interests of A to be reunited with his  family
         in the UK, and further to that finding, that there are serious  and
         compelling considerations rendering the exclusion of A from the  UK
         undesirable.   I make that finding on the  basis  of  the  evidence
         available to me as at the date of hearing.  That means that  as  at
         the date of hearing, A meets all the requirements of  para  301  of
         the Immigration Rules.



Article 8

     37. Mrs Pettersen  accepted  that  success  under  para  301  would  be
         determinative and the appeal would have  to  be  allowed  on  human
         rights grounds.

     38. For the avoidance of doubt, I  record  the  agreement  between  the
         parties, and my acceptance, that there is a family life  between  A
         and his UK-based family members.  There is here both emotional  and
         financial dependency such that there is  a  'family  life'.   I  am
         further satisfied that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance
         demonstrates a lack of respect  for  that  family  life  such  that
         Article 8 is engaged. The only question is  whether  that  lack  of
         respect is on  the  facts,  and  having  regard  to  the  need  for
         immigration control, justified.

     39. I must have regard to those factors set  out  at  Part  5A  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The  Act  mandates
         that the maintenance  of  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
         interest. I note the adverse aspects of  A's  parents'  immigration
         history. Notwithstanding this, they were successful before the 2017
         FTT and the family were given leave to remain after this.  In  this
         context I also  note  my  own  finding  that  A  has  succeeded  in
         demonstrating that he qualified for leave to enter under  para  301
         of the Immigration Rules.  For the reasons outlined above,  I  find
         that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  to  A   would   lead   to
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for him.  It  is  further  in  the
         public interest, and in the interests of the economic well-being of
         the UK, that A is financially independent, because such persons are
         less of a burden on taxpayers, and are  better  able  to  integrate
         into society.  A is likely to have recourse to state education  but
         his parents are financially independent and  working  hard  as  key
         workers for children in need in  the  UK.   A  will  be  adequately
         maintained and accommodated by his parents.  A clearly  speaks  and
         write English with proficiency.

     40. In all the circumstances, I  find  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
         clearance is disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  of  the
         ECHR.



Decision

     41. The decision in the appeal is remade  as  follows:  the  appeal  is
         allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer   Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer    16 July 2020


