
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/22789/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2021                    |On 05 October 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     h r
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as they were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The  Secretary  of  State  is  once  more  the
    respondent and HR is the appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cartin ("the judge"), promulgated on 10  February  2021.
    By that decision, the judge allowed the appellant's appeal against  the
    respondent's decision, dated 25 October 2018, refusing his human rights
    claim made in the context of deportation proceedings.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who last  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in early 2012. He  became  an  overstayer  from  May  2014.  In
    January 2016 he was found not guilty by reason  of  insanity  (paranoid
    schizophrenia) in  respect  of  an  incident  in  which  he  wounded  a
    relative. The Crown Court made the appellant the subject of a  hospital
    order and a restrictions order pursuant to sections 37 and  41  of  the
    Mental Health Act 1983. The appellant was discharged from  hospital  in
    early November 2018 following intensive management  of  his  condition.
    The restrictions order remains in  place  and  the  appellant  has  the
    status of a conditionally discharged patient.

 4. It has been common ground  throughout  that  the  appellant  is  not  a
    "foreign criminal" because he has not been "convicted" of  an  offence.
    Thus, the provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 and section 117C of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 do not apply. Instead, the
    respondent made a deportation order pursuant to section 3(5)(a) of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 (what is sometimes described in shorthand terms as
    a conducive deport decision). In response, the appellant made  a  human
    rights claim, the refusal of which led to the appeal before the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In  essence,  both  the  deportation  decision  and  the
    refusal of the human rights claim relied on the fact  of  the  wounding
    incident as constituting, in and of itself, a sufficient basis for  the
    appellant to be deported as  it  allegedly  indicated  a  risk  to  the
    public.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was  essentially  put
    onto grounds: first, that deportation  would  violate  Article  3  ECHR
    (Article 3) on the basis that there would not be appropriate  treatment
    for him in Bangladesh; second, that deportation would violate Article 8
    ECHR (Article 8), relying primarily on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  (the  Rules),  but  also  a  wider  proportionality
    argument.

 6. The judge rejected the  Article  3  claim,  concluding  that  the  high
    threshold was not met because:

          a) there was no real risk of the appellant committing suicide;




          b) there was no real risk of a lack of treatment  of  his  mental
             health condition resulting in "intense suffering";




          c) there was appropriate treatment available in Bangladesh.

 7. In reaching these findings, the judge found that certain aspects of the
    evidence provided by family members had been somewhat exaggerated.

 8. In considering Article 8, the judge found that there was no family life
    in the United Kingdom, but private life had been established, albeit in
    the absence of any lawful  status  since  2014.  The  judge  turned  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) of the Rules and considered whether any  of  the
    suitability criteria under S-LTR  of  Appendix  FM  applied.  The  only
    provision which had potential application was S-LTR.1.6, which read  as
    follows:

           "S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the public good because  their  conduct  (including
           convictions which do not fall within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to
           1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
           undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."

 9. At [72], the judge reasoned as follows:

           "In regard to the 1.6, whilst this is  drafted  more  widely  to
           include conduct and other reasons, his  conduct  must  still  be
           such that  it  makes  his  presence  here  undesirable.  I  have
           observed already that the Appellant is not a  foreign  criminal.
           Whilst it is the Secretary  of  State's  stated  view  that  his
           presence in the UK is not conducive to the public good, I am not
           convinced. The Appellant was unwell at the time of  his  actions
           which harmed a family member.  In  law  he  was  not  criminally
           responsible and it is clear his actions were attributable to his
           illness.  In  those  circumstances  he  cannot  be  regarded  as
           culpable. I therefore do not consider that the actions which led
           to his hospital order be made, make his  presence  non-conducive
           to the public good."

10. This conclusion permitted the judge to go on and consider sub-paragraph
    (vi) and whether the appellant would face very significant obstacles to
    integration if deported to  Bangladesh.  The  judge  addressed  various
    matters in some detail between [73] and [77], including a reference  to
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813. At [78], the  judge  set  out  his  overall
    conclusion on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules:

           "On the basis of the above, I conclude that  the  Appellant  has
           been away from the country for a number  of  years,  he  suffers
           with mental ill-health and he has been institutionalised for the
           last 5 years in the UK. Prior to then he was very  dependent  on
           his family and he continues to be dependent  on  their  presence
           and support. By contrast he will have limited support  available
           to him from his ageing  parents  who  have  some  understandable
           reticence over caring for their son. He is a quiet and  reserved
           individual who has to date developed  few  social  relationships
           and those are with his family and care team in the UK..  He  has
           limited life skills, education and work experience. I  therefore
           conclude  that  the  Appellant  would  face   very   significant
           obstacles  to  his  re-integration  in  Bangladesh  and  so   he
           satisfies the rules for a grant of leave to remain on the  basis
           of his private life. Accordingly, his appeal is allowed."

11. No consideration was given to Article 8  outside  the  context  of  the
    Rules.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

12. Three points are made in the grounds of appeal. First, it is said  that
    the judge should have attached only "little weight" to the  appellant's
    private life in the United Kingdom  and  that  that  private  life  was
    "insufficient to outweigh the public interest". Second, it is said that
    the  judge  erred  in  "equating  non-conducive  grounds  to   criminal
    convictions", with particular reference to S-LTR.1.6 and what  is  said
    at [72] of the decision. Third, it is said that  the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for his conclusion that the appellant would  face
    very significant obstacles to re-integration if deported to Bangladesh.
    A portion of [78] is quoted and it  is  specifically  stated  that  the
    judge failed to take  account  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    previously worked on the family farm in Bangladesh, a matter which  was
    relevant to the assessment of very significant obstacles.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 27
    March 2021. He focused on the second point highlighted in the preceding
    paragraph and regarded the other proposed challenges as "weak".

14. A rule 24 response was provided by the appellant  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing, although it had not found its way to the Tribunal's file. This
    did not cause any difficulties at the hearing.



The hearing

15. At the outset of the hearing, Ms McCarthy formally  applied  to  cross-
    appeal in respect of the judge's conclusion on Article  3.  Given  that
    success on Article 3 grounds would, as I understand it, have led  to  a
    similar  grant  of  discretionary  leave  to  the  appellant  to   that
    applicable on Article 8 grounds, it was unclear to me whether there was
    a  need  to  cross-appeal  (see  Smith   (appealable   decisions;   PTA
    requirements; anonymity) [2019] UKUT 216 (IAC)). In the alternative, Ms
    McCarthy relied on her rule 24 response to the effect  that  Article  3
    should be a live issue at the error of law stage.

16. Whether on the application to cross-appeal or on the basis of the  rule
    24 response, I refused permission for the appellant  to  challenge  the
    Article 3 findings. It was far too late in the day to seek to mount  an
    attack on the judge's conclusions. I indicated that if I  were  to  set
    the judge's decision aside, I would consider  afresh  whether  to  look
    again at Article 3.

17. Mr Tufan relied on the grounds of appeal. I raised the contents of  the
    respondent's  guidance  on  suitability  ("Suitability:   non-conducive
    grounds for refusal or cancellation of entry clearance or  permission",
    version 1.0, published on  1  December  2020)  and  asked  whether  the
    matters set out in S-LTR.1.6 required culpability (in  other  words,  a
    degree of blameworthiness). In response, he referred me to KE (Nigeria)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1382 and noted that in the present case  the  appellant
    had been made subject to a restrictions order under section 41  of  the
    Mental Health Act 1983. He submitted  that  this,  in  and  of  itself,
    indicated that there was a risk to the public and  that  S-LTR.1.6  was
    the appropriate  provision.  He  submitted  that  culpability  was  not
    required.

18. In respect of what the judge said at  [78],  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that
    there was a failure to have taken findings made  under  the  Article  3
    issue into account.

19. Ms McCarthy noted that the respondent had never specifically raised  or
    relied on the existence of the restrictions  order  as  constituting  a
    specific basis for the application of S-LTR.1.6 of the  Rules.  It  had
    only been raised at the hearing. The judge could not be criticised  for
    failing to specifically consider an issue which had not been  addressed
    by the respondent's representative. Further, Ms McCarthy submitted that
    the respondent's guidance on  suitability  suggested  that  culpability
    was, to a greater or lesser extent, required. The judge had dealt  with
    the respondent's case as it had been put, and the conclusion stated  at
    [72]  was  sustainable.  The  act  of  wounding  was  not,  by  itself,
    sufficient to make out the conducive criterion.

20. On the issue of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules,  Ms  McCarthy
    submitted that the judge had taken a good deal of expert evidence  into
    account, together with evidence provided by family members. The  expert
    evidence had not been challenged by the respondent. What  was  said  at
    [78] had to be considered in light of the overall analysis.

21. Mr Tufan made no reply.

22. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Conclusions on error of law

23. For the reasons set out below, I conclude that the judge did not err in
    law such that his decision should be set aside under  section  12(2)(a)
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

24. I deal first with the "little weight"  point  raised  in  the  grounds,
    although this is not specifically referred to in oral  submissions.  In
    my view,  it  has  no  merit.  The  judge  was  plainly  aware  of  the
    appellant's lack of status in  this  country  from  2014,  specifically
    referring to this and the consequent breach of immigration laws at  the
    beginning of [67]. In addition, the bald assertion that  in  any  event
    the appellant's private life did not outweigh the  public  interest  is
    simply  a  statement  of  disagreement  with  the  ultimate  conclusion
    reached.

25. There is a potentially interesting point arising in this case  relating
    to the scope of S-LTR.1.6: is a degree of culpability required  for  it
    to bite?

26. The respondent's suitability guidance gives a fairly  clear  indication
    that some form of blameworthiness (a term used by  the  Oxford  English
    Dictionary 3rd Edition for the definition  of  "culpable")  is  needed.
    Page 5  of  the  guidance  refers  to  "offending"  and  "reprehensible
    behaviour". Nine  examples  of  situations  rendering  an  individual's
    presence in this country to be non-conducive are set out, all of  which
    clearly involve culpability to a greater or lesser extent. Having  said
    that, immediately following the list of examples is  the  caveat  that,
    "This list is not exhaustive. In all  cases,  you  must  consider  what
    threat the person poses to the UK public."

27. I have also considered the respondent's guidance on  deporting  non-EEA
    foreign nationals, version 3.1, April 2015. This includes a section  on
    deportation  under  section   3(5)   of   the   1971   Act   (conducive
    deportations). This refers to the need to prove "serious or  persistent
    criminality" to the civil standard of proof and, at section 3.2,  makes
    it clear that criminal activity can have  taken  place  in  either  the
    United Kingdom or overseas. It refers to situations in which  sentences
    of less than 12 months having been imposed and where an individual  has
    received cautions. As with the suitability guidance, there is a 'catch-
    all' passage at the end of the section stating that the  scenarios  set
    out are non-exhaustive.

28. There is in my view a respectable argument to be  made  that  something
    more than a bare fact of doing an act (such as injuring another person)
    should be required for an individual's claim to  fail  under  paragraph
    276ADE, or indeed in respect of any other  case  in  which  suitability
    criteria must be considered.

29. On the other hand, the phrase "other reasons" in S-LTR.1.6 is,  on  its
    face, broad in scope. There would in my view be merit in the suggestion
    that its presence must be given utility and that this should  encompass
    the scenario in which an individual is not culpable,  but  nonetheless,
    on the facts of a particular case,  represents  a  significant  ongoing
    risk to the public, perhaps by virtue of a mental illness  which  could
    manifest itself in violent acts.

30. I am unaware of any judgments of the higher courts or decisions of  the
    Upper Tribunal in which a situation such as that which  arises  in  the
    present case has been considered. Neither representative has been  able
    to assist in this regard.

31. In the end, I have concluded that the particular issue  outlined  above
    does not need to be determined in this appeal. I say this on the  basis
    of the way in which the respondent's case appears to have been  put  to
    the judge, and the significant body of expert evidence relating to  the
    period between the appellant being discharged from hospital in 2018 and
    the date of the hearing in November 2020.

32. Having reviewed the decision to deport letter and the  decision  letter
    refusing the human rights claim, I note that reference was made to  the
    imposition of the hospital order and the restrictions order  under  the
    Mental Health Act 1983.  Both  highlight  the  serious  nature  of  the
    wounding incident and the second  letter  quotes  from  the  Sentencing
    Remarks from 2016  and  a  subsequent  risk  assessment  by  a  medical
    professional in 2017 to the  effect  that  the  restriction  order  was
    necessary and that there was an ongoing risk of violence at  that  time
    given the early stage of the appellant's treatment.

33. However, as far as I can see nothing further was  put  forward  by  the
    respondent, either by way of evidence or submissions, which  considered
    the appellant's circumstances (including risk to  the  public)  at  any
    time between the  assertions  made  in  2018  decision  letters  (which
    themselves looked back in time to 2016/2017) and the hearing before the
    judge. I have seen no reference to any submissions made on the scope of
    S-LTR.1.6 and its accompanying guidance. There has been no  substantive
    challenge to the voluminous body of expert  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant as to his ongoing high-intensity care and  treatment  in  the
    United Kingdom, evidence which the judge plainly took  careful  account
    of. The overall effect of that  evidence  was  to  indicate  that:  the
    appellant was compliant with all forms  of  his  treatment  (including,
    importantly, taking the relevant medication);  his  mental  health  had
    been "stable" since discharge  from  hospital;  he  was  spending  some
    nights with his family away from his supported  accommodation;  he  had
    regular contact with a variety of professionals; that there had been no
    relapse or violent behaviour or offending since discharge; and that his
    prognosis was "very good" (see, for example, the  addendum  psychiatric
    report from Dr R Latham  contained  in  the  appellant's  supplementary
    bundle).

34. Further, and importantly, the respondent's grounds of  appeal  make  no
    mention of the restrictions order  or  any  purported  failure  on  the
    judge's part to  have  regard  to  relevant  expert  evidence.  Rather,
    paragraph 4 of the  grounds  wrongly  seeks  to  blame  the  judge  for
    "equating non-conducive grounds to criminal convictions." The judge did
    no such thing at [72]. His reference to "culpable" conduct was  plainly
    made after  recognising  that  S-LTR.1.6  encompassed  more  than  just
    convictions. Indeed, the judge  correctly  directed  himself  that  the
    conduct in question must be such that it made the appellant's  presence
    in United Kingdom "undesirable".

35. The reality is that the reliance on the  restrictions  order  has  only
    been put forward in oral submissions by Mr Tufan at the hearing  before
    me. That is  not  a  criticism  of  him,  but  it  is  relevant  to  my
    consideration of whether the judge erred in law.

36. In my judgment, the judge was entitled to conclude that  the  appellant
    was not culpable in respect of the wounding incident.  He  was  not  to
    blame (in the ordinary sense of that  word)  because  he  was  mentally
    unwell at the time, a state of affairs recognised in the verdict of not
    guilty by virtue of insanity. Even if it is the case  that  culpability
    is not a prerequisite for all of the considerations falling  within  S-
    LTR.1.6, its absence was nonetheless a relevant factor to  the  overall
    assessment of whether the appellant's  presence  in  this  country  was
    undesirable.

37. Beyond what was expressly stated at [72], it is in my view implicit  in
    the judge's overall assessment that he had in  mind  all  the  evidence
    pertaining to  the  appellant's  current  circumstances  when  deciding
    whether the undesirability criterion had been met.  I  have  summarised
    that evidence, above. In contrast, there appears to have  been  nothing
    from  the  respondent  side,  save  for  the  simple  reliance  on  the
    historical fact of the wounding incident and a subsequent imposition of
    the hospital and restrictions orders (together with the brief reference
    to a 2017 assessment of whilst the appellant was still in hospital  and
    at the outset of his treatment).

38. In all the circumstances, I conclude that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    find that the respondent had not made out her case on  the  suitability
    issue. There are no errors of law here.

39. Even if the judge had been wrong on the culpability point, there is  no
    realistic prospect that it  would  have  made  any  difference  to  the
    ultimate conclusion: the overall evidential picture before him and  the
    respondent's position were such that he would in  all  likelihood  have
    come to the same result on the S-LTR.1.6 issue.

40. The respondent's third ground of  appeal  is,  as  described  by  Judge
    Sheridan in his grant of permission, "weak". It  quotes  only  part  of
    what the judge said at [78], which is in my view does not reflect  well
    on the respondent. Further, and more importantly, the ground  fails  to
    have any proper regard to the totality  of  the  judge's  findings  and
    reasons, as set out at [73]-[77]. These paragraphs include  a  detailed
    consideration of relevant factors  including:  the  significant  period
    spent in hospital in the United Kingdom; the  lack  of  an  independent
    life before or after the hospitalisation; limited  education;  "limited
    skills" in respect of establishing a reasonable  life  for  himself;  a
    degree of exaggeration  in  the  evidence  from  some  family  members,
    specifically in respect of his parents being "aged";  a  reluctance  on
    the part of his mother to care for him because of his past conduct; and
    the relatively significant degree of stigma attached mental  health  in
    Bangladesh. These factors were then correctly placed in the context  of
    the guidance set out in Kamara.

41. The complaint in the grounds relating to past work  undertaken  by  the
    appellant on the family farm is misconceived. First, it was taken  into
    account alongside a variety of other considerations. Second, it is  not
    clear to me what the respondent was seeking to suggest in  this  aspect
    of her challenge. Should the judge have concluded  that  the  appellant
    could go to Bangladesh and effectively live and work in the fields away
    from all other members of the local community or wider society?

42. Finally, what Mr Tufan described as the "negative credibility findings"
    in respect of the Article 3 issue do not in any material way  undermine
    the judge's conclusion on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The judge  noted  an
    aspect of exaggeration when  considering  this  provision  (see  [75]).
    Beyond that, the findings in question related to  the  availability  of
    appropriate treatment and the ability to travel to and from a hospital.
    Those narrow issues were not of any particular relevance  to  the  test
    under the Rules, which addresses integration (or re-integration)  in  a
    broad sense, not solely through the narrow  prism  of  a  pure  medical
    claim under Article 8.

43. Reading the judge's decision as  a  whole,  I  am  satisfied  that  his
    conclusions on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) were open to him and there is no
    error of law.

44. It follows that the respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  must  be
    dismissed and that the First-tier Tribunal's decision stands in so  far
    as the appellant's appeal before  the  judge  succeeded  on  Article  8
    grounds.

45. I have not permitted the appellant to challenge the judge's conclusions
    on Article 3 and these shall stand.



Anonymity


46. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction because of the
    appellant's significant mental health difficulties. In light of his
    particular condition, I deem it appropriate to maintain that direction.


Notice of Decision

47. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law and that decision shall stand.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 26 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

