
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/22203/2018
                                                               HU/22205/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 13 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     OTO
                                     OAO
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, of Counsel, instructed by Atlantic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms I Vijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  on  28  October  2019  in
         respect of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor,
         promulgated on 2 July 2019 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 3
         June 2019.

      2. The appellants are sisters born in June 2000  and  September  2004.
         They are Nigerian nationals. They  seek  entry  clearance  to  join
         their paternal grandmother, the sponsor, who was granted indefinite
         leave to remain in July 2003 but who had been living here since May
         1991. The sponsor was born in July 1948 and is in employment.

      3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor.
         He accepted that the father of  the  appellants  had  been  missing
         since 2013 and that at  the  same  time  their  mother  had  fallen
         critically ill with mental health problems and was unable  to  care
         for them. He found, however, that arrangements had  been  made  for
         them to  be  cared  for  by  a  family  friend,  K,  and  that  the
         arrangement  had  been  working  well.  The  first  appellant   had
         completed school and was studying fashion at  college.  The  second
         was still at school. He did not accept the sponsor's delayed  claim
         in evidence that K had emailed to say she was moving away  and  did
         not want to care for the appellants any longer because this  was  a
         matter the sponsor had "forgotten" to mention before, the email was
         not included in the appellants'  bundle  and  the  matter  was  not
         mentioned in any of the written statements or affidavit that  post-
         dated it. The judge took account  of  the  delay  in  the  decision
         making. He concluded that there were no  circumstances  which  made
         the  exclusion  of  the  appellants  from   the   UK   undesirable.
         Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

      4. The grounds for permission to appeal argue that the judge was wrong
         to find that the appellants could continue to be cared for by K and
         that that was a temporary arrangement. It was argued that the email
         only came to light at the hearing and  that  it  accords  with  the
         evidence of a temporary arrangement.  It  is  maintained  that  the
         judge misdirected himself in law when he found that a family friend
         could provide care. Finally, it is argued that the  best  interests
         of the appellants were not considered.

         The Hearing

      5. Mr Aslam relied upon the grounds in his submissions at the  hearing
         on 6 December 2019. He maintained the issue was a limited  one  and
         depended  on  whether  the  appellants  met  the  requirements   of
         paragraph 297(i)(f) - i.e., was the  exclusion  of  the  appellants
         from the United Kingdom undesirable?  He submitted that  the  judge
         had found that the  appellants  were  related  as  claimed  to  the
         sponsor (at 14), that their mother was unfit and unable to care for
         them (at 15) and that their father was missing (at 16). A friend of
         the sponsor stepped in to help but the evidence  from  the  sponsor
         and her son was that the arrangement was a temporary  one.  It  was
         anticipated that an entry clearance application would be  made  and
         the only reason the arrangement had continued so long  was  because
         there had been delays in the processing of the applications.

      6. Mr Aslam submitted that the judge had read the email from the K  on
         the sponsor's mobile phone.  That had been spontaneous evidence and
         had not been advanced by the sponsor and  so  the  judge  had  been
         wrong to make adverse findings as to its reliability.

      7. Mr Aslam argued that children should be cared for by relatives  and
         that this principle was confirmed in  the  Immigration  Directorate
         Instructions (IDIs). The judge had misdirected himself  in  finding
         that a family friend could care for the appellants.  He  relied  on
         Mundeba (s.55 and paragraph 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) in which
         there had been reference to the IDIs. He submitted that  there  was
         an  absence  of  relatives  in  Nigeria  who  could  care  for  the
         appellants and that the provisions in paragraph 297(i)(f) allowed a
         child to join a relative in this country where that child could not
         be adequately cared for by parents  or  relatives  in  his/her  own
         country. He conceded that neither the judgment  nor  the  IDIs  had
         been placed before the judge but he argued that the best  interests
         of the children should still have been considered as the head  note
         of Mundeba provided.

      8. In  response,  Ms  Vijiwala  submitted  that  the  grounds  were  a
         disagreement with the judge's decision. The judge took  account  of
         the evidence of the sponsor and her son and their  claim  that  the
         arrangement was a temporary one. However, he also noted that  there
         was no reference in K's affidavit (where she was described  as  the
         guardian) that this was the case.  Further,  the  evidence  of  the
         sponsor's son was that there was an aunt (his sister)  in  Nigeria.
         In those circumstances the judge was entitled to find  as  he  did.
         The appellants were studying. They were being cared for. There  was
         no mention of any problems in the affidavit. The correct  test  had
         been applied. Mundeba was not authority  for  the  contention  that
         children must be cared for by a blood relative and  the  IDIs  were
         not the rules. Whilst the judge had not  specifically  referred  to
         the best interests of the appellants,  it  was  implicit  from  his
         consideration of the evidence that he had taken this into  account.
         Despite the delay  in  the  entry  clearance  applications,  K  had
         continued to care for them, and they  continued  to  progress  with
         their education. There were no errors in the determination.

      9. Mr Aslam replied. He submitted  that  there  was  no  contradiction
         between the  affidavit,  the  email  and  the  oral  evidence;  the
         affidavit simply failed to mention the arrangement  was  temporary.
         There had been a failure to consider s.55. The judge had not  given
         reasons for why it was in the best interests of the  appellants  to
         be cared for by the sponsor's friend rather than  a  relative.  The
         determination was flawed as a result. There were, however, positive
         findings made; those could be  maintained,  and  a  fresh  decision
         could be made by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  available  evidence,
         despite the dispute as to K's position.

     10. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.

         Discussion and Conclusions

     11. I have considered all the evidence before me and have had regard to
         the submissions made.

     12. Paragraph 297 of the Rules provides:

             The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join  a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

                  (a)  both parents are present and settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; or

                  (b)  both parents are being admitted on the same  occasion
                  for settlement; or

                  (c)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom and the  other  is  being  admitted  on  the  same
                  occasion for settlement; or

                  (d)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                  settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                  settlement and has had sole responsibility for the child's
                  upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                  the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion
                  for settlement and there are serious and compelling family
                  or other considerations which make exclusion of the  child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been  made  for
                  the child's care; and

             (ii)      is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)     is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
             is not a civil partner, and  has  not  formed  an  independent
             family unit; and

             (iv)      can, and will, be  accommodated  adequately  by  the
             parent, parents or relative  the  child  is  seeking  to  join
             without recourse to public funds in  accommodation  which  the
             parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join,  own
             or occupy exclusively; and

             (v) can, and will, be maintained  adequately  by  the  parent,
             parents, or relative the child is  seeking  to  join,  without
             recourse to public funds; and

             (vi)      holds a valid United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for
             entry in this capacity.

     13. The provisions the appellants need to meet are at 297(i)(f),  (ii)-
         (vi) although Mr Aslam only addressed sub paragraph (i)(f)  in  his
         submissions.

     14. I now turn to the arguments made. Essentially,  the  case  for  the
         appellants is that the judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  the  care
         provided by a family friend could take  the  place  of  care  by  a
         relative and that there had been no consideration of s.55.

     15. I turn first to the judge's decision in respect of the first point.
         Heavy reliance was  placed  upon  the  IDIs  and  the  judgment  in
         Mundeba. The IDIs, as cited in  the  judgment,  say  the  following
         about 'serious or other family considerations':

             S.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
             requires the UK  Border  Agency  to  carry  out  its  existing
             functions in a  way  that  takes  into  account  the  need  to
             safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the  UK.   It
             does not  impose  any  new  functions,  or  override  existing
             functions.

             Officers  must  not  apply  the  actions  set  out   in   this
             instruction either to  children  or  to  those  with  children
             without having due regard  to  s.55.   The  UK  Border  Agency
             instruction "arrangements to safeguard and promote  children's
             welfare in the United Kingdom Border Agency" sets out the  key
             principles to take into account in all agency activities.

             Our  statutory  duty  to  children  includes   the   need   to
             demonstrate:

             .   fair treatment which meets the same standard as a  British
             child would receive;

             .   the child's interests being made a primary,  although  not
             the only consideration;

             .   no discrimination of any kind;

             .   asylum applications are dealt with in a timely fashion;

             .   identification of those that might be at risk from harm.

             This paragraph relates to the considerations  referred  to  in
             paragraphs 297(i)(f) ... of the Immigration Rules.

             The objective of this provision is to allow a child to join  a
             parent or relative in this country only where that child could
             not be adequately cared for by his parents or relatives in his
             own country.  It has never been the  intention  of  the  Rules
             that a child should be admitted here due to the wish of or for
             the benefit of other relatives in this country.

             This approach is entirely consistent with the  internationally
             accepted principle that a child should first and  foremost  be
             cared for by  his  natural  parent(s),  or,  if  this  is  not
             possible, by his natural relatives in the country in which  he
             lives.  Only if  the  parent(s)  or  relative(s)  in  his  own
             country cannot care for him should consideration be  given  to
             him  joining  relatives  in  another  country.   It  is   also
             consistent with the provisions of the European  Convention  on
             Human Rights, and  the  resolution  of  the  harmonisation  of
             family unification agreed by EU members in  June  1993  (dated
             July 2011, chapter 8 section 5 Annex M, at paragraph 1).

     16. Mr Aslam relied primarily on the penultimate paragraph.

     17. Reference was also made by the Presenting Officer in Mundeba to the
         following part of the IDIs:

             1.2       Where the sponsor is not a parent

             If the sponsor is not a parent but another relative,  e.g.  an
             aunt or grandparent, the factors which are  to  be  considered
             relate only to the child and the  circumstances  in  which  he
             lives or lived prior to travelling here.  These  circumstances
             should  be  exceptional  in  comparison  with   the   ordinary
             circumstances of other children in his home country.  It would
             not, for instance, be sufficient to  show  that  he  would  be
             better off here by being able to attend a state  school.   The
             circumstances relating to the sponsors  here  (e.g.  the  fact
             that they are elderly or infirm and need caring for)  are  not
             to be taken into account."

     18. In having regard to the arguments put in respect of the  rules  and
         the IDIs, the court held decided that when considering the  meaning
         behind the rules, "the words need to be  given  their  natural  and
         ordinary meaning" (at 29). It further found that:   "In  our  view,
         'serious' means that there needs to be more than the parties simply
         desiring a state of affairs to obtain. 'Compelling' in the  context
         of paragraph  297(i)(f)  indicates  that  considerations  that  are
         persuasive and powerful. 'Serious' read with 'compelling'  together
         indicate  that  the  family  or  other  considerations  render  the
         exclusion of the child from the  United  Kingdom  undesirable.  The
         analysis is one of degree and kind.  Such an interpretation sets  a
         high threshold that excludes  cases  where,  without  more,  it  is
         simply the wish of parties to  be  together  however  natural  that
         ambition that may be" (at 34). Reference was also made by the court
         to what was said in Odelola [2009] 1WLR 126 on the matter of  using
         the IDIs to interpret the Immigration Rules : "The question is what
         the Secretary of State intended.  The Rules are her Rules" (at  33)
         and on the clarification provided in AM (Somalia)  [2009]  UKSC  16
         (at 10): "...that intention is to be discerned objectively from the
         language  used,  not  divined  by  reference  to  supposed   policy
         considerations. Still less is the Secretary of State's intention to
         be  discovered  from  the  Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions
         (IDIs) issued intermittently to guide immigration officers in their
         application of the rules" (both cited in Mundeba  at  25).  Indeed,
         Lord Brown noted that there were instances of  the  IDIs  providing
         guidance contrary to the Immigration Rules and he observed that  he
         found reliance upon them "singularly  unhelpful  on  the  issue  of
         construction" (AM at 11).

     19. In Mundeba, the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  although  s.55  only
         applied to children within the UK, there was a broader duty on  the
         administrative authorities to have due regard to the UN  Convention
         on the Rights of the Child which is why the IDIs  invited  ECOs  to
         consider the statutory guidance issued under s.55 (at 36). It  held
         that:

             "family considerations require an evaluation  of  the  child's
             welfare including  emotional  needs.   'Other  considerations'
             come into play where there are other aspects of a child's life
             that are  serious  and  compelling  -  for  example  where  an
             applicant is living in an  unacceptable  social  and  economic
             environment.  The focus needs to be on  the  circumstances  of
             the child in the light of his or her  age,  social  background
             and developmental history  and  will  involve  inquiry  as  to
             whether:-

          i) there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

         ii) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

        iii) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.

             The  assessment  involves  consideration  as  to  whether  the
             combination  of  circumstances  is  sufficiently  serious  and
             compelling to require admission" (at 37).

     20. It was accepted that "as a starting point the best interests  of  a
         child are usually best served by being with both or at least one of
         their parents" but that there were other  important  considerations
         such as "continuity of residence" because "change in the  place  of
         residence where a child has grown up for a  number  of  years  when
         socially aware is important" (at 38).

     21. The appellant in that case was a young teen who had been  separated
         from his family during the conflict in  the  DRC.  His  mother  had
         since died and his father's whereabouts were not known  so  he  was
         being cared for as an orphan by The Girl Guides  when  his  sister,
         the sponsor, found him and made contact. Her evidence was  that  he
         was very lonely, unhappy and receiving no  education  (at  7).  She
         also maintained that she was not in a position to visit him due  to
         her own circumstances and the ongoing civil war (at 8 and 16).  She
         was found to be a credible witness.  It  was  also  argued  on  the
         appellant's behalf that he had no one to protect  him  and  was  at
         risk of recruitment as a child soldier (at 10).  Nevertheless,  the
         Upper Tribunal concluded that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had
         been entitled to find that his circumstances (having no family,  no
         education, being unhappy and living in  a  civil  war  environment)
         were not serious and compelling (at 45). It  also  found  that  the
         sponsor would be able to visit him when the situation settled down.

     22. The Tribunal observed: "It is not the case that  any  15  year  old
         orphan who has a sister in the United  Kingdom  must  be  admitted,
         irrespective of his actual circumstances" (at 44).  That  certainly
         undermines Mr Aslam's submission that the intention  of  the  rules
         was that all children should be cared for by a blood relative.  Nor
         is the determination authority for the  contention  that  the  IDIs
         must be followed by the courts to the extent that they  intend  for
         children, in the absence of relatives in  their  home  country,  to
         join relatives in the UK. Had it been so, then the  Tribunal  would
         not have observed as it did (above).

     23. The Tribunal concluded:

             "Taking the circumstances of the appellant at its highest,  he
             is being looked after by the Girl Guides Association  who  are
             meeting his basic needs including, significantly, medical care
             which  we  suspect  may  not  be  available  to  many  orphans
             displaced by the civil war in the DRC.  Although the appellant
             is not receiving an education,  we  do  not  consider,  having
             regard to his age at the date of application and his age  now,
             that this of itself is sufficient  to  create  a  serious  and
             compelling consideration.   The  lack  of  opportunities  that
             might exist for a teenager in the United Kingdom are  unlikely
             to be of any relevance unless  the  cumulative  effect  is  to
             undermine a child's welfare needs. In addition he has a mobile
             phone supplied by his sister, and receives regular remittances
             from her. Doubtless there are emotional exchanges between them
             given their family history  and  their  re-discovery  of  each
             other but that is not sufficient  to  amount  to  serious  and
             compelling circumstances that make his exclusion  undesirable.
             In so far as a comparison is made with other children  in  his
             country of origin, it is a factor  (albeit  not  a  conclusive
             one) that his circumstances  would  appear  to  be  reasonably
             catered for despite the loss of his parents" (at 45).

     24. Turning then to the circumstances of the appellants in the  present
         case, now aged 19 and 15, although obviously  younger  whether  the
         entry clearance applications were made in  December  2016,  I  note
         that the judge found that they were being well cared for, that they
         were progressing in their education and that the  eldest  appellant
         had completed school and was now studying fashion  at  college.  He
         found that they were provided for financially and that contrary  to
         what the sponsor had said in evidence, she did have a  daughter  in
         Nigeria (indeed, she is the one who is cited in the  police  report
         as having reported the appellants' father, her  brother,  missing).
         Additionally,  there  were  relatives  of  the  appellants'  mother
         although the sponsor had not asked the appellants about them (at  9
         and 17).

     25.  Whilst  the  sponsor  gave  evidence  as  to  the  nature  of  the
         arrangement of care, the judge was not satisfied that he  had  been
         given a true  picture,  noting  that  K  (described  as  the  legal
         guardian of the appellants  in  a  sworn  affidavit)  had  made  no
         mention of the temporal nature of the arrangement in  any  evidence
         before him. He, therefore, found that he  could  not  rely  on  the
         claim that it was temporary, and  he  had  reservations  about  the
         reliability of the February 2019 email from K which stated that she
         was  moving  shortly  and  that  the  sponsor  should  make   other
         arrangements for the children. Whilst  Mr  Aslam  argued  that  the
         evidence was in accordance with the oral testimony, spontaneous and
         thus uncontrived, the judge was entitled to note that  it  was  not
         referred to at all in the  more  recent  affidavit  from  the  same
         person. His finding is reinforced by the fact that  the  appellants
         continue to live with K some ten months later.

     26. No submissions were made on how the circumstances of the appellants
         compare to those of other youngsters in Nigeria but the  fact  that
         they are in receipt of an education already puts them ahead of many
         others in their country. There is no suggestion that they have been
         neglected or abused, that they have  basic  unmet  needs  nor  that
         there are any issues financially. Were there any such  issues,  one
         would have expected the sponsor to say so given her recent  regular
         visits to  Nigeria  where  presumably  she  had  contact  with  the
         appellants (although strangely her statement is  silent  on  this).
         Indeed, the sponsor's funds are bound to stretch  much  further  in
         Nigeria than in the UK.

     27. The sponsor's written evidence was that the appellants also receive
         health care and attend church. There is also  evidence  that  there
         are relatives in Nigeria and that  the  situation  is  not  as  the
         sponsor originally tried to  make  out  of  there  being  no  other
         relatives. No details were given as to whether attempts  have  been
         made to seek their assistance; the sponsor's evidence was that  she
         had not even asked the appellants about their  mother's  relatives.
         The sponsor's son spoke of having met some on one of his two visits
         to Nigeria and it transpired that he had a  sister  there,  so  the
         sponsor had not been truthful when she told the judge that all  her
         children except for the appellants' missing  father  were  in  this
         country.

     28. There was no evidence  of  contact  between  the  sponsor  and  the
         appellants before the judge;  no  evidence  of  phone  calls,  text
         messages, cards or other correspondence. The decision maintains the
         status quo and the continuity of residence in a country and culture
         the appellants have always lived in and are  familiar  with.   "The
         material advantages of life in the United Kingdom is not the  test;
         the loss of his cultural roots in the society in which he has grown
         up to date is a relevant factor. There is no evidence that he is at
         risk of harm where he is" (Mundeba at  50).  On  this  evidence,  I
         cannot find that  the  judge  erred  in  his  conclusion  that  the
         evidence did not point to  there  being  serious  or  other  family
         considerations that make the exclusion of the appellants  from  the
         UK undesirable.

     29. It is important to note that in  this  case,  as  in  Mundeba,  the
         appellants are not being denied re-union  with  a  previous  carer.
         This is not a case where they were previously cared  for  by  their
         grandmother and that she could not care for them anywhere  but  the
         UK.  They have never lived  together,  and  the  sponsor  has  been
         living in the UK since before they were born. Her  passport  copies
         show that she visits Nigeria most years (since 2003) and no  reason
         was given as to why she could not continue to do so.

     30. I would also note that although Mr Aslam asked  that  I  allow  the
         appeal because paragraph 297(i)(f) had been made out, he omitted to
         consider the remaining sub paragraphs which have not been addressed
         at all by the evidence.  Indeed,  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
         finances shows that she  is  regularly  overdrawn,  sometimes  even
         beyond her overdraft limit, and there was no evidence given to  the
         judge as to how  she  would  be  able  to  afford  to  support  two
         teenagers. No evidence of available accommodation has been adduced.
         The notice to leaseholders gives no information as to the  size  of
         the property, or the number of occupants or whether the  appellants
         would be permitted to reside there. There is  also  an  anomaly  in
         that her pay slips give a Coventry address as opposed to the London
         address in other evidence.

     31. I turn next to the complaint that there  was  no  consideration  of
         s.55.  I  accept  that  the  judge  did  not  cite  s.55   in   his
         determination; however, as Ms Vijiwala submitted, it is implicit in
         his consideration of the facts and the evidence that  he  did  have
         regard to their welfare and best  interests.  He  noted  they  were
         cared for, that they had stability, that they were  progressing  in
         education and training and that there was no reliable evidence that
         the situation could not continue. He  also  noted  that  the  older
         appellant was now over 18. It is not apparent that there  were  any
         factors omitted in the judge's  consideration  of  the  appellants'
         circumstances, nor was I referred to any. Mr Aslam did not point to
         any overlooked matters in his  submissions,  save  for  the  formal
         consideration of s.55, and the grounds fail to mention any.

     32. Three of the head notes of Mundeba were relied on by Mr Aslam. They
         state:

             (i) The exercise of the duty by the Entry Clearance Officer to
             assess an  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  to
             whether there are family or other  considerations  making  the
             child's   exclusion   undesirable   inevitably   involves   an
             assessment of what the  child's  welfare  and  best  interests
             require.

             (ii)      Where an  immigration  decision  engages  Article  8
             rights, due regard must be had to the  UN  Convention  on  the
             Rights of the Child.  An  entry  clearance  decision  for  the
             admission of  a  child  under  18  is  "an  action  concerning
             children ... undertaken by ... administrative authorities" and
             so by Article 3 "the best interests of the child  shall  be  a
             primary consideration".

             (iii)     Although the statutory duty under  s.55  UK  Borders
             Act 2009 only applies to children within the UK,  the  broader
             duty doubtless explains  why  the  Secretary  of  State's  IDI
             invites Entry Clearance Officers  to  consider  the  statutory
             guidance issued under s.55.

     33. As set out in the first paragraph of  the  head  note,  it  may  be
         safely assumed that any consideration by the respondent, and  hence
         also  by  a  judge,  of  whether  there   are   family   or   other
         considerations which would make  a  child's  exclusion  undesirable
         inevitably involves an assessment of what that child's welfare  and
         best interests require. In Mundeba, the judge  did  not  conduct  a
         s.55 assessment, noting that "...section 55 of the BCIA  2009  does
         not  apply  to  entry  clearance  cases  but  that  not  dissimilar
         considerations should be taken into account under Article 8."

     34. That is entirely consistent with what the judge did in the  present
         case. As I have already said, there is no reliance on  any  factors
         that were said to have been overlooked by the judge nor  any  which
         would fall to be considered under s. 55  but  not  under  paragraph
         297(i)(f). So essentially, the  judge's  consideration  of  whether
         there were family or other  considerations  which  would  make  the
         appellants' exclusion from the UK undesirable was  a  consideration
         of their  best  interests.  It  is  also  important  to  note  that
         according to the judge's record of proceedings, no  submissions  on
         s.55 were made to  the  judge  at  the  hearing  by  Mr  Aslam  who
         represented the appellants at that time, as he does now.

     35. In conclusion, therefore, I am satisfied that the decision  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge did not contain an  error  of  law.   The
         joint  appeals  of  the  appellants  in  the  Upper  Tribunal   are
         accordingly dismissed.




         Decision

     36. The appeals are dismissed.

         Anonymity

     37. I make an order for anonymity.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 9 December 2019


