
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/22382/2016
                                                               HU/23319/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2018                  |On 26 April 2018                    |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HUBERT [L] &
                                    [K L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Cohen (Counsel) instructed by Legal Rights
                    Partnership

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss, promulgated on 24  August  2017,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3.  The  first  Appellant  is  the  second  appellant's  father.  The  first
appellant was born on 1 December 1968. The second appellant was  born  on  4
January 2007. Both appellants are Ghanaian nationals. On  1  September  2016
the appellants applied for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds. The respondent refused their applications on 8 September 2016.

4. The first appellant entered the UK illegally  in  2003.  On  24  February
2012 he applied for leave to remain in the UK as the  spouse  of  a  British
citizen. The respondent refused that  application  on  19  March  2013.  The
first appellant had no right of appeal against that decision.  On  5  August
2014 the first appellant was served with a form  IAS151A  informing  him  of
his liability to  removal.  The  first  appellant  unsuccessfully  tried  to
judicially review that decision.  On  4  August  2016  the  first  appellant
submitted further representations.

5. The second appellant was born in the UK for January 2007. On 24  February
2012 he applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  dependent  on  article  8ECHR
grounds.  That  application  was  refused  on  19  March   2013.   Following
unsuccessful judicial  review  procedure,  the  second  appellant  submitted
further representations on 4 August 2016.

6. Both appellants submitted applications for leave to remain on  article  8
ECHR grounds of 1 September 2016. On  8  September  2016  the  Secretary  of
State refused the Appellants' applications. On  2  August  2017  the  second
appellant was granted British citizenship.  The  second  appellant's  mother
died on 7 March 2016.


The Judge's Decision

7. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Juss ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  1  February  2018  Judge
O'Garro gave permission to appeal stating

    "1. The respondent seeks permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss, sitting at Birmingham,  who
    in a decision promulgated on 24 August 2017 allowed the appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to remain.


    2. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  Judge's  decision  is  wrong
    because he failed to consider the case properly under article 8 looking
    through the lens of the immigration rules before proceeding to consider
    article 8 outside the immigration rules. That the Judge failed to  give
    proper  regard  to  the  public  interest   considerations.   That   in
    considering the appeal outside the  immigration  rules  the  Judge  has
    failed to give adequate reasons why the appellant's  circumstances  are
    exceptional or compelling.


    3. Appendix FM states at paragraph GEN 1.1 that the appendix  "reflects
    how, under article 8 of the human rights convention, the  balance  will
    be struck between the right to respect for private and family life  and
    the legitimate aims of protecting national security, public safety  and
    the economic well-being of the UK". It follows that an  appellant,  who
    makes specific application under appendix FM, is  implicitly  making  a
    claim that he or she is entitled to entry/leave to remain on the  basis
    of that provision that seeks  to  incorporate  his  human  rights.  The
    Immigration Directorate Instructions define a  human  rights  claim  as
    including an application under appendix FM.


    4. In Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) the  tribunal
    held that (i) in cases to which the new immigration rules introduced as
    from 9 July 2012 by HC  194  apply,  Judges  should  proceed  by  first
    considering whether a claimant is able to benefit under the  applicable
    provisions of the immigration  rules  designed  to  address  article  8
    claims. Where the claimant does not meet the requirements of the  rules
    it will be necessary to go on  to  make  an  assessment  of  article  8
    applying the criteria established by law.


    5. Having carefully considered the decision, I find arguable  merit  in
    the grounds in terms in which they are set forth. The grounds  disclose
    an arguable point of law and permission to appeal is granted."





The Hearing

8. (a) For the respondent Ms Kiss told  me  that  the  decision  contains  a
number of errors of fact.  Both  appellants  are  Ghanaian  nationals;  both
appellants are male; there are two appellants. Yet in [1]  of  the  decision
the Judge identifies a solitary appellant as a female Jamaican national.  It
is beyond dispute that the mother of the second appellant died in 2016,  yet
the Judge claims to have heard evidence from her in [8] of the decision.  At
[16] of the decision the Judge takes the respondent's delay  in  making  the
decision as a factor against the respondent, when there was  no  significant
delay. Ms Kiss told me that the Judge  has  produced  a  decision  which  is
inadequately reasoned.

(b) I reminded Ms Kiss that the second appellant became a  British  national
before the Judge's  decision  was  promulgated.  She  agreed  that  he  must
succeed because he is a British citizen.

9. I told Ms Cohen that I did not  need  to  hear  from  her.  I  told  both
parties' agents that the decision contains an error of law and would be  set
aside. I said that I would substitute my own  decision,  taking  the  second
appellant's British citizenship as my starting point.




Analysis

10.  At  [1]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  incorrectly  identifies   both
appellants as being one female Jamaican, when they are two males who at  the
date of hearing both had Ghanaian nationality. At [8] of the  decision,  the
Judge claims to have heard evidence from the second appellant's mother,  who
passed away in 2016. Those are clearly errors of fact.

11. At [11] the Judge records that the second appellant has  an  outstanding
application for British nationality. The decision was not promulgated  until
24 August 2017. Three weeks before the decision was promulgated  the  second
appellant became a British national.

12. In the 40 days between the date of hearing and the promulgation  of  the
decision there was a material change in circumstances,  because  the  second
appellant was granted British citizenship.

13.   In E and R (2004) EWCA Civ  49  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  "a
mistake of fact giving rise to unfairness is a separate  head  of  challenge
in an appeal on a point of law, at least in those statutory  contexts  where
the parties share  an  interest  in  co-operating  to  achieve  the  correct
result.  Asylum law is undoubtedly such an area." The Court  of  Appeal  set
out the ordinary requirements for a finding of unfairness as follows:

         i) There must have been a mistake as to an existing fact  including
         a mistake as to the availability of evidence on a particular fact;


         ii)      The fact or evidence must have been  established,  in  the
         sense that it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable;


         iii)     The  appellant  (or  his  advisors)  must  not  have  been
         responsible for the mistake; and


         iv)      The mistake must have played a material  (not  necessarily
         decisive) part in the Adjudicator's reasoning.


14. The Judge's decision is based on a mistake of fact. The decision  relies
on a finding of  fact  that  the  first  appellant's  child  is  a  Ghanaian
national, when, before the date of decision, the second appellant  became  a
British Citizen.  The mistake relates to a  fundamental  fact  which  almost
certainly would have resulted  in  a  different  outcome.  The  decision  is
tainted by material error of law. I set the decision aside.

15. There is sufficient material before me to enable  me  to  substitute  my
own decision.

The Material Facts

16. The first appellant is  a  Ghanaian  national  who  entered  the  UK  in
December 2002. In 2005 he met [EA], and  a  relationship  developed  between
them. The second appellant was born to the first appellant  and  [EA]  on  4
January 2007. [EA] died in the UK on 7 March 2016.

17. The second appellant is now 11 years old. He is in  his  final  year  of
primary school and will start  secondary  education  later  this  year.  His
primary carer is the first appellant. The  second  appellant  is  happy  and
well settled at school. He enjoys playing for a local junior football team.

18. On 17 May 2017 the second appellant applied for British citizenship.  On
2 August 2017 the second appellant  was  granted  British  citizenship.  The
decision against which  both  appellants  appeal  was  promulgated  22  days
later, on 24 August 2017. Three weeks before the  decision  was  promulgated
the second appellant became a British citizen.

19. Because the second appellant is a British citizen he no longer  requires
leave to remain in the UK. He has the right to remain in the UK.

20. The first appellant is the second appellant's primary carer. He  is  the
second appellant's sole surviving parent. The first  and  second  appellants
live together.

Analysis

21. Because the second appellant is a British citizen he no longer  requires
leave to remain in the UK. He has the right to remain in the UK.

22. The respondent's IDIs on Family Migration (Paragraph 11.2.3) deals  with
British children. The  August  2015  version  states  that,  save  in  cases
involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not  take  a  decision  in
relation to the parent or primary carer of a  British  Citizen  child  where
the effect of that decision would be to force that British  child  to  leave
the EU, regardless of the age of that child. However, it  also  states  that
"where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a  parent  or
primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the  case  must  always
be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect  a  British
Citizen child to leave the EU  with  that  parent  or  primary  carer".  The
section goes on to address the grant of leave to the parent indicating  that
it may not be appropriate if there is no satisfactory evidence of a  genuine
and subsisting parental relationship or where the conduct of the  parent  or
primary carer gives rise to considerations of  such  weight  as  to  justify
separation but none of that gets round the  unequivocal  statement  that  it
would always be unreasonable to expect a British child to leave the EU.

23. The respondent's  decision  was  that  the  first  appellant  meets  the
eligibility and  suitability  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  but
cannot meet the requirements of  paragraph  EX1,  because  the  respondent's
view is that it is reasonable for the second appellant to  return  to  Ghana
with  the  first  appellant.  That  logic  is  wholly  undermined   by   the
respondent's decision to grant the  second  appellant  British  citizenship.
The respondent's own guidance says that it is  unreasonable  to  expect  the
second appellant to leave the EU. It cannot therefore be reasonable for  the
second appellant to go to Ghana.

24. The Upper Tribunal in SF and others (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)  Albania
[2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) held, considering this guidance  that  even  in  the
absence of a "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  ground  of  appeal,  the
Tribunal ought to take the Secretary of State's guidance into account if  it
points clearly to a particular outcome in the instant case.   Only  in  that
way can consistency be obtained between  those  cases  that  do,  and  those
cases that do not, come before the Tribunal

25. The respondent's own guidance says that it is  not  reasonable  for  the
second appellant to leave the UK, and that is not reasonable for  the  first
appellant to leave the UK. The first appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
the immigration rules. The second appellant is a  British  citizen  to  whom
the immigration rules no longer apply. He cannot be removed.

Article 8 ECHR.

26. In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 it was made clear that  (even
in a deport  case)  the  Rules  are  not  a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..." In  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC
11, Lord Reed (when explaining how  a  court  or  tribunal  should  consider
whether a refusal of leave to remain was compatible  with  Article  8)  made
clear that the critical issue was generally whether, giving  due  weight  to
the strength of the public interest in removal,  the  article  8  claim  was
sufficiently  strong  to  outweigh  it.   There  is  no  suggestion  of  any
threshold to be overcome before proportionality can be fully considered.

27. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest.  In AM (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

28. On the facts as I find them to be, family life exists. On the facts  as
I find them to be the first appellant is the father of a  British  citizen.
On the facts as I find them  to  be  the  first  appellant  now  meets  the
requirements of the immigration rules.

29. The respondent's position is that all article 8 ECHR considerations are
embraced by the Immigration Rules. The fact that  I  find  that  the  first
appellant meets the requirements of the immigration  rules  indicates  that
the  respondent  has  a  willingness  to  grant  leave  to   remain.    The
respondent's decision must therefore be a disproportionate  breach  of  the
right to respect for family life. The respondent's own rules indicate  that
the decision is a disproportionate interference with the right  to  respect
for family life.

30. Family life within the meaning of article  8  is  established  for  the
appellants. The respondent's decision is an interference with  that  family
life. The burden therefore shifts  to  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
interference was justified. The respondent  relies  solely  on  the  public
interest in effective immigration control.

31. The second appellant is a British citizen.  S.117B(6) of the  2002  Act,
which says

    (6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and


         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

32.  The focus in this case is on sub-section (6) of Section  117B.  Section
117B(6) is in two parts which are conjunctive. Section 117B(6)(a) weighs  in
favour of the first appellant  because  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
paternal  relationship  with  a  British  Citizen  child.  It   is   Section
117B(6)(b) which is determinative of this case.

33. The test is one of reasonableness. The simple  question  is  whether  or
not it is reasonable  for  the  second  appellant,  who  is  now  a  British
citizen, to remain in the UK alone. The second appellant is  11  years  old.
He is a primary schoolboy who has only ever lived with  his  parents.  I  am
mindful of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,
and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.   I  remind  myself  of
the cases of Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting  children;  onward
appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW [2015] CSIH 36.   The  interests  of  the
second appellant will be served if the integrity of the family unit  is  not
challenged. It has long  been  settled  that  it  is  in  the  interests  of
children to live with their parents.

34. The simple answer is that it cannot be reasonable for an 11-year-old  to
either live alone or to be separated from his father and forced  into  local
authority care. As the second appellant is a British citizen,  the  question
of returned to Ghana cannot be considered reasonable because  removal  would
be  an  act  inconsistent  with  the  rights  and  obligations  of   British
citizenship, which the respondent herself conveyed on the second appellant.

35. The refusal of leave to remain must  therefore  be  a  disproportionate
breach of the right to respect for family life. The respondent's own  rules
and  the  respondent's  own  guidance  indicate  that  the  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the right to respect for family life.

36. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) it  was
held that the decision in Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 is to  be  followed
and that the obligation imposed by Article 8 is to promote the family  life
of those affected by the decision.

37.  In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)  the
Tribunal  further  held  that  the  claimant's  ability   to   satisfy   the
Immigration Rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,  but
is capable of  being  a  weighty,  though  not  determinative,  factor  when
deciding whether such refusal is proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
enforcing immigration control. At paragraph 9 it was  said  that  where  the
ground of appeal is limited to human  rights  "  Clearly  there  can  be  no
question of entertaining an appeal on grounds  alleging  that  the  decision
was not in accordance with the law or the immigration rules. These  are  not
permissible grounds. However if ...the claimant has shown that refusing  him
entry ... does interfere with his ...family life then it will  be  necessary
to assess the evidence to see if the claimant meets  the  substance  of  the
rules. This is because... the ability to satisfy the rules  illuminates  the
proportionality of the decision to refuse him entry clearance".

38.  At paragraph 23 the Upper Tribunal said "We have  considered  carefully
the effect that this decision could have in other cases. Plainly  this  will
mean that the underlying  merits  of  an  application  and  the  ability  to
satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules,  although  not  the  question  before  the
Tribunal, may be capable of being a weighty factor in  an  appeal  based  on
human rights but they will not  be  determinative.  They  will  only  become
relevant if the interference is such as to engage Article 8(1)  ECHR  and  a
finding by the Tribunal that an appellant does satisfy the  requirements  of
the rules will not necessarily lead  to  a  finding  that  the  decision  to
refuse  entry  clearance  is  disproportionate  to  the  proper  purpose  of
enforcing immigration control. However, it may be capable of being a  strong
reason for allowing the appeal that must be weighed with  the  others  facts
in the case.  ".

39. As I have already indicated, the respondent's  own  IDI's  dictate  that
the respondent's position is that it cannot  be  reasonable  for  a  British
citizen child to be required to leave the UK. The respondent's decision,  if
it is enforced, would cause upheaval and distress, which cannot  be  in  any
child's best interests.

40. In Kaur (children's best interests / public interest  interface)  [2017]
UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that the "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of
the 2002 Act do not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;
"little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-contained
boundaries, will  result  in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of  weight
considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

41. Even when  I  give  little  weight  to  the  relationship  between  the
appellants, the relationship still carries sufficient weight because on the
facts as I find them to be the first appellant meets  the  requirements  of
the immigration rules and because the article  8  family  life  established
encompasses the interests of a primary school age child.

42. The fact that the appellants meet every requirement of  the  immigration
rules is an indicator that  the  respondent  accepts  that  the  balance  of
proportionality weighs in  the  appellants'  favour,  and  that  the  public
interest  embodied  in  immigration  control  does  not  demand   that   the
appellants should be forced to live apart.

43.  I find that these appeals succeed on  article  8  ECHR  (family  life)
grounds.

Decision

The appeals are allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.

CONCLUSION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  24  August  2017  is
tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

The appeals are allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed  Paul Doyle
   Date  23 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



