
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: HU/22699/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1 March 2018                      |On: 7 March 2018                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Atuegbe, R & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because the respondent ('R')  is  a  14-
    year-old child.




Background facts


 2. R is a citizen of Nigeria, born there in 2003.  She has resided in  the
    United Kingdom ('UK')  since  2010  with  her  grandmother  (a  British
    citizen, born in the UK), her aunt and her  aunt's  two  children  (all
    British citizens).  R's mother applied for leave to  enter  the  UK  in
    early 2007, but was advised by an Immigration Officer to  apply  for  a
    certificate of entitlement to the  right  of  abode  ('right  of  abode
    certificate') instead, which she did successfully later that  year  for
    herself, and then in 2010 for R and her two  other  children.   When  R
    entered the UK in November 2010, she therefore did so as a person  with
    a right of abode, valid from 15 June 2010 until 24 January  2013.   R's
    parents and two siblings remained in Nigeria.  R  remained  in  the  UK
    with her grandmother, to enable her mother to complete her  studies  in
    Nigeria, with a view to the family relocating to the UK at the  end  of
    her studies.


 3.  In  July  2015,  the  appellant  ('the  SSHD')  informed  R  that  her
    certificate of a right to abode in the UK had been issued in error  and
    apologised for the difficulty this caused.   No  explanation  has  been
    provided for this.  Significantly, the SSHD has never alleged any  form
    of deception on the part of R or her family members, and simply asserts
    that she was mistaken in advising  R  that  she  was  entitled  to  the
    certificate and in granting her the certificate.  Shortly after this, R
    applied to remain in the UK outside the Immigration  Rules,  which  was
    refused in a decision dated 20 September 2006.  R appealed against this
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.


Appeal proceedings

 4. The SSHD has appealed against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 5 October 2017 in which  it  allowed  R's  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The SSHD contends that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
    in:

      i) treating R's best interests as determinative;


     ii) failing to factor in the public interest  considerations  into  the
         balancing exercise;


    iii) failing to take into account and attach weight to the fact that the
         R would be returning to live with her own family in Nigeria.

 5. In a decision dated 7  December  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  considered
    these grounds to be arguable and granted permission to appeal.




Error of law discussion

 6. As Mr Harrison accepted,  in  many  respects  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision is a carefully drafted one.  The law was correctly  summarised
    at [3] to [7], and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  comprehensive  and
    detailed findings of fact at [9], entirely open to it.  These  findings
    are summarised at [2] - [3] above.


 7. I however accept, as Mr Harrison submitted, that in  failing  to  apply
    the public interest considerations at section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('the  2002  Act')  and  in  focussing
    solely upon the best interests of R, the First-tier Tribunal  committed
    a material error of law.   The  relevant  provisions  of  section  117A
    state:

         "(1)     This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.


         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and


             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
         the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2)."

 8. The considerations referred to in section 117A(2)(a), which are said by
    that provision to be applicable in all cases where the public  interest
    question is under consideration, are set out at  section  117B  are  as
    follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.


         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)      Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.


         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

 9. The factors set out at section 117B(1)-(5) make no distinction  between
    adults and children, and in Miah (section 117B NIAA  2002  -  children)
    [2016] UKUT 131 (IAC) they were held to apply  to  all,  regardless  of
    age.


10. By contrast, the position of a child with seven years of  residence  in
    the UK, but without reference to the child's parental relationship,  is
    addressed  in  the  Immigration  Rules  at  276ADE.  This  states   (my
    emphasis):

         "276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:


         (i)      does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
         Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and


         (ii)     has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and


         ...


         (iv)     is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
         the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
         imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         applicant to leave the UK; or...".

11. When making its findings, the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard
    to the section 117B considerations in the  context  of  this  case  and
    specifically failed to consider what role the  reasonableness  test  in
    276ADE should play.


12. I do not accept Mr Atuegbe's  submission  that  it  was  sufficient  to
    simply refer to the wording of section 117B when summarising the  legal
    framework.  Section 117A(2) of the 2002 Act requires the Tribunal, when
    considering the public interest question for the purposes of Article 8,
    to have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B.  The First-
    tier Tribunal failed to do this  and  focussed  solely  upon  R's  best
    interests.

13. After hearing  from  both  representatives,  I  indicated  that  I  was
    satisfied  that  the  decision  contains  an  error   of   law.    Both
    representatives accepted that I should remake the decision myself given
    the absence of  any  factual  dispute,  and  the  detailed,  unappealed
    factual findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.


14. Having had regard to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the  factual  agreement
    in this case, I decided that it was appropriate to remake the  decision
    in the Upper Tribunal.


Remaking the decision

Hearing

15. Mr Atuegbe confirmed that the factual matrix remained the same, and  it
    remained R's mother's intention to leave Nigeria  to  reside  with  her
    family in the UK as soon as  they  were  able  to  make  the  necessary
    arrangements.  Mr Harrison was content  to  accept  this  evidence  and
    indicated that he did not intend to cross-examine R's grandmother,  who
    was present with a view  to  providing  oral  evidence,  if  considered
    necessary. Both representatives agreed that it was unnecessary to  hear
    any further oral evidence, and invited me to simply apply the  findings
    of fact to the relevant legal framework.


16. Having heard brief submissions from both representatives,  I  announced
    that the appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds, for the reasons I now
    set out below.

Best interests


17. I turn firstly to R's  best  interests,  viewed  through  the  lens  of
    Article 8 private life.


18. I have applied the general principles when considering the interests of
    a child in the context of an Article 8 evaluation.  These have recently
    been summarised by Kitchin LJ in TA (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ
    260 at [22] as follows:

         "In particular, the respondent has an overriding obligation to have
         regard to the welfare of a child in the  exercise  of  her  various
         statutory functions. The best interests of a child are therefore an
         integral part of the proportionality assessment under Article 8. In
         carrying out that assessment it is important to have a  clear  idea
         of a child's circumstances  and  of  what  is  in  a  child's  best
         interests before determining whether those interests are outweighed
         by  the  force  of  other  considerations.  In  carrying  out  that
         evaluation, the best interests of  the  child  must  be  a  primary
         consideration   although   not   necessarily   the   only   primary
         consideration. It necessarily follows that the best interests of  a
         child  can  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of   other
         considerations; but no consideration can be treated  as  inherently
         more significant than the child's best  interests.  Ultimately  the
         decision maker must carry out a careful examination and  evaluation
         of all relevant factors with these principles in mind. The question
         is whether, having regard to the foregoing,  there  are  compelling
         circumstances which justify the grant of leave  to  remain  outside
         the immigration rules."

19. Having considered all the relevant circumstances, I find that R's  best
    interests are served by remaining in the UK, by a considerable  margin.
    There are five dominant factors:

          i) She has spent over seven years in the UK.


         ii) She came to the UK as a young child and has spent some of  her
             most formative years (7 to 14) and half her life in the UK.


        iii) R clearly has significant ties to Nigeria as her parents  live
             there with her siblings.  However, she was just a young  child
             when she left Nigeria and I accept she sees herself as British
             with an identity based on British multi-cultural society.  Her
             integration into UK society  can  be  described  as  advanced,
             albeit she clearly has a mixed Nigerian and  British  cultural
             identity.


         iv) R will  find  it  difficult  to  return  to  Nigeria  at  this
             particular stage of her  education  and  childhood.   She  has
             already commenced her GCSEs and is doing well at school.


          v) R resides with her grandmother and aunt, together with her two
             first cousins, aged 14 and 11, who she  regards  as  siblings.
             She will have to repeat a process of leaving  siblings  behind
             to begin a new life elsewhere, and  is  likely  to  find  this
             difficult.

20. I have reached this conclusion having borne in mind that R's biological
    siblings reside in Nigeria with their parents in what appears to be  an
    entirely stable and loving environment, which R would be able to  join,
    having resided with them in Nigeria from birth to 2010.  The difficulty
    for R would be leaving all that she has become accustomed to in Britain
    in terms of family and private life, over an extended  period  of  over
    seven years, and at a formative stage of her life.  Whilst R  would  be
    able to visit her grandmother, and 'adopted' family, I accept that  she
    is likely to find the process of leaving them, her  education  and  her
    friends distressing (notwithstanding the availability of  communication
    by modern means), at this particular stage of her life, in the short to
    medium term.  The factual matrix can therefore  be  distinguished  from
    that in TA (Sri Lanka) (supra), wherein that child had only lived  away
    from her parents and siblings for 3 years and 10 months.

21. I am mindful that the best interests assessment  is  not  determinative
    and the approach summarised above at [18] must be applied.  As Elias LJ
    noted in MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (7 July 2016) at [47]
    even where the child's best interests are to stay, for the purposes  of
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules or section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  it
    may still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave.  That will
    depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in
    the UK and Nigeria, as well as any other relevant wider  considerations
    - see [45] of MA (Pakistan) and EV (Philippines) v SSHD at [34-37].

Section 117B considerations

22. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) I am obliged to have regard
    to the considerations listed in section 117B, and do so below.

23. The  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is engaged but to a limited extent.  The whole family (and the
    SSHD, at least to 2015) proceeded on the  basis  that  R  was  lawfully
    entitled to reside in the UK.  This was based upon  a  right  of  abode
    certificate granted in good faith in 2010.  It was only  in  2015  that
    the SSHD pointed out that this was granted in error and apologised  for
    this mistake.  It follows that R has spent the majority of her time  in
    the UK holding the reasonable belief that she was  entitled  to  remain
    lawfully and has taken steps to clarify her  immigration  status  since
    then.

24. I also bear in mind that as at the date  of  application  on  17  March
    2016, R did not have seven-years residence, and as such  276ADE  cannot
    be met.  However as at  the  date  of  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and before me, R has been resident in the UK  for  over  seven
    years.  If an application was to be made now, R would clearly meet  the
    residency requirement, albeit consideration would have to be  given  to
    the reasonableness test.


25. There is no infringement of the "English speaking" public interest as R
    speaks fluent English.  The economic interest must be engaged because R
    has been, and will continue to be, educated at public expense and  will
    have  the  capacity  to  access  other  publicly  funded  services  and
    benefits.  However, she is doing well at school and is ambitious.   She
    has already integrated fully into UK society and there is every  reason
    to believe that in the medium to long term she will not be a burden  on
    taxpayers.

26. I have regard to the considerations at sections 117B(4)  and  (5)  that
    little weight should be given to R's private life at a  time  when  her
    immigration status was precarious or unlawful.   In  my  judgment,  R's
    immigration status did not become truly precarious until 15 July  2015,
    when she was told that she had been provided  with  a  right  of  abode
    certificate in error.  Further,  prior  to  that  date  she  cannot  be
    properly said to have been in the UK unlawfully.  It follows that I  am
    entitled to attach full weight to her private  life  between  2010  and
    2015.


27. The private life established by R after 15 July 2015 can be taken  into
    account, given the particularly unusual and  exceptional  circumstances
    that led to R being in the  UK  with  an  immigration  status  that  is
    precarious.  Even at this point, R sought to regularise her status.  In
    Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803, the Court of Appeal  examined  the
    interaction of section 117A(2) and section 117C.  Sales  LJ  made  this
    observation regarding the "little weight" provisions in section 117B:

         "It is possible to conceive of cases falling within section 117B(4)
         (unlawful presence  in  the  UK)  or  section  117B(5)  (precarious
         immigration status in the UK) in which private or family  life  (as
         appropriate) of an especially strong kind has been  established  in
         the host country such that it should be accorded great  weight  for
         the purpose of analysis under Article 8: Jeunesse v Netherlands  is
         a prime example."

28. In Kaur (children's best interests / public interest interface)  [2017]
    UKUT 14 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal agreed with this reasoning, concluding
    that the "little weight" provisions "do not entail an  absolute,  rigid
    measurement or concept; "little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,
    within its self-contained boundaries, will result in the measurement of
    the quantum of weight considered  appropriate  in  the  fact  sensitive
    context of every case."


29. Sales LJ observed at [53] of Rhuppiah  (supra)  that  the  "generalised
    normative  guidance  may  be  overridden  in  an  exceptional  case  by
    particularly strong features of the private life in question, where  it
    is not appropriate in Article 8 terms to attach only little  weight  to
    private life." In my judgment, this is such a case: the private life of
    this child has a special  and  compelling  character  in  that  it  was
    established firmly in the UK at a formative stage  of  her  development
    over a lengthy period when all concerned believed she was entitled to a
    right of abode certificate.

Proportionality / balancing exercise

30. In my  consideration  of  R's  best  interests  above  I  have  already
    highlighted the salient facts and factors.  On the one hand, removal to
    Nigeria would be hugely distressing and disruptive  for  R,  and  would
    decimate the friendships, relationships and activities  that  form  the
    core of her private life. It would also obstruct  her  education  given
    that she has started her GCSE course, and is more than half way through
    the first of a two-year course.  It would involve  her  transfer  to  a
    society whose values and norms are less familiar to her.   Emotionally,
    it would undoubtedly be stressful and damaging.  In addition, she would
    have to cope  without  the  two  children  she  regards  in  practical,
    everyday terms as her siblings.  Furthermore,  this  transformation  of
    her life and lifestyle would occur at an  age  and  stage  of  critical
    importance to her development - she is nearly 15.


31. In addition, significant weight must be given to R's residence of  over
    seven years.  In MA (Pakistan) V SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (7 July 2016)
    Elias LJ said this:

         "46.     Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
         that  a  child  has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
         significant weight when carrying out the proportionality  exercise.
         Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in
         the form of Immigration Directorate Instructions  entitled  "Family
         Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes"  in
         which it is expressly stated that once the seven  years'  residence
         requirement is satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for
         refusing leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force
         when the cases now subject to appeal were  determined,  but  in  my
         view they merely confirm what is implicit in adopting a  policy  of
         this nature. After such a period of time the child  will  have  put
         down roots and developed social, cultural and educational links  in
         the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the  child
         is required to leave the UK. That may be less so when the  children
         are very young because the focus of their lives will  be  on  their
         families, but the disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get
         older. Moreover, in  these  cases  there  must  be  a  very  strong
         expectation that the child's best interests will be  to  remain  in
         the UK with his parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must
         rank as a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


         ...


         49.      ... However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

32. This policy guidance was updated on 22 February  2018,  but  the  terms
    remain similar for children who have resided in the UK for seven  years
    (pg 75):

         "Significant weight must be given to such a  period  of  continuous
         residence. The longer the child has resided  in  the  UK,  and  the
         older the age at which they have done so, the more the balance will
         begin to shift towards it being unreasonable to expect the child to
         leave the UK, and strong reasons  will  be  required  in  order  to
         refuse a case where the outcome will be removal  of  a  child  with
         continuous UK residence of seven years or more."

33. On the other hand, taking into account R's age and  the  support  of  a
    stable family unit in Nigeria, she would, foreseeably, adapt over time.
     I attach weight to the powerful interest in reuniting a child with her
    parents when there remains a clear  bond  of  love  between  them.   In
    addition, there is no suggestion that her health would be detrimentally
    affected.   Although R and her family members reasonably  believed  she
    was entitled to a right of abode certificate and resided here  on  that
    basis for five years, the SSHD clarified that she is not  so  entitled.
    The requirements of immigration control therefore support her  removal.




34. The main countervailing factors are that R has no legal right to remain
    in the UK and has a stable family unit she can return  to  in  Nigeria.
    However, this is not a case in which  a  family  has  brazenly  made  a
    decision to overstay.  In this case,  the  family  reasonably  believed
    that R was entitled  to  remain  and  her  attachment  to  the  UK  has
    developed over a significant period when the SSHD also considered  that
    she was entitled to remain.


35. Although R has a family in Nigeria at present, the First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that R's mother intends to come to reside with her  family  in
    the UK, as she has completed her accountancy  exams.   At  the  hearing
    before me, R's grandmother gave express instructions that this  remains
    the  intention.   Mr  Harrison  did  not  wish  to  cross-examine   the
    grandmother on this, or any other issue.  Mr  Harrison  was  unable  to
    confirm whether R's mother is entitled to a right of abode certificate.
     However, the certificate she has held and renewed has not been revoked
    by the SSHD.  Given that R's grandmother is a British citizen by birth,
    there is no reason to doubt her daughter's entitlement to  a  right  of
    abode certificate.  In any event, the SSHD has not done so.  This means
    that R's mother's intention to relocate to the UK, in  accordance  with
    the First-tier Tribunal's findings, has every chance of taking place.


36. As set out above, I consider that there are strong  factors  supporting
    the conclusion that it would not be reasonable to expect R to leave the
    UK at this juncture, and it would not be in her best  interests  to  do
    so. There are no strong reasons that bear upon her personally  pointing
    in the other direction.  It is undeniable that R would have the benefit
    of a loving and stable family  unit  in  Nigeria,  albeit  there  is  a
    likelihood that the family will be relocating in  the  near  future  to
    London.


37. Having considered all the relevant matters in the round, including  the
    public interest considerations set out above, I am satisfied  that  the
    preponderance of strong factors in support of R remaining in the UK are
    not outweighed by the countervailing considerations, as outlined above.




38. I conclude that it would be a disproportionate breach of Article 8  for
    R to be removed.   Accordingly, her appeal succeeds under Article 8.


Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


40. I remake the decision by allowing R's appeal on Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    grounds.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 5 March 2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
