
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22906/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2020                         |On 6th March 2020             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JDB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Rutherford; instructed by Immigration
Advisory Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction has been made by the First-tier Tribunal.  For
      the avoidance of any doubt that direction continues.  Unless and until
      a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, JDB is granted anonymity. No
      report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him
      or any member of his family.  This direction applies amongst others to
      all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
      contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is JDB.
       However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to JDB as
      the appellant, and the SSHD as the respondent.


   3. The appellant is a national of Sierra Leone.  He arrived in the UK on
      21st January 2012 with leave to enter as a spouse until February 2014.
      Between February 2014 and August 2014, he was convicted of four
      offences including battery, criminal damage and harassment. On 26th
      February 2015, he was convicted at Nottingham Crown Court of causing
      grievous bodily harm with intent.  He was sentenced on 31st March 2015
      to a s37 Hospital Order and a s41 Restriction Order under the Mental
      Health Act 1983.


   4. As a consequence, on 24th October 2018, a decision was made to make a
      deportation order against the appellant under s5(1) Immigration Act
      1971.  The appellant made a human rights claim, contending that his
      deportation would be contrary to Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  That
      claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision
      dated 24th October 2018, served on the appellant on 29th October 2018.
       The appellant appealed against the refusal of his human rights claim.
       Following a hearing on 31st January 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Thomas allowed the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds for reasons
      set out in a decision promulgated on 21st March 2019.


   5. The appellant's immigration and offending history is set out at
      paragraph [2] of the decision. The Judge summarised the appellant's
      claim and set out the evidence, including the evidence of the
      appellant and his partner at paragraphs [3] to [9] of the decision.
      At paragraph [21], the judge states:


         "the issue in this appeal is whether there are exceptional or very
         compelling circumstances in the appellant's family and private
         life, that outweigh the public interest in deportation...."

   6. The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [23] to
      [42] of her decision.  The judge noted, at paragraph [25], that the
      appellant's mental health condition is not life-threatening and there
      is evidence of mental health facilities, albeit severely limited, in
      Sierra Leone. The judge concluded that the circumstances are not such
      that removal of the appellant to Sierra Leone would be in breach of
      Article 3 or Article 8 on medical grounds.  The judge considered the
      Article 8 claim on family and private life grounds by reference to the
      immigration rules and having concluded that paragraphs 399 and 399A do
      not apply, went on to consider whether there are exceptional or very
      compelling circumstances in the appellant's family and private life,
      that outweigh the public interest in deportation


The appeal before me


   7. The respondent claims the judge erred in her conclusion, at paragraph
      [34] of her decision that the requirements of paragraph 399A(c) are
      met.  That is, there would be very significant obstacles to his
      integration into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.
      Furthermore, the judge erred in failing to take into account the
      established case law in respect of the threshold for establishing
      "very significant obstacles", and in reaching the decision, failed to
      have regard to the alternative medication that would be available to
      the appellant in Sierra Leone to manage his mental health.


   8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on
      15th April 2019 and the matter comes before me to determine whether
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material
      error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


   9. Mrs Aboni adopted the grounds of appeal and submits that having found
      the appellant cannot meet the exceptions set out in paragraphs 399 and
      399A of the immigration rules and s117C(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act,
      the judge erred in finding that the public interest in deportation is
      outweighed for the reasons set out in paragraph [42] of her decision
      and is disproportionate.  Mrs Abhoni submits the judge found at
      paragraph [30] that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's
      wife to leave her family and life in the UK, and, there are no
      insurmountable obstacles or very significant difficulties in family
      life between the appellant and his wife continuing outside the UK.
      However, at paragraph [41], the Judge proceeds upon the premise that
      if removed, the appellant will be alone in Sierra Leone, without
      family support or a home.  She submits that in reaching her decision,
      the judge failed to consider the fact that the appellant had received
      treatment in Sierra Leone in the past and the judge did not consider
      the availability of treatment in Sierra Leone.  She submits the judge
      failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal.


  10. In reply, Ms Rutherford submits the reasons given by the judge for
      allowing the appeal are entirely adequate and rational.  She submits
      the judge had in mind throughout, the strong public interest in the
      deportation of foreign criminals and the judge's reasons for allowing
      the appeal are to be found at paragraphs [35] to [42].  At paragraph
      [39], the judge recognised that the reality is that given her
      responsibility for her grandchildren, the appellant's partner would
      not leave the UK to accompany the appellant to Sierra Leone.  The
      availability of treatment was considered by the judge and at [25], the
      judge noted that there is evidence of some medical and mental health
      facilities in Sierra Leone, albeit on a severely limited basis.  The
      evidence before the Tribunal of previous treatment in Sierra Leone was
      referred to in a letter from Dr Obinwa, a Consultant Forensic
      Psychiatrist, who referred to a medical discharge summary dated 21
      September 2018.  It was said that throughout his time in Sierra Leone,
      the appellant was treated by "traditional spiritual medicine in the
      form of prayer and fasting".  The evidence was that in 2010, the
      appellant was treated by Dr Nahim (who is now deceased) who worked in
      a local church. The treatment included the first generation
      antipsychotic Largactil (Chlorprozamine) for about three months at an
      unknown dose.


Discussion


  11. The judge noted that in assessing the claim by the appellant that his
      deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
      under Article 8 ECHR, she had to consider whether paragraphs 399 or
      399A of the immigration rules apply.


  12. The judge noted, at paragraph [24], that the appellant is in a genuine
      and subsisting relationship with his partner. The judge was impressed
      by the evidence of the appellant's partner, and her care and
      commitment to the appellant. The judge noted the appellant's partner
      has three young grandchildren in her care and accepted her evidence
      that her two sons and adult daughter are living abroad.  The judge
      accepted that although the appellant has to reside in supported
      accommodation, he spends the daytime hours at his family home, and he
      is involved in the day-to-day care of his partner's grandchildren.


  13. At paragraph [28] of the decision, the judge found that the
      requirements of paragraph 399(b)(i) of the immigration rules are met.
      That is, the relationship was formed at a time when the appellant was
      in the UK lawfully.  Paragraph 399(b)(i) in fact required the judge to
      consider whether the relationship was formed at a time when the
      appellant was in the UK lawfully and his immigration status was not
      precarious. The judge did not consider that additional requirement,
      but that is immaterial because the judge found, at paragraph [30],
      that although it would be difficult for the appellant's wife to leave
      her family and life in the UK, it would not be unduly harsh for her to
      do so.  The judge concluded there are "no insurmountable obstacles" to
      the family life between the appellant and his partner continuing
      outside the UK. Furthermore, at paragraph [31], the judge found it
      would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner to remain in the
      UK without the appellant.  The judge found the requirements of
      paragraph 399(b)(iii) are not met.


  14. Insofar as private life is concerned, the judge found, at [32], that
      the appellant has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
      life and therefore paragraph 399A(a) does not apply.  The judge found
      the appellant is socially and culturally integrated in the UK for the
      reasons set out at paragraph [33] and that there would be very
      significant obstacles to his integration into Sierra Leone, for the
      reasons set out at paragraph [34].  I accept, as the respondent
      submits, there is a high threshold, and that the test 'very
      significant obstacles' directs a self-evidently elevated threshold
      such that mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere
      upheaval or inconvenience, even where multiplied, will generally be
      insufficient.  Here, the judge considered the matters that weigh in
      favour of, and against the appellant. The judge was entitled to take
      into account her finding that the appellant has no close relatives or
      other form of support in Sierra Leone, and, in the particular
      circumstances, it is extremely unlikely that the appellant would be
      able to support himself.  The judge noted that without support, the
      appellant is unlikely to be able to access any available mental health
      care or medication and his condition would relapse.  In any event,
      whether or not there would be very significant obstacles to his
      integration into Sierra Leone, was immaterial to the outcome of the
      appeal.  The appellant could not benefit from paragraph 399A of the
      immigration rules because all three requirements were not met, and the
      appeal was not allowed because paragraph 399A applied.


  15. It is uncontroversial that the deportation of criminals is in the
      public interest.  Section 117C(2) of the 2002 Act confirms that the
      more serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal, the
      greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.  At
      paragraph [36], the judge acknowledged the public interest in the
      deportation of foreign criminals is high and noted the offence
      committed by the appellant caused serious harm to a police officer,
      and, that increases the weight of the public interest.  At paragraph
      [37], the judge stated:


         "It is accepted the Appellant's criminal activity was caused by his
         mental illness. He has responded well to medical treatment and has
         cooperated fully with his medical carers and his medication plan.
         The authorities no longer consider him a risk to the public or to
         his family, as demonstrated by him being permitted to visit his
         wife, her children and his home daily, and to undertake voluntary
         work. In MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279...the CA said
         that when considering the risk to the public of the claimant's
         continued presence in the UK, it is of great importance to assess
         the extent to which continued medication and support would remove
         the risk of further offending. Although the risk could not be
         entirely removed, if the risk would be minimal, that was a powerful
         factor in considering the proportionality of the deportation order.
         In the Appellant's case, whilst there is no official assessment of
         current risk, it is reasonable to conclude from the medical
         evidence, the progress report of Mr Tills and the appellant's
         current circumstances, that providing he takes prescribed
         medication, as he is doing, he is unlikely to reoffend or cause
         harm."

  16. Applying s117C(3) of the 2002 Act, the public interest required the
      appellant's deportation unless Exceptions 1 or 2 set out in s.117C(4)
      and (5) apply.  It is uncontroversial that the appellant was unable to
      establish that Exceptions 1 or 2 apply, essentially for the reasons
      given by the judge for concluding that paragraphs 399 and 399A of the
      immigration rules do not apply.


  17. In NA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Lord Justice Jackson
      held that the fall back protection set out in s117C(6) also avails
      those who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2 and that on a proper
      construction of section 117C(3), the public interest requires the
      person's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies or
      unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
      described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  As to the meaning of "very
      compelling circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions
      1 and 2, Lord Justice Jackson said:


         "28. ... The new para. 398 uses the same language as section
         117C(6). It refers to "very compelling circumstances, over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399
         and 399A of the 2014 rules refer to the same subject matter as
         Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C , but they do so in greater
         detail.

         29. In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in JZ
         (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used in section
         117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have held is
         to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean that a foreign
         criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking
         to rely on matters falling within the scope of the circumstances
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that "there
         are very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
         in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have indicated above, a foreign
         criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would need
         to be able to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the 2014 rules),
         or features falling outside the circumstances described in those
         Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his claim based on
         Article 8 especially strong.

  18. Whether there are "very compelling circumstances" is a demanding test,
      but nonetheless requires a wide-ranging assessment, so as to ensure
      that Part 5A produces a result compatible with Article 8.


  19. At paragraph [23], the Judge states:


         "The evidence shows this Appellant was mentally unwell with
         paranoid schizophrenia at the time of his offending.... The
         evidence suggests the likelihood that all offending, which was
         committed in a 12 months period occurred when the appellant was
         mentally unwell, undiagnosed and untreated. The appellant remained
         in Kedleston Low Security Unit, Kingsway Hospital Site from 26
         September 2016 until 11 July 2018 when he was granted conditional
         release to live at St Chads Supported Housing Ltd accommodation and
         to engage in psychiatric supervision and accept prescribed
         medication. The evidence of Dr Chinwe Obinwa and Mathew Till
         confirm the Appellant's extensive cooperation and recovery
         following release to date and his ongoing progress with support. He
         is now permitted daily home leave and does voluntary work. There
         has been no further offending."

  20. The Judge found, at [40], that the appellant's relationship with his
      family in the UK is real and very strong, and one from which he
      receives emotional, physical and social support. The judge believed it
      to be essential to continued improvement in the appellant's mental
      health. The judge stated, at [41]:


         "If removed, the appellant will be alone in Sierra Leone, without
         family support or a home. It is unlikely without support, the
         appellant will be able to secure employment to access
         accommodation, or any form of medical treatment that may be
         available. The appellant is assessed as needing medication and
         practical support from mental health carers. The background
         information is that there are is no such support available in
         Sierra Leone. It is therefore highly likely in these circumstances
         the appellant could be homeless, destitute and suffering a serious
         mental illness with no prospect of recovery. He will inevitably
         relapse and is highly likely to be exposed to stigmatisation and
         type of dire circumstances facing those with mental health illness
         as detailed in the background information, in a poor country
         virtually devoid of such humanitarian care. Indeed, I have found at
         paragraph 34 above, for these reasons, there are very significant
         obstacles to his integration in Sierra Leone. In the UK, where the
         appellant has real family and receives essential support from the
         authorities and family, his mental health status controlled, and
         the risk of reoffending is low."

  21. The judge concluded at paragraph [42] as follows:


         "Considering the case in the round, I find the strong public
         interest in the deportation of foreign offenders who commit serious
         offences as in this Appellant's case, is outweighed because the
         appellant (a) is integrated in the UK and has lived here lawfully;
         (b) the offending resulted from the appellant's mental illness,
         namely paranoid schizophrenia; (c) that illness is now controlled,
         so the risk of reoffending is low; (d) the appellant has no family
         or other support in Sierra Leone; (e) without support it is
         extremely likely he will not have access to medical treatment or
         care, and will suffer a relapse; and (f) he will be deprived of his
         established family life in the UK and of the availability to forge
         a private life in Sierra Leone. Cumulatively these factors
         constitute very compelling circumstances under paragraph 398 of the
         Rules and section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act, making the decision to
         remove the appellant disproportionate and in breach of Article 8
         ECHR."

  22. In the final analysis, the First-tier Tribunal Judge again reminded
      herself of the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign
      offenders who commit serious offences but found that on the particular
      facts, the strong public interest is outweighed for the reasons set
      out in paragraph [42].  The respondent does not challenge the
      conclusion that there are exceptional or very compelling circumstances
      in the appellant's family and private life, that outweigh the public
      interest in deportation.  If the Tribunal judge applied the correct
      test, and that resulted in an arguably generous conclusion, it does
      not mean that it was erroneous in law.


  23. In my judgement the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was one
      that was open to her on the evidence.  The findings and conclusions
      reached by the FtT judge were neither irrational nor unreasonable in
      the Wednesbury sense.  It follows that in my judgement there is no
      error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


Decision:


  24. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Thomas stands.


Signed                                  Date          28th February 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



