

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/22461/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House without a      |     Decision & Reasons           |
|hearing                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On 3 October 2017                        |     On 4 October 2017            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               KUTAN KISAO?LU
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 12 September 2017 I gave the following directions:-

   1. As the grounds of appeal  note,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R  Scott
      clearly erred in concluding that the appellant  was  an  EU  national;
      being a national of the TRNC is not the same as being a citizen of the
      Republic of Cyprus. He also appears [31] to [33] have assumed that the
      appellant and his sponsor could live in "Cyprus" presumably that  part
      not occupied by the TRNC.  He also proceeded [40] on the basis that as
      no decision had been made to remove the appellant [41],  the  decision
      in this case, a decision to refuse a human  rights  claim,  would  not
      interfere with his right to private or family life.


   2. It is my preliminary view that the decision did involve the making  of
      an error of law capable of affecting the outcome, in  that  the  judge
      proceeded to determine the case on a fundamentally misconceived basis.
        It is therefore my preliminary view that the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal should be set aside and that the appropriate  course  of
      action would be to remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      fresh determination on all issues.


   3. Unless within ten working days of the issue of these directions  there
      is any written objection to this course of action, supported by cogent
      argument, the Upper Tribunal will  proceed  to  determine  the  appeal
      without an oral hearing and will remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.


   4. In the absence of a timely response by a party, it  will  be  presumed
      that it has no objection to the course of action proposed




 2. There has been  no  response  to  these  directions  by  either  party.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that neither party objects  to  the  matter
    being determined without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am
    satisfied that that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law for the reasons  set  out  above,
    and must therefore be set aside.  Given the  nature  of  the  error,  I
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  determination
    on all issues.



Summary of conclusions

     1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
        of an error of law and I set it aside.


     2. I remit the  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
        decision on all issues


     3. The appeal must not be before First-tier Tribunal Judge R Scott






Signed                                             Date:  3 October 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

