
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22722/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2017                          |On 6 December 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          MR JUSTICE JULIAN KNOWLES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                              akino damion page

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Chelliah
     Counsel instructed by Forward & Youssuf Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan
     Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of continuity, we  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



2.   The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated 12  July
    2016 to refuse a human rights  claim  in  the  context  of  deportation
    proceedings. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen ("the judge") allowed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 18 August 2017.

3.   The  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the following grounds:

       i)   The judge failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  to  support  his
          finding that the appellant had a  genuine  parental  relationship
          with his youngest child, who was born while the appellant was  in
          prison, or to explain why he considered that the appellant played
          a 'significant role' in the lives of his two children.


      ii)   The judge failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  to  support  his
          finding that it would   be 'unduly harsh'  for  the  children  to
          remain in the UK if the appellant was deported. The judge  failed
          to identify any factors  that  would  render  deportation  unduly
          harsh on  the  children  over  and  above  the  usual  impact  of
          deportation on a child. In making the assessment the judge failed
          to give weight to the public interest in deportation.

Decision and reasons

4.   After hearing  submissions  from  both  parties,  and  after  carefully
    considering the First-tier Tribunal  decision,  we  conclude  that  the
    decision involved the making of an error of law.

5.   The judge had the benefit of  hearing  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    mother and his partner (the appellant is in Jamaica). The  judge  noted
    that there was evidence to show  that  the  appellant  had  an  ongoing
    relationship with his daughter over a period  of  time.  He  took  into
    account the written evidence given by  his  daughter's  mother  stating
    that she frequently spent weekends and holidays with her  father  [23].
    It was open to him to accept the evidence of the  appellant's  partner,
    who explained the nature of his relationship with her  and  the  child.
    She said that she had visited the appellant in prison [24].

6.   The respondent does not seek to criticise the judge's finding  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect  the  children  to  live  with  him  in
    Jamaica. Clearly  that  was  a  sustainable  finding  given  that  both
    children are settled  in  the  UK  with  their  mothers.  However,  the
    respondent seeks to challenge the judge's finding that it  was  'unduly
    harsh' to expect the children to remain in the UK without their father.
    The judge's finding was confined to the following comment at [25]:

         "...I  additionally  find  it  would  be  unduly  harsh   for   the
         appellant's children to remain in the UK without having  access  to
         the appellant particularly noting the significant role that he  has
         played in their lives and upbringing. I find that  the  appellant's
         deportation will in effect cease his family life with his  children
         and  I  find  that  this  would  be  disproportionate  in  all  the
         circumstances particularly  noting  the  best  interests  of  those
         children."

7.   It was only after the judge came to this conclusion that he went on  to
    consider the criminal offence committed by the appellant. He noted that
    the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  "serious  criminal  wrongdoing
    involving the sale of class A drugs". He had regard to  the  fact  that
    the sentencing judge had taken into  account  "substantial  mitigation"
    and the fact that there was additional  evidence  indicating  that  the
    appellant  was  "a   model   prisoner"   who   had   undertaken   drugs
    rehabilitation courses [26]. He concluded at [29].

         "29. I note the public interest and expectation in respect  of  the
         deportation of foreign criminals but find that the appellant  meets
         the exception included in the Immigration Rules to deportation  and
         find that it is not in the public interest to deport the father  of
         two British children  who  has  a  significant  role  and  parental
         relationship in their lives and who speaks English and  intends  to
         work and support his family in the future. I additionally find that
         the appellant has reformed and does  not  pose  a  future  risk  to
         society."

8.   While the judge had the benefit of hearing  evidence  from  members  of
    the appellant's family, on the face of it  the  appellant  lived  quite
    some distance from his daughter and his second child was born while  he
    was in prison. His partner confirmed that she visited  him  in  prison,
    but the contact he had with the child would have been somewhat  limited
    by the circumstances. Although the judge was entitled to conclude  that
    the evidence showed that  he  had  a  parental  relationship  with  the
    children the Court of Appeal has made clear in a  series  of  decisions
    that the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  often  outweigh  the
    interests of the child.  The  effect  of  deportation  is  to  separate
    children from their parent because of his or her criminal actions:  see
    Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348.

9.   Having read the decision as a whole, we conclude  that  the  judge  did
    not give adequate reasons to explain why he found  that  the  applicant
    played a 'significant role' in the children's lives such that  it  gave
    rise to the kind of circumstances that would outweigh the weight to  be
    given to the  public  interest  in  deportation.  Nor  did  he  explain
    adequately how or why the fact of separation, which is the  unfortunate
    consequence  of  deportation,  rendered  the  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant 'unduly harsh' on the children on the  facts  of  this  case.
    While it was open to the judge to consider the extent and nature of the
    offence and the likelihood of reoffending, we are  not  satisfied  that
    sufficient reasons were given to demonstrate that the  public  interest
    considerations were adequately weighed and placed  in  the  balance  as
    part of the assessment of whether it was 'unduly harsh' on the children
    to be separated from their father: see MM (Uganda) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 617. The judge made his finding  in  [25]  before  he  went  on  to
    consider the nature of the offence and without reference to the rest of
    the appellant's immigration history (he had no leave  to  remain  since
    2006 and was therefore liable to removal in any event).

10.  For these reasons, we conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law and the  decision  must  be  set
    aside.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law

The decision is set aside

Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]                  Date  05 December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
