
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22103/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th November 2019                |On 12th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                            HIS HONOUR JUDGE BIRD
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                             MISS THAPA MANMAYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION nOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Jesurum of Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lucas who dismissed her appeal on Article 8 grounds
    against the respondent's decision to refuse her application  for  entry
    clearance for family was against the reunification as a  family  member
    of a former Gurkha soldier dated 17 September 2018, which was upheld on
    review by the Entry Clearance Manager on 5 March 2019.  The findings of
    the First-tier Tribunal are not entirely clear and are limited to a few
    short  paragraphs  about  the  applicant's  circumstances,  her  family
    situation and the situation of the sponsors in the United Kingdom.

 2. The grounds of appeal against the decision  are  essentially  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to  apply  the  correct  test  to  determine
    whether there was family life for the purposes  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights and in particular that there was  a
    failure to apply the correct test from Lord Justice Sedley in  Kugathas
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, as  to
    whether there is real  effective  and  committed  support  between  the
    family members.  The grounds are also on the basis  that  the  findings
    conflate the issues under Article 8(1) and 8(2) between  whether  there
    is  family  life  at  all  or  whether  there  is  a   disproportionate
    interference with it.

 3. The second ground of appeal is broadly that the findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal were contradictory, in one paragraph finding that  family
    life has been maintained through visits between  the  parents  and  the
    appellant and in a later paragraph finding that no family  life  exists
    because of the nature of the relationship between parents and an  adult
    child.  Further, that the First-tier Tribunal had not expressly applied
    the five-stage approach in Razgar v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27.

 4. Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal has failed to apply the  decision
    in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA  Civ  320,  in  particular
    paragraph 38 of that decision where the correct question is  identified
    as whether family life existed in Nepal and had endured notwithstanding
    the separation of the family when the parents as sponsors moved here in
    2010 and 2011 respectively.

 5. The final ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  has  failed
    to consider proportionality in the right context of this  case  without
    considering the historic injustice to Gurkhas  and  their  families  in
    relation to settlement and that the standard position is that if  there
    has been a historic injustice and family life is engaged,  there  would
    normally be required a decision in the appellant's favour.

 6. During the course of submissions from the  parties  in  this  case,  it
    became clear that the parties were in  agreement  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to make an express decision as  to  whether  family
    life existed to engage Article 8(1) in this case or not.  In  paragraph
    19 of the decision there is  a  reference  to  the  appellant  and  her
    siblings having lived apart from their parents and that family life has
    quite clearly been maintained through  frequent  visits.   However,  in
    paragraph 22 there is a statement that there  is  nothing  apparent  in
    this case that leads to the view that the bond between  this  appellant
    and her parents is  beyond  that  of  the  usual  paternal/adult  child
    relationship.  That somewhat  paraphrases  the  test  in  Kugathas  but
    contradicts the earlier statement in paragraph 19.

 7. At no point in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  there  any
    clear statement of the law that is being applied nor is there any clear
    finding on family life and  it  is  impossible  to  reconcile  the  two
    statements in paragraphs 19 and 22 as dealing conclusively  either  way
    with this issue.  The absence of  a  finding  specifically  on  whether
    family life is engaged at all, is a clear material error of  law  which
    infects the later findings on proportionality,  such  that  the  rather
    brief decision at the end of the decision can be said to deal with  the
    question of proportionality at all.

 8. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law and must be set aside.  There are no findings  of
    fact which can be preserved, the error of law primarily being the  lack
    of any adequate findings at all.  It is therefore appropriate to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing to  address
    that first fundamental question of whether Article  8  is  engaged  and
    then go on to apply the usual  tests  in  relation  to  Article  8  and
    proportionality thereafter.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  remit  it  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing to be heard by  any  Judge  except
Judge Lucas.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date     9th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

