
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22645/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2017                         |On 27 September 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             JAMIE-RAE NATHANIEL
                       (anonymity direction Not MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon, promulgated on 11 January 2017,  in
     which he allowed  Mr.  Nathaniel's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision to refuse to grant further  leave  to  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom on the basis of his private life.


  2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
     the Respondent, and to Mr. Nathaniel as the Appellant, reflecting their
     positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


  3. The grounds of appeal state as follows:


     "The Judge allows the appeal under the immigration rules  and  declines
     to consider the Human Rights appeal.  The right of appeal  was  limited
     to Human Rights grounds.  The determination is wrong in law in terms of
     jurisdiction.


     In the alternative, the Judge gives inadequate reasons for finding that
     the appellant had spent over half his life in the UK on  the  basis  of
     evidence that could not be tested in cross examination."


  4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "It is arguable that in accepting a statement which was unsworn from  a
     person (paragraph 17) claiming to have known the appellant for 20 years
     and failing to give adequate reasons for finding that the appellant had
     spent at least 20 years in the UK, the judge has made an arguable error
     of law."

The hearing


  5. The Appellant attended the hearing but was not represented.  He  stated
     that he understood the purpose of the hearing.  There was a  discussion
     relating to the grounds of appeal, and the grant of permission, as  set
     out below.


  6. At the hearing I dismissed the appeal.  I found that the  decision  did
     not involve the making of a material error of  law.   My  full  reasons
     follow.


Error of law decision


  7. At the outset of the hearing it was agreed by Mr. Hibbs that the ground
     set out in paragraph 1 of the grounds of  appeal  did  not  identify  a
     material error of law.  The appeal had been allowed on the  basis  that
     the Appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v).   This
     rule sets out the Respondent's  policy  in  relation  to  private  life
     claims.   Therefore,  given  that  the   judge   considered   paragraph
     276ADE(1)(v), he did not fail to "consider the  human  rights  appeal".
     The judge did not proceed to consider the appeal "outside  the  rules",
     and there is no reference to section 117B of  the  2002  Act,  but  any
     error in so doing cannot be  material  in  the  circumstances,  as  was
     accepted by Mr. Hibbs.


  8. If the Appellant meets  the  Respondent's  requirements  for  leave  to
     remain on private life grounds,  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
     effective immigration control will not be compromised  by  a  grant  of
     leave to remain.  Mr. Hibbs accepted that a simple line to  the  effect
     that the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds  as  the  Appellant
     met the requirements of the  immigration  rules  would  have  sufficed.
     There is no material error of law identified in ground 1.


  9. In relation to the second ground, as acknowledged by Mr. Hibbs, this is
     not particularly clear.  Clarity is not provided by the grant of appeal
     which states that the judge found that the Appellant had been here  for
     20 years.  This was not the judge's finding, nor was it the Appellant's
     claim.  Mr. Hibbs submitted, with reference to the reasons for  refusal
     letter, that ground 2  was  essentially  a  challenge  to  the  judge's
     finding that the Appellant and Jamie-Rae Morgan were one and  the  same
     person, and his reliance on the letter from Novlette Reece when  making
     this finding.  He accepted  that  the  Respondent  would  not  seek  to
     challenge the kind of evidence as had been provided  by  the  Charlotte
     Keel Medical Practice (A13) which confirmed that Jamie-Rae Morgan, date
     of birth 1 March 1996, had been registered since 26 March 2001, and  it
     was this letter on which the judge placed particular  reliance  as  set
     out in [20].


 10. The grounds are not well drafted, and there is no specific challenge to
     this finding.  Given Mr. Hibbs' acceptance that  the  Respondent  would
     not challenge the letter from the medical practice confirming length of
     residency, on which the judge placed particular reliance, I accept that
     ground 2 must be read as an assertion  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
     finding that the Appellant is Jamie-Rae Morgan.


 11. I take into account Mr. Hibbs' submission that the letter from Novlette
     Reece was not accompanied by any evidence of  ID.   He  also  submitted
     that a simpler way of providing confirmation of  the  Appellant's  name
     would have been for him to contact  the  Jamaican  High  Commission  to
     obtain evidence from them, and for them to confirm the  genuineness  of
     the Birth Registration Form.  However, having carefully considered  the
     evidence which was before the judge,  and  bearing  in  mind  that  the
     standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities,  which  the  judge
     correctly states at [17], I find that the judge was  entitled  to  make
     the finding that the Appellant and Jamie-Rae Nathaniel Morgan were  one
     and the same person.


 12. The judge states at the  outset  of  [17]  that  he  is  aware  of  the
     Respondent's issues with regards to the Appellant's name.  He refers to
     the Birth Registration Form  which  names  the  Appellant's  father  as
     Desmond Lloyd Morgan.  He refers to the letter from Novlette Reece.  He
     is mindful of the fact that it is not a sworn statement  and  that  she
     has not given evidence.  He states "having considered the document  and
     the photographs in the light of all of the other information  available
     to me, I do find that the explanation given by Novlette Paris Reece  as
     to the Appellant's  name  is  credible".   He  has  taken  the  correct
     approach and considered the evidence in the round.  While  he  has  not
     set out the contents of  all  of  this  evidence,  he  has  listed  the
     evidence, both that contained in the Respondent's bundle  at  [4],  and
     the further evidence provided by the Appellant for the appeal  at  [5].
     It is clear he was aware of the evidence which was before him.  He  has
     made specific reference at [5] to the evidence from Novlette Reece.


 13. He finds the explanation given in the letter, when considered  "in  the
     light of all of the other information", to be credible.  There  was  no
     challenge in the reasons for refusal letter to Shelda Grocia being  the
     Appellant's mother.  On the contrary, this was accepted (page  4).   An
     application had been made in January  2014  with  the  Appellant  as  a
     dependent child on his mother's application.  Shelda Grocia is the name
     given on the Birth Registration Form as the  Appellant's  mother.   The
     information before the judge included letters  which  refer  to  Shelda
     Grocia and Jamie-Rae Morgan having lived at the same  address  (E1  and
     F1).  Therefore the evidence before the judge showed  Jamie-Rae  Morgan
     to be living with Shelda Grocia, acknowledged by the Respondent  to  be
     the mother of Jamie-Rae Nathaniel.  The evidence before him showed that
     the dates of birth for Jamie-Rae Morgan and Jamie-Rae Nathaniel  to  be
     the same.  I find that  the  judge  was  considering  the  letter  from
     Novlette Reece against the backdrop of  this  evidence.   The  evidence
     showed the Appellant to be related as claimed to his  mother,  who  was
     named in the birth certificate, and with whom  Jamie-Rae  Morgan,  with
     the same date of birth as the Appellant, had resided since 2001.


 14. In [18], when considering length of residency, and  with  reference  to
     the letter from the Charlotte Keel Medical Practice, he again refers to
     the fact that he has credible evidence that the Appellant and Jamie-Rae
     Morgan are one and the same person.  As above, I find that this finding
     was open to him.


 15. I find there is no error  of  law  in  the  judge's  finding  that  the
     Appellant and Jamie-Rae Morgan are one and the same person.   While  he
     has relied on the letter from Novlette Reece,  he  has  considered  her
     evidence in round with all the other evidence  which  was  before  him.
     While arguably he could have set out  this  evidence  in  more  detail,
     there is no material error of law in his failure to do so.


 16. Having found that there was no error of law in the judge's finding that
     the Appellant and Jamie-Rae Morgan are one and  the  same  person,  and
     given that there was an acceptance that the  letter  from  the  medical
     practice confirmed that Jamie-Rae Morgan had been registered  since  26
     March 2001, there is no error in the judge's finding that the Appellant
     met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), as he had lived in  the
     United Kingdom for over half of his life, and he is aged between 18 and
     25.  The fact that the judge did not state that the  appeal  was  being
     allowed on human rights grounds, as  I  have  set  out  above,  and  as
     accepted by Mr. Hibbs, is not a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

17. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision does not involves the making  of
    a material error of law and I do not set the decision aside.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

19. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 25 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
