
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/22868/2018
                                                               HU/22880/2018
                                                               HU/22876/2018
                                                           HU/22872/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2021                   |On 25 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   K D + 3
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, instructed by FLK, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Albanian nationals,  husband,  wife,  daughter,  and
    son.  Their  case  centres  on  the  medical  condition  of  the  third
    appellant, aged 9.

 2. The decision of Designated FtT Judge McCarthy, promulgated  on  16  May
    2019, clearly sets out the facts at that date.

 3. This determination should be read also with the decision  of  Ut  Judge
    Bruce, dated 15 December 2020, based on the SSHD's concession that  the
    decision of Judge  McCarthy  should  be  set  aside  in  light  of  the
    judgement of the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) [2021] UKSC 17  and  of
    the need for a rounded assessment of the medical evidence going to  the
    likely impact of removal on the third appellant.

 4. AM established the legal test:

         "[22] Following a careful analysis of the decision in  the D case
         and of its own decision  in  the N case,  the  Grand  Chamber  in
         the Paposhvili case expressed the  view  in  para  182  that  the
         approach hitherto adopted should be "clarified". The Convention  is
         a living instrument and  when,  however  appropriately,  the  ECtHR
         charts its growth, it may generate confusion for it to claim to  be
         providing only clarification. The court proceeded as follows:

             "183.  The Court considers that the  'other  very  exceptional
             cases' within the meaning of the judgment in N v  The  United
             Kingdom (para 43) which may raise an issue  under  article  3
             should be understood to  refer  to  situations  involving  the
             removal of a seriously ill person in which substantial grounds
             have been shown for believing that he or she, although not  at
             imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account  of
             the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving  country
             or the lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a
             serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of
             health resulting in intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
             reduction in life expectancy. The Court points out that  these
             situations correspond to a high threshold for the  application
             of article 3 of the Convention in cases concerning the removal
             of aliens suffering from serious illness."

 5. The appellants provide an updating report, dated 2 February 2021,  from
    the Consultant Paediatric Urologist at Great Ormond Street Hospital for
    Children:

         "[The third appellant] was reviewed by myself on the 18th  November
         2020. She has a complex urogenital and  intestinal  anomaly  called
         Cloacal malformation. She had major surgery in  Albania  and  under
         myself in 2017 to achieve stability and has become socially dry and
         stable from her chronic kidney failure.  She is clearly growing and
         is in much better health than when I first met her in 2017. All her
         care has been so far privately funded and not through the NHS. With
         her reconstructive surgery under GOSH and close monitoring, she has
         remained stable and her health continues to improve.

         Her current situation is that she  has  some  wetting  through  the
         channel we made to drain  the  urine  which  could  be  because  of
         abnormal bladder behaviour for which she  has  been  scheduled  for
         further investigations and work up.

         Her  prognosis  remains  guarded  in  terms  of  needing  a  kidney
         transplant but if careful and regular monitoring continues, then it
         is likely she will need kidney replacement only much later in life.
          In the absence  of  regular  and  careful  monitoring  and  timely
         intervention when needed, she will progress  to  end  stage  kidney
         failure and will need kidney replacement therapy such dialysis  and
         kidney transplant."

 6. Mr Bates submitted on these lines.  The  respondent  accepts  that  the
    child suffers from a serious ongoing medical condition, and that  while
    treatment is available in Albania, that  might  not  be  sufficient  to
    cater for her complex needs in  the  event  of  further  complications.
    However,  he  observed  that  there  has  been  no  need   for   direct
    intervention since the surgery  in  2017,  the  child's  condition  has
    clearly  improved,  and  at  present  she  needs  only  monitoring  and
    surveillance.  Treatment available at a hospital in Tirana was adequate
    to cope with urinary infections which might occur.  Her condition,  now
    that it was stabilised, could be monitored in Albania.  There could  be
    liaison with Great Ormond Street.  The  appellants  founded  partly  on
    travel difficulties from Albania, and  it  appeared  that  Albania  has
    currently suspended flights to  the  UK,  but  they  had  not  provided
    evidence of what the practical difficulties might be.     The case  was
    to be tested as at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  when  the  article  3
    threshold, which remains a high one, was not crossed.

 7. Mr Paramjorthy said that if the need for medical attention was to arise
    while the child was in Albania, there would be  travel  and  quarantine
    difficulties.

 8. Evidence was lacking, and I am not persuaded these  difficulties  would
    be as severe as claimed.  Although neither  side  provided  any  direct
    reference to the regulations, I proceed on the assumption that there is
    exemption from quarantine on urgent medical grounds.  However, it is in
    the public realm that there  are  current  obstacles  to  international
    travel, in a rapidly changing environment.  The appellants' evidence is
    that they fear that travel from Albania to the UK  for  urgent  medical
    reasons might not be straightforward.  That is not fanciful.

 9. Mr Paramjorthy also suggested that availability of travel  for  private
    treatment in the UK would not defeat the principles  of  AM.   I  doubt
    that proposition.  It is difficult to see why persons of means, readily
    able to protect themselves through travel and treatment, would  qualify
    for protection under article 3.

10. The appellants rely on SQ [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 at [17]:

         "Stripped of its references to torture and  punishment,  Article  3
         provides:

             "No one shall be subjected to inhuman or  degrading  treatment
             ...".

         It is well known that a contracting state may infringe Article 3 if
         it returns a person to a country where he would be  at  substantial
         risk of inhuman  or  degrading  treatment:  see Soering  v  United
         Kingdom [1989] 11 EHRR 439,  which  provided  the  jurisprudential
         basis for D. However, the imposition  of  a  "high  threshold"  is
         equally well established and this is  underlined  by  the  test  of
         exceptionality illustrated by D and N. On the other hand, Article 3
         confers an unqualified right. Ultimately the  question  is  whether
         what is likely to befall the claimant crosses  the  high  threshold
         and the test of exceptionality. Whether or not the  required  level
         of severity is reached in a particular  case  depends  on  all  the
         circumstances of that case. I accept that there  are  circumstances
         in which the threshold will be reached in relation to a child where
         it would not be reached in the case of an adult. As  Baroness  Hale
         said in E v Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary [2009]
         1 AC 536 (at paragraph 9):

             "The special vulnerability of children is also relevant to the
             scope of the obligation of the State to protect them from such
             treatment."

         She referred to "the instructive case"  of Mayeka  and  Mitunga  v
         Belgium [2006] 46 EHRR 449.  However,  in  the  present  case  the
         evidence, taken at its highest, and making every allowance for  the
         age of MQ, does not establish that the high threshold is satisfied.
         To put it bluntly, MQ would  not  be  returning  to  an  early  and
         solitary death in Pakistan. He had  been  receiving  treatment  and
         blood transfusions without contracting HIV, hepatitis B or C before
         leaving Pakistan. He also received chelation therapy  although  his
         mother states in her witness statement  that  he  sometimes  missed
         that treatment for a month or two because they  did  not  have  the
         money to pay for the best medication and sometimes they had to  use
         inferior alternatives. In 2010, MQ contracted malaria  and  typhoid
         but it is not established that this was  the  result  of  receiving
         unscreened blood transfusions."

11. Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the proposition in SQ was consistent with
    Paposhvili and with AM.  Mr Bates did not dispute that point.  I accept
    that the threshold, as it now stands, may be met by  a  child  in  some
    cases where it would not be met by an adult.

12. While every case turns ultimately on its own facts and circumstances, I
    observe in passing that the present case appears stronger than that  of
    MQ (the child of SQ).

13. Having considered the medical evidence as a whole, including the latest
    report, and drawing the above threads together, I conclude as  follows.
    The child suffers from a rare and  serious  condition.   For  the  time
    being, she  needs  only  careful  monitoring,  which  is  available  in
    Albania.  There is no doubt that she will need further major  treatment
    in the longer term.  There is a real risk, in the shorter term, that  a
    need  for  further  intervention  may  arise.   Such  intervention   is
    available in the UK but not in Albania.  Timeliness of intervention may
    be crucial.  There is a  real  risk  that  her  health  might  decline,
    through lack of timely intervention, to an extent which meets the  test
    in Paposhvili.  Even if the case might be borderline for an  adult,  it
    reaches the threshold for a child.

14.  The decision of the FtT has been set aside.  The decision  substituted
    is that the appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is allowed.

15. An anonymity direction remains in place.


        Hugh Macleman

      10 February 2021
      UT Judge Macleman

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).
3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
