
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/22133/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 16 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 NARMAYA PUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D. Balroop, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  01  October
    2018 to refuse a human rights claim in the context  of  an  application
    for entry clearance as the dependent adult daughter of a Gurkha widow.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 08 July 2019. He was  not  satisfied  that
    the appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM  of  the  immigration
    rules for entry as an adult dependent relative, nor did  she  meet  the
    requirements of the respondent's policy, contained in Annex  K  of  IDI
    Chapter 15, for entry as the dependent of a Gurkha widow. The appellant
    did not seek to appeal those findings.

3.    The judge went on to consider whether the decision showed  a  lack  of
    respect for the appellant's right to family life with her mother  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention. It is accepted  by  both  parties
    that this part of  the  decision  lacks  structure  and  in  places  is
    somewhat unclear. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke accepted  that
    the judge's findings disclosed an error  of  law  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of dependency and the proper application of  the  principles
    outlined in decisions such as Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170 and Rai v
    ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320. Despite the lack of structure, it seemed clear
    from the judge's finding  at  [68]  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was emotionally dependent upon her mother, and at [60],  that
    she was also financially dependent upon her despite her age  and  their
    continued separation. In the circumstances, he submitted that the judge
    misdirected himself in relation to his assessment of  family  life.  He
    asked me to set aside the decision, to remake and to allow the appeal.

4.    In light of the  respondent's  concession,  I  need  only  make  brief
    findings. Although the judge's findings lack  clarity  and  a  coherent
    structure, I am  satisfied  that  the  concession  is  one  that  could
    properly be made. The judge's findings of fact  relating  to  emotional
    and financial dependency were tolerably clear although the  conclusions
    he drew from those findings are accepted to amount to a misdirection in
    relation to the relevant law.

5.    Based on those findings the  respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant
    continues to maintain a family life with her mother for the purpose  of
    Article 8(1). Despite being an adult, the appellant had not established
    an independent life and had always lived in the same extended household
    as her mother prior to the sponsor settling in the UK. Since her mother
    came to the UK as a  Gurkha  widow  there  continues  to  be  a  mutual
    relationship of emotional dependence. The  appellant  continues  to  be
    financially  dependent  upon  her  mother.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    respondent's decision to  refuse  entry  clearance  showed  a  lack  of
    respect for the appellant's right to  family  life  which  engaged  the
    operation of Article 8(1) of the European Convention.

6.    Contrary  to  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    (inaccurate) reference to the decision in Ganesh  Pun  (Nepal)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2106, the appellant remains emotionally and financially
    dependent upon her mother, who is the widow of a  Gurkha  veteran.  Her
    father retired from the army in 1970 after eight  years'  service.  But
    for the historic injustice it is likely  that  the  family  could  have
    settled in the UK long ago when the appellant was still a young  child.
    The relevant case law makes clear  that  in  most  cases  the  historic
    injustice should be given determinative weight in the  absence  of  any
    other strong public  policy  considerations:  see  Ghising  and  others
    (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight)  [2013]  UKUT  567.  The  judge
    noted that there were no additional public interest considerations that
    might weight against the appellant such as a poor  immigration  history
    or criminal convictions [51]. None were raised by the respondent in the
    decision letter or in the ECM review. As  such,  I  am  satisfied  that
    weight should be given to the  historic  injustice  and  that  this  is
    determinative of the proportionality assessment. I  conclude  that  the
    decision does not strike a fair balance between the weight to be  given
    to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  an  effective   system   of
    immigration control and the  appellant's  right  to  family  life.  The
    decision  amounts  to  a   disproportionate   interference   with   the
    appellant's rights with reference  to  Article  8(2)  of  the  European
    Convention.

7.    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a
    point of law. The decision  is  set  aside  and  remade  based  on  the
    respondent's concession. The decision to refuse a human rights claim in
    the context of the application for entry clearance  is  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date   14 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan









