
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22319/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral decision given following hearing|                                     |
|On 18 February 2020                  |On 20 March 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L SMITH


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 Adeniti [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Reville, Counsel instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wylie  dated  31  May  2019  and
    promulgated shortly thereafter following a hearing at Harmondsworth  on
    21 May 2019 in which Judge Wylie allowed the appeal of Mr  [E]  against
    the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  deport  him.   For  ease  of
    convenience throughout this decision we refer to the Secretary of State
    who was the original respondent as "the Secretary of State" and  to  Mr
    [E], who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria who was born in this  country  on
    26 July 1994.  His birth certificate is contained within the  Secretary
    of State's bundle (at page 33) which  confirms  that  he  was  born  in
    Edgware General Hospital and that at that time his  father  and  mother
    lived in  Finchley.   The  evidence  within  the  file  showed  to  the
    satisfaction of this Tribunal that he was  in  this  country  from  his
    birth until certainly about 2001 because there is reference to  various
    medical appointments and dental appointments within that time.   It  is
    also clear from the evidence that he was in this country by  July  2003
    because a medical appointment was made for him  on  that  date  and  he
    started at primary school the following September.  He apparently,  and
    this is common ground, then went to Nigeria in 2004 returning to the UK
    in 2007 when he was 13 years old.  The evidence of the claimant is that
    as far as he can recollect he was in the UK throughout  the  period  of
    his childhood until he left for Nigeria in 2004, just before his  tenth
    birthday, but the Secretary of State's case is  that  he  left  the  UK
    before then because her records apparently show, although the  Tribunal
    has not seen direct evidence on this, that he was granted a multi-entry
    visa in Lagos, Nigeria in 2002.  We will have to make findings on  this
    in due course.  It is common ground that between 2004 and 2007  he  was
    in Nigeria and that he returned to this country in 2007 aged 13.

 3. Thereafter this claimant has amassed a significant number  of  criminal
    convictions, some thirteen in all, from  being  convicted  aged  16  in
    October 2010 of criminal damage and a Section 5 Public Order  Act  1986
    conviction through to convictions  in  January  2018  for  battery  and
    criminal damage.  During that period,  he  has  amassed  some  thirteen
    convictions in total spanning offences  of  dishonesty,  possession  of
    offensive weapons including a  bladed  article,  a  drugs  offence  and
    offences of violence including a number of offences of battery (two  in
    2017 and one in 2018).  He also has a conviction for criminal damage.

 4. Rather unsurprisingly, following his most recent conviction in  January
    2018 the Secretary of State  made  a  decision  to  deport  him.   This
    decision was made in August 2018.   As  already  indicated  above,  the
    claimant appealed against this decision and it was his  appeal  against
    this decision which was allowed by Judge Wylie in her decision which is
    now under challenge, permission to appeal having  been  granted  on  19
    December 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey.

 5. We have been greatly assisted by written submissions prepared on behalf
    of both parties and also  by  the  succinct  and  persuasive  arguments
    advanced orally before us.

ERROR OF LAW

 6. The first issue we have to decide  is  whether  or  not  Judge  Wylie's
    decision contains a material error of law.   There  were  a  number  of
    arguments raised before her  including  that,  despite  the  number  of
    offences committed, the claimant was not a  "persistent  offender"  for
    the purposes of Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 and also that the effect on the claimant's son who  is  now  6
    years old would be "unduly harsh", such that the claimant ought not  to
    be deported because he would fall within  Exception  2.   Although  the
    judge rejected the submission advanced on behalf of the  claimant  that
    the claimant was not a persistent offender, she nonetheless found  that
    the effect on the claimant's child would be in her view "unduly harsh",
    such that it would not be lawful to deport him.

 7. For ease of reference we set  out  Section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (added by  the  Immigration  Act  2014)
    which provides as follows:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)      C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

             (b)      C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)      there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in sub-Sections (1) to (6) are to be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  Tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted".

    By Section 117D(2) a "foreign criminal" is defined as meaning a  person
    -

         "(a) who is not a British citizen,

         (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom  of  an  offence,
             and

         (c)  who-

             (i)  has been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                  least 12 months,

             (ii)     has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

             (iii)         is a persistent offender".

 8. Although this claimant has amassed such a large number of  convictions,
    he has never been sentenced by  a  criminal  court  to  any  period  of
    imprisonment other than suspended sentences and so  he  does  not  fall
    within Section 117D(2)(c)(i).  So far as (ii) is concerned, it  is  not
    asserted that any of the offences of which he has been  convicted  have
    in themselves caused "serious harm"..  The Secretary of  State  however
    considered that he did fall within sub-Section (iii) being a persistent
    offender.

 9. So far as this aspect of the claimant's appeal is concerned, there  was
    no challenge within the Rule 24 statement or otherwise made  on  behalf
    of the claimant to the  judge's  finding  that  he  was  a  "persistent
    offender", although it is now argued on behalf of the claimant that  in
    light of the few months that have elapsed since that hearing  it  might
    be arguable that whatever the position was at that  time  the  claimant
    should not now be regarded as a  persistent  offender.   However,  that
    aspect of Judge Wylie's decision  not being challenged, the sole  issue
    so far as the error of law hearing is concerned is whether or  not  the
    judge's finding, and the reasoning on which that finding is said to  be
    based, that the effect on the child of the claimant's deportation would
    be "unduly harsh" is sustainable.

10. There are two aspects of this finding with which the Tribunal has to be
    concerned.  The first is whether it would be unduly harsh for the child
    to leave with the claimant and go with him to Nigeria.  The  second  is
    whether in the event that the child stayed in the UK it would be unduly
    harsh for him to be separated from his father while  remaining  in  the
    UK.  At paragraph 49, Judge  Wylie  found  that  "[r]ealistically,  the
    child would remain in the United Kingdom, and the question  is  whether
    or not it would be unduly harsh for the  child  if  the  appellant  was
    deported".

11. The judge's reasons for finding that the effect on the child  would  be
    unduly harsh are extremely succinct and are set out  at  paragraphs  50
    and 51 of her decision as follows:

         "50. The evidence of the appellant and the child's mother was  that
             the appellant currently provides much of the daily care of the
             child during the week.  This was supported by the letter  from
             the school noted above, and the comments of the social worker.
              There was a possibility that the mother  could  not  continue
             her current full-time work if she had to be solely responsible
             for  child  care  which  would  adversely  affect  the  family
             finances.  This, though unfortunate, could not be held  to  be
             excessively harsh.

         51.   However  I  accept  the  evidence  that  the  child   has   a
             particularly close relationship with his father  as  his  main
             carer for most of the week.  At his  age,  he  would  be  very
             conscious of the loss of his father.  It  would  be  difficult
             for him, at  his  age,  to  enjoy  a  meaningful  relationship
             through telephone or modern means of communication.  The  view
             of the social worker is that long  term  separation  from  his
             father would cause him emotional harm".

    Then, at paragraph 52 the judge found as follows:

         "52. In the circumstances of this child, I find that  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for him if the appellant was deported".

12. The Secretary of State in her grounds  submits  that  this  finding  is
    inadequately reasoned.  The letter from the social  services  which  is
    referred to at paragraph 46 of Judge Wylie's decision which was dated 3
    October 2018 includes the following:

         "during my interactions with [the claimant's son],  he  has  spoken
         warmly of his father.  [He] has shared how he enjoys going  to  the
         park with his father at weekends, and that [the claimant] helps him
         with his numbers and learning at home.  [The child] appears to have
         a warm, happy active relationship with his father and in my opinion
         a long term separation would cause him emotional harm.  It is  also
         my understanding that [the child's] care  is  shared  between  [the
         claimant] and [the claimant's partner] with him  helping  with  the
         school drop offs and football training at the weekend.   I  believe
         that the family will struggle without the  care  and  support  that
         [the claimant] provides to his son".

13. Then at paragraph  47,  as  already  indicated,  the  judge  gives  her
    reasoning why the claimant's partner would not go to Nigeria which  was
    that "she has her extended family all in the United  Kingdom,  she  has
    employment here, and has lived all her life in the United Kingdom,  she
    has never visited Nigeria".

14. At paragraph 48 the judge gives her reasons  why  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to separate the child from his mother to go to Nigeria  with  his
    father which are unsurprising.  By reason of what appears below, it  is
    not necessary to consider this aspect because the  effective  challenge
    is to the judge's decision that the effect on the child of remaining in
    this country without his father would be unduly  harsh  such  that  the
    claimant's appeal against deportation should be allowed.

15. There have been a number of recent cases in which the issue of how  the
    courts and Tribunal should consider whether the effect on  a  child  is
    "unduly harsh" as defined within Section 117 has  been  considered,  of
    which currently the most important is the decision of the Supreme Court
    in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 in which the Supreme  Court
    held that when considering  this  issue  a  court  or  Tribunal  should
    concern itself only with the effect on the child and should not  factor
    into the words "unduly harsh"  any  consideration  of  the  offence  or
    offences by reason of which  it  had  been  felt  right  to  deport  an
    applicant.  It is right to say that in this decision the Supreme  Court
    sets the threshold of what is said to be "unduly harsh" very high.   At
    paragraph 27, the court refers with approval  to  a  decision  of  this
    Tribunal (the former President McCloskey  J  and  UTJ  Perkins)  in  MK
    (Sierra Leone) v SSHD  [2015]  UKUT  223  where  at  paragraph  46  the
    Tribunal had referred to the "evaluative assessment"  required  by  the
    Tribunal as follows:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher".

16. Just prior to citing that case  with  approval  at  paragraph  23,  the
    Supreme Court had stated as follows:

         "On the other hand the  expression  'unduly  harsh'  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of 'reasonableness'
         under Section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word 'unduly' implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a 'due' level of
         'harshness', that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. 'Unduly' implies  something  going  beyond
         that level.  The relevant context is that set by  Section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence ...".

17. In a subsequent Court of Appeal decision, in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1213 giving the decision with which all the  court  concurred,
    Holroyde LJ stated as follows, at paragraph 34:

         "It is therefore now clear that a  Tribunal  or  court  considering
         Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on the  comparative
         seriousness of the offence or offences  committed  by  the  foreign
         criminal who faces deportation, but rather, on whether the  effects
         of his deportation on a child or partner would go beyond the degree
         of harshness which would necessarily be involved for any  child  or
         partner of a foreign criminal faced with deportation [my emphasis].
          Pursuant to Rule 399, the Tribunal or  court  must  consider  both
         whether it would be unduly harsh for the child  and/or  partner  to
         live in the country to which the foreign criminal is to be deported
         and whether it would be unduly harsh for the child  and/or  partner
         to remain in the UK without him".

18. We also take account of another  post  KO  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, SSHD v KF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2051  in  which  Baker,  LJ
    (with the Senior President of  Tribunals  in  agreement)  endorsed  the
    position taken in PG (Jamaica) and stated at [30]-[31]  that:

         "30. Furthermore, and with respect to the First-tier Tribunal judge
         [who had allowed the appeal], I consider that his conclusion on the
         evidence about the respondent's family that his  deportation  would
         be unduly harsh is unsustainable in the light  of  Lord  Carnwath's
         analysis of the proper interpretation of Exception 2 in  s.117C(5),
         namely that:

             'One is looking for a degree of harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent.'

         Looking at the facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal  that  led
         to the conclusion that family would suffer adverse consequences  as
         a result of the deportation, and in particular the consequences for
         the respondent's son separated from his father, it is difficult  to
         identify anything which distinguishes this case  from  other  cases
         where a family is separated. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found
         that the respondent's son would be deprived  of  his  father  at  a
         crucial time in his life. His view that 'there is no substitute for
         the emotional and developmental benefits for a three-year-old child
         that are associated with being brought up by  both  parents  during
         its formative  years'  is  indisputable.  But  those  benefits  are
         enjoyed by all three-year-old children in the care of both parents.
         The judge observed that it was a 'fact that  being  deprived  of  a
         parent is something a child is likely to find  traumatic  and  that
         will potentially have long-lasting adverse  consequences  for  that
         child' and that he was entitled to take  judicial  notice  of  that
         fact. But the'fact' of which he was  taking  'judicial  notice'  is
         likely to arise in every case  where  a  child  is  deprived  of  a
         parent. All children should, where possible, be brought up  with  a
         close relationship with both parents. All children  deprived  of  a
         parent's company during their formative years will be  at  risk  of
         suffering harm. Given the changes to  the  law  introduced  by  the
         amendments to 2002 Act, as interpreted by the Supreme Court, it  is
         necessary to look for consequences characterised  by  a  degree  of
         harshness over and beyond what every child would experience in such
         circumstances.

         31.  For those lawyers, like my Lord and  myself,  who  have  spent
         many years practising in the family jurisdiction,  this  is  not  a
         comfortable interpretation to apply. But that  is  what  Parliament
         has decided, and it is important to bear in mind  the  observations
         of Hickinbottom LJ in PG (Jamaica) at paragraph 46:

             'When a parent is deported, one can only have  great  sympathy
             for  the  entirely  innocent  children   involved.   Even   in
             circumstances in which they can remain in the  United  Kingdom
             with the other parent, they  will  inevitably  be  distressed.
             However, in section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act,  Parliament  has
             made clear its  will  that,  for  foreign  offenders  who  are
             sentenced to one to four years, only  where  the  consequences
             for the  children  are  'unduly  harsh'  will  deportation  be
             constrained. That is entirely consistent  with  Article  8  of
             ECHR. It is  important  that  decision-makers  and,  when  the
             decisions are challenged, tribunals  and  courts  honour  that
             expression of Parliamentary will.'

19. In other words, before Judge Wylie could properly find that it would be
    unduly harsh for  the  claimant's  child  (she  did  not  consider  the
    position of the claimant's partner in her decision) to remain in the UK
    without the claimant it was necessary to consider to  what  extent,  if
    any, the position of this claimant's son would be different  from  that
    which one would ordinarily expect to be the position when any parent is
    deported.  In our judgement also, insofar as the judge considered  that
    the relationship between a son and his father was so close as to  be  a
    "particularly close relationship" it was incumbent on her  to  set  out
    the reasoning why this relationship  was  so  much  closer  than  would
    normally be expected as to make  the  effect  on  the  child  not  just
    "harsh" but "unduly harsh" having in mind the very high threshold which
    it is clear from the decisions of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal
    referred to above must be met.

20. In answer to the Tribunal's concerns as to what the  reasons  may  have
    been, Ms Reville on behalf of the claimant suggested that it could only
    be in reliance on the evidence  which  was  contained  in  the  witness
    statement of the claimant and also  the  report  from  social  services
    already referred to.  That evidence is set out at paragraphs 25  to  37
    of the witness statement and refers to how the claimant gets his son up
    for school and they have fun, that he enjoys brushing  his  teeth  with
    him, they have breakfast together, they  play  football  together,  and
    pray together as well, they go to school and listen  to  gospel  music,
    the claimant walks his son up to school and he then picks him up  after
    school and he checks to see whether he  has  any  homework  to  do  and
    sometimes they do the homework together.  The family all pray  together
    before going to bed and the son has inherited the  claimant's  love  of
    Arsenal Football Club and cheers whenever Arsenal score.  The  claimant
    also intended to teach his son how to play the piano.  It is sadly  the
    case as Hickinbottom LJ mentioned in  his  concurring  judgment  in  PG
    (Jamaica) at paragraph 46 that there  will  always  be  disruption  and
    hardship and distress suffered by an innocent child when  a  parent  is
    deported.  What Hickinbottom LJ said at paragraph 46 was as follows:

         "46. When a parent is deported, one can only  have  great  sympathy
             for  the  entirely  innocent  children   involved.   Even   in
             circumstances in which they can remain in the  United  Kingdom
             with their other parent, they will inevitably  be  distressed.
             However, in Section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act,  Parliament  has
             made clear its  will  that,  for  foreign  offenders  who  are
             sentenced to one to four years, only  where  the  consequences
             for the  children  are  'unduly  harsh'  will  deportation  be
             constrained. That is entirely consistent with Article 8 of the
             ECHR.  It is important that decision-makers  and,  when  their
             decisions are challenged, Tribunals  and  courts  honour  that
             expression of Parliamentary will ...".

21. Hickinbottom LJ concluded by acknowledging in that particular case that
    "unfortunate as PG's deportation will be for his children, for none  of
    them will it result in undue harshness".

22. Given the high threshold which applies  in  cases  such  as  this,  the
    reasoning set out within Judge Wylie's decision  is  in  our  judgement
    clearly insufficient such that  the  decision  that  she  made  is  not
    sustainable and will have to be remade.

REHEARING

23. After the Secretary of State had  been  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  standard  directions
    were sent to the parties which made it  clear  that  the  parties  were
    expected to be prepared in the event that an error of law was found  to
    continue the hearing immediately thereafter.   Furthermore,  under  the
    Rules the parties are required to seek  permission  to  adduce  further
    evidence if either of them wishes to do so.  The claimant chose not  to
    attend and furthermore no application was made to  adduce  any  further
    evidence.  In the circumstances and Ms Reville did not seek to persuade
    the Tribunal otherwise it was appropriate to rehear the case and remake
    the decision in reliance on the evidence already submitted.

24. Very helpfully prior to the  hearing  before  this  Tribunal  today  Ms
    Reville had prepared a skeleton argument in the event that the Tribunal
    was to rehear the appeal today.  This was supplementary to the Rule  24
    arguments which had already been submitted.  This  is  a  comprehensive
    and exceptionally well-argued document and sets  out  fully  the  basis
    upon which  the  claimant's  submissions  are  now  made.   Ms  Reville
    supplemented this skeleton argument in oral arguments before us.

25.  Essentially Ms Reville had three grounds on which she  now  sought  to
    argue  that  the  appeal  should   succeed.    The   first   was   that
    notwithstanding the finding which had previously  been  made  by  Judge
    Wylie that this claimant  was  a  "persistent  offender"  because  this
    Tribunal was obliged to consider the position as it is now and in light
    of the further time which had elapsed since Judge Wylie had  given  her
    decision the claimant now ought not to  be  regarded  as  a  persistent
    offender.  The second ground was that this Tribunal should find on  the
    evidence that the effect of the  removal  of  the  claimant  from  this
    country while the claimant's child remained would be  unduly  harsh  on
    that child.  Thirdly, and in  any  event  there  were  very  compelling
    reasons why this claimant should not be deported.

Persistent Offender

26. Essentially the claimant relied heavily on what  was  said  to  be  the
    ratio of SC (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 929 in which (and  this  is  set
    out at paragraph 10 of Ms Reville's skeleton argument) it was held that
    the wording of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 does not  "compel  any  particular  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    Secretary of State's view"  that  someone  is  a  persistent  offender.
    Reference was  made  to  the  court  in  SC  (Zimbabwe)  endorsing  the
    reasoning given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Chege  ("is  a  persistent
    offender") [2016] UKUT 187 in which the Tribunal at  paragraph  51  had
    specifically said that:

         "There may be circumstances in which it would be  inappropriate  to
         describe someone with a past history  of  criminality  as  being  a
         'persistent  offender'  even  if  there  was  a  time   when   that
         description would have been an accurate one".

27. Examples are given at paragraph 52 of Chege.  The example  given  there
    though was of a person who "in his youth  had  committed  a  number  of
    offences between the ages of 14 and 17  but  in  adulthood  had  led  a
    blameless existence for 20 years".   At paragraph 53 the Upper Tribunal
    in Chege had said that:

         "Put simply, a  'persistent  offender'  is  someone  who  keeps  on
         breaking the law. That does not mean, however, that he has to  keep
         on offending until the date  of  the  relevant  decision  up  to  a
         certain time before it, or that the  continuity  of  the  offending
         cannot be broken".

28. In other words, Ms Reville submitted that, even though  she  could  not
    now challenge Judge Wylie's finding that  at  the  time  she  made  her
    decision the claimant was a "persistent offender", he should no  longer
    be regarded as being so.  This was because  he  had  now  been  out  of
    trouble for a period in excess of two years which showed that  although
    prior to his previous conviction he  might  have  been  regarded  as  a
    "persistent offender" that should now not  be  regarded  as  being  the
    position.

29. Unfortunately, Ms Reville was obviously unaware of the fact that during
    the period in which the claimant had not been convicted of  an  offence
    he had been in immigration custody for some period (it seems  this  was
    between July and August 2018).  If she had been aware of that she would
    obviously have brought it to the attention  of  the  court  because  Ms
    Reville is known to this Tribunal as an advocate  who  understands  and
    always complies with  her  obligations  as  counsel.   Furthermore,  it
    appears that the claimant has been on immigration bail since that  time
    so it is perhaps unsurprising that he has not been in  further  trouble
    during this period.  Moreover, the period of  time  since  Judge  Wylie
    reached her decision that the claimant was a "persistent  offender"  is
    so limited and the number of offences and their  variety  is  so  large
    that rationally we do not feel able to reach any conclusion other  than
    that in the circumstances of this particular case this claimant clearly
    remains a "persistent offender" and accordingly  a  "foreign  criminal"
    for the purposes of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and  also  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Is the effect on the claimant's child "unduly harsh"?

30. It is not necessary for the  purposes  of  this  decision  to  consider
    whether or not it would be "unduly harsh" for the claimant's son to  go
    with the claimant to Nigeria in the event that the claimant  is  to  be
    deported.  We note Judge Wylie's finding that  the  claimant's  partner
    would not go with him, and in these circumstances even  though  it  may
    not have been unduly harsh for his  partner  to  go  with  him,  it  is
    difficult to disagree with the finding that Judge Wylie  made  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for  the  British  child  to  separate  from  his
    British mother in order to go with his father to Nigeria.  However, the
    real issue in this case is the effect on the child of remaining in this
    country while his father is removed to Nigeria and whether that can  be
    said to be unduly harsh.

31. Our starting point as has been made clear from the authorities referred
    to above is that there is considerable  public  interest  in  deporting
    foreign criminals which the claimant is.  It is also the case  that  as
    the courts have made clear there will almost always and certainly  most
    often be considerable distress caused to a child when his or her parent
    is removed.  What we would have to find to support  a  conclusion  that
    the effect on the child is unduly harsh (and this is without  reference
    to the extent of the criminality involved) is that the  effect  on  the
    child would be beyond that which would be in the words of the  previous
    President  of  this  Tribunal  as  set  out   with   approval   in   KO
    "uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult".  It has
    to be beyond "something severe, or bleak".   As  our  former  President
    stated (approved by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO)  "harsh  ...  is  the
    antithesis of pleasant  or  comfortable".   That  Tribunal  also  noted
    "Furthermore, the addition of the adverse 'unduly'  raises  an  already
    elevated standard still higher".

32. We have summarised what the claimant has said to  be  his  relationship
    with his child earlier and in our judgement it does not in  essence  go
    beyond what one would normally expect to be the relationship between  a
    father who is taking his child to school and  spending  time  with  him
    while his mother works (as is  frequently  the  case  because  in  such
    circumstances it is almost always or it is very often the case that the
    father is not allowed to work).  In this case perhaps the  relationship
    is not even as close as will often be the case because as the  claimant
    makes clear in his statement upon which reliance is now placed he  also
    is undergoing a course in sports management at  university  during  the
    day and so his involvement with his child is before  school  and  after
    school and sometimes the child has to remain at  a  club  after  school
    until the claimant can collect him.  There is nothing in  the  evidence
    which could justify us in finding that the elevated threshold has  been
    reached.  As  Hickinbottom  LJ  made  clear  in  PG  (Jamaica)  already
    referred to above, children in these circumstances "will inevitably  be
    distressed" and the result for the innocent  children  of  people  like
    this claimant is often very sad but is a regrettable bi-product of  the
    need to deport foreign criminals.  Certainly, in the  circumstances  of
    this case  we  have  no  hesitation  whatsoever  in  finding  that  the
    threshold is not reached by a very large margin.

Are there very compelling circumstances over and above those set out  within
the exceptions such that this claimant should not be deported?

33. Ms Reville rightly submitted that the  Tribunal  should  following  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 adopt
    a "balance sheet" approach whereby the Tribunal  should  weigh  up  the
    various  factors  both  for  and  against  deportation.    As   already
    indicated, the starting point must be  the  very  great  public  weight
    which must  be  given  to  Parliament's  intention  that  absent  "very
    compelling circumstances" this country needs, and it is  very  much  in
    the public interest to deport foreign criminals, which by reason of his
    persistent offending, this claimant is.

34. The factors on which Ms Reville relies in order to support her argument
    that there are very compelling reasons why the claimant should  not  be
    deported are as follows:

      a) the length of time the claimant has been here;

      b) the strength of his family relationships with his partner  and  his
         son;

      c) the fact that the  offences  while  numerous  were  all  relatively
         minor;

      d) the relationship that he has with his partner was  founded  (it  is
         said) when he thought he was in this country  lawfully  and  indeed
         thought that he was a British citizen;

      e) his social and cultural integration in this country; and

      f) that there will be very significant obstacles to his integration in
         Nigeria were he to be sent there.

35. I deal with these factors in turn.

Length of time the claimant has been here

36. It is the claimant's case that having been born in this country in 1994
    he remained here till 2004 until just before he was 10 and then went to
    Nigeria for about three years before returning to this country in 2007.
     The Secretary of State's case based  upon  what  is  said  within  her
    records to be an application and grant of a multi-visit visa in 2002 is
    that at the very least the claimant was out of this  country  for  some
    time between 2001 to 2003.

37. Looking at the evidence contained in the file we are satisfied  on  the
    balance of probabilities that the claimant was in the UK from  1994  to
    2001.  There are recorded visits and appointments with the doctors  and
    dentists and so on which suggest this is the case.  However, there is a
    gap between 2001 to 2003 and  interestingly  there  is  an  absence  of
    schooling until 2003 when the claimant was recorded as  having  started
    primary school.  There was a medical appointment apparently booked  for
    him in July 2003 although he did not go.  Given that a child  would  be
    expected to start primary school at the age of 7, we are not  satisfied
    that the claimant has established on the balance of probabilities or at
    all that he was actually within this country between 2001 and 2003  and
    consider it more likely that he in fact returned to this  country  from
    Nigeria in late 2003 where he stayed for about a  year  before  as  his
    school record makes clear he left.  It is  common  ground,  as  already
    stated that from 2004 to 2007 the claimant  was  in  Nigeria.   In  any
    event, we do not believe that this makes a great deal of difference  to
    his case, because even if he had been in this country up until 2004, he
    left before his tenthbirthday and so on any view would  not  have  been
    here sufficiently long to have been entitled to British citizenship  if
    an application had been made on his behalf at that time.

Strength of family  relationships  in  the  UK  with  his  partner  and  his
children

38. We accept that the claimant has a relationship with both his  wife  and
    his son.  So far as a relationship with his son is  concerned  we  have
    considered the strength of this relationship when  considering  whether
    the effect on the child would be "unduly harsh".  Ms Reville argues  as
    she is entitled to that even if the strength of  that  relationship  is
    not sufficient that the effect on the child of his departure  could  be
    said to be "unduly harsh" nonetheless it is a factor which can be taken
    into account in conjunction with other factors when considering whether
    there are very compelling  reasons  why  the  claimant  should  not  be
    removed.  It is argued on behalf of the claimant (and we deal with  the
    fourth factor which we  are  asked  to  take  into  account)  that  the
    strength of the family relationship should be looked at  on  the  basis
    that the claimant believed that he was a British citizen  and  that  it
    was only when he was 18 that was after  his  juvenile  convictions  but
    before his other convictions that he realised that he  was  in  fact  a
    national of a foreign country.  In these circumstances it is  submitted
    this Tribunal should give less weight to what is said at  Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act where at sub-Section (4) that "little weight should  be
    given to - (a) a private life, or (b)  a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying partner, that it is established by a person at a  time  when
    the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully" or to what is  said  at
    (5) that "little weight should be given to a private  life  established
    by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious".

39. It may be the case because the evidence is not completely clear on this
    that for a substantial period of time the claimant was in this  country
    he had a valid visa to be here, but certainly as a matter of  fact  his
    immigration status in this country was precarious.  Furthermore, we are
    unable to accept what the claimant says in his witness statement  which
    is that he was not aware that he was not a British citizen until he was
    about 18 because it is common ground that  when  he  returned  to  this
    country in 2007 he did so by presenting a Nigerian passport which had a
    visa allowing him to come to the UK.  It is apparently  the  claimant's
    case that somebody else organised the obtaining  of  his  passport  and
    visa and that he had nothing to do with it, but on  any  view  when  he
    arrived in this country aged 13 at Heathrow he would have gone  to  the
    entry point which is open to foreign nationals and  not  to  the  entry
    point where he would have gone if a UK or other EU national.   We  have
    to consider this issue on the balance of probabilities, and we consider
    it far more likely than not that this claimant was aware at that  time,
    that is when he came to this country in 2007, that he was not a British
    national.

Were the offences all relatively minor?

40. Although the claimant was not at any time  sentenced  to  an  immediate
    period of imprisonment,  in  our  view  these  offences  could  not  be
    described, when seen in their totality as "all relatively  minor".   As
    already indicated above they include offences of dishonesty  (not  just
    the frequent offences of travelling on the  railway  without  a  ticket
    which deprives the Exchequer of  revenue  to  which  the  Exchequer  is
    entitled, but also of attempted theft), offences of  battery,  that  is
    violence, possessing offensive weapons, including a bladed  instrument,
    with potentially extremely serious consequences, a  drugs  offence  and
    also criminal damage.  We do not regard these offences, in totality  as
    being "relatively minor"; indeed, they are sufficiently serious that we
    have found it correct (as did Judge Wylie  before  us)  to  uphold  the
    Secretary of State's view that this claimant is  indeed  a  "persistent
    offender" and thus a "foreign criminal".

Relationships formed when he thought he was a British citizen

41. As indicated above we have set out our findings  with  regard  to  this
    under  the  discussion   regarding   the   strength   of   his   family
    relationships.

Social and cultural integration

42. Clearly  the  claimant  is  to  some  extent  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into the UK, but the strength of this  integration  must  be
    viewed in the context of his serious offending and  we  do  not  regard
    this as of any great weight.

Are there very significant obstacles to the  claimant's  integration  within
Nigeria?

43. We find it interesting in this case when considering the evidence of in
    particular the claimant's uncle, who has spent  some  time  in  Nigeria
    that although he refers  to  relatives  of  the  claimant  who  are  in
    Nigeria, he does not deal with where various  other  relatives  are  or
    might be.  At paragraph 4 of his statement he says this:

         "My brother Rotimi is the only sibling I know who lives in Nigeria.
          He is 44 years old.  He does not have a job and has  not  had  any
         formal education.  Although he has not received a formal diagnosis,
         I feel that he might be  autistic.   Rotimi  struggles  with  daily
         tasks and is a  slow  learner.   I  recall  that  my  parents  were
         concerned  that  he  might  have  a  mental  health  condition.   I
         therefore have to support him financially as much as I can.  If  it
         was not for me, I do not think he could survive".

44. Curiously he says nothing about his parents,  that  is  the  claimant's
    grandparents, and nor does  he  say  where  his  sister  (that  is  the
    claimant's mother) is save that he does not  know  of  her  whereabouts
    because "we have not been in contact for  years  after  she  mistreated
    [the claimant]".

45. All we do know is that the claimant's uncle who maintains that he cares
    for the claimant, has sufficient financial resources to be able to help
    a brother in Nigeria of whose whereabouts he knows,  and  there  is  no
    reason to believe that he could not also provide some assistance to the
    claimant as well.  Indeed, it is not part of Ms Reville's case advanced
    on the claimant's behalf that the claimant would  be  destitute  within
    Nigeria.

46. The claimant may know few people in Nigeria, but English is a  language
    widely spoken within Nigeria and there is nothing within the papers  to
    suggest that any difficulties that this claimant might have  on  return
    to Nigeria would be significant, let alone "very  significant".   There
    is no basis in our judgement upon which we  could  properly  find  that
    this claimant would not be able within a reasonable period to find  his
    feet and exist and have a meaningful normal life within Nigeria and  we
    so find.

47. Accordingly, having weighed up all  the  factors,  none  of  which  are
    particularly unusual in deportation cases against the very large public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals, and having regard to our  duty
    also to where necessary take account of  the  level  of  offending  and
    accepting that even taken together these offences are not as serious as
    some  people  who  are  deported  having  received  very   considerable
    sentences  of  imprisonment,  nonetheless  balancing  all  the  factors
    together we are quite satisfied that  by  a  very  large  margin  there
    cannot be said to be "very compelling reasons" why deportation  in  the
    circumstances is disproportionate.  It follows that this appeal must be
    dismissed and our decision is accordingly as follows:




    Decision

    We set aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wylie  as
    containing a material error of law and remake the  decision  dismissing
    the claimant's appeal on all grounds.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 18 March 2020

