
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/22027/2018
                                                               HU/21980/2018
                                                               HU/21972/2018
                                                               HU/21986/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |On 4 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                JAYANTHI [G]
                              GANESH KUMAR [N]
                                     M G
                                     R K
      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE ONLY IN RESPECT OF THE THIRD AND FOURTH
                                 APPELLANTS)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Waheed, Counsel, instructed by Lambeth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, all citizens of India,  are  a  wife  and  husband  and
their two children.  In a decision sent on 24 January 2019, Judge  Solly  of
the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed their appeals against  the  decision
made by the respondent on 8 October 2018 refusing them leave to remain

2.   The appellants' written grounds of  appeal  are  not  well-drafted  but
appear to raise three main points, it being asserted that  the  judge  erred
in (1) failing to apply to the central issue of whether  it  was  reasonable
to expect the third appellant, who was a qualifying child, to leave the  UK,
the correct approach as set out in  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53  and  MA
(Pakistan) [2015] EWCA Civ 705; (2) failing to apply the guidelines set  out
by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in  assessing
the best interests of the two children aged 9 and  5;  and  (3)  failing  to
recognise that in cases in which there are many positive factors  in  favour
of the appellants the public interest can be outweighed.   Integral  to  all
three of these grounds was the contention that  having  made  a  finding  at
para 60 that it was in the best interests of  M,  the  third  appellant,  to
remain in the UK, the judge failed  to  apply  this  to  her  assessment  of
reasonableness.

3.   As regards ground (1), I would accept that even though  the  judge  did
refer to  MA  (Pakistan)  she  does  not  anywhere  identify  the  important
principle established in that case,  for  example  in  [46]-[48]  that  when
considering whether it is reasonable to expect a qualifying child  to  leave
the UK, the decision-maker should ask whether there are strong  or  powerful
reasons for refusing leave:

    'Applying the reasonableness test

 1. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that  a  child
    has been here for seven years must be  given  significant  weight  when
    carrying out the proportionality exercise.  Indeed,  the  Secretary  of
    State published guidance in August 2015  in  the  form  of  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent)
    and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that
    once the seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there need to
    be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing  leave   (para.   11.2.4).   These
    instructions were not in force when the cases  now  subject  to  appeal
    were determined, but in my view they merely confirm what is implicit in
    adopting a policy of this nature. After such a period of time the child
    will have put down roots and developed social, cultural and educational
    links in the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive  if  the
    child is required to leave the  UK.  That  may  be  less  so  when  the
    children are very young because the focus of their  lives  will  be  on
    their families, but the disruption becomes more  serious  as  they  get
    older. Moreover, in these cases there must be a very strong expectation
    that the child's best interests will be to remain in the  UK  with  his
    parents as part of a family unit, and  that  must  rank  as  a  primary
    consideration in the proportionality assessment.

 1. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test where the focus
    is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow that  leave  must
    be granted whenever  the  child's  best  interests  are  in  favour  of
    remaining. I reject  Mr  Gill's  submission  that  the  best  interests
    assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness  question.  If
    Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to dictate the outcome
    of the leave application, it would have said so. The concept  of  "best
    interests" is after all a well-established one. Even where the  child's
    best interests are to stay, it may still be not unreasonable to require
    the child to leave. That will depend upon a  careful  analysis  of  the
    nature and extent of the links in the UK and in the country where it is
    proposed he should return. What could not be considered, however, would
    be the conduct and immigration history of the parents.

 1. In EV (Philippines) Lord Justice Christopher  Clarke  explained  how  a
    tribunal should apply  the  proportionality  test  where  wider  public
    interest considerations are in play, in circumstances  where  the  best
    interests of the child dictate that he should remain in the UK  (paras.
    34-37):

         "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
         the need for immigration control outweighs the  best  interests  of
         the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength of
         the factors which make it in their best interests to  remain  here;
         and also to take account of any factors that point the other way.

         35.  A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully." '

However, I am not persuaded that this error had a  material  effect  on  the
outcome of the decision.  That is for several reasons.

4.   First, although she does not identify the aforesaid  approach  set  out
in MA (Pakistan), she does at para 57 cite with  approval  the  headnote  of
Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 that:

    "... lengthy residence in a country other than state of origin can lead
    to development of social, cultural and educational ties that  it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of  compelling  reasons  to
    the contrary."

This formulation identifies a very similar test.

5.   Second, the judge clearly did attach significant  weight  to  the  fact
that the third appellant had been in the UK for over  seven  years  and  was
thus  a  qualifying  child.   Having   noted   submissions   regarding   the
significance of the fact that she was a qualifying child  and  so  satisfied
para 276ADE(iv) and s117B(6) (see paras 25, 52 and 53), the judge  noted  at
para 58, first sentence, that "M has been in the UK for just under 9  years"
and at para 60 that "[s]he has been in the UK for many years"  and  in  para
76  (in  a  paragraph  which  cites  MA  (Pakistan))  states  that  "I  give
significant weight to the length of time that M has been in the UK  and  the
interests she has developed".

6.   Third, as the last six words of the sentence just cited  from  para  76
indicate, the judge not only considered the length but also the  quality  of
the third appellant's stay noting at para 59, that she is studying  well  in
school and has been enjoying extra-curricular  activities  including  ballet
and swimming and that she is learning Welsh, noting in  the  same  paragraph
that if she returns to  India  "her  links  with  her  existing  school  and
friends would be broken" (see also para 65).  At para  66  the  judge  notes
that:

    "66. I have a long a recent letter, [ from M in which she] says she  is
         9 years and 10 months at the top, commencing on page A 12 in  which
         she explains to me why she wishes to remain in the UK.  She is most
         articulate in explaining that she does not want to return to  India
         and says she has many friends and has many activities in the UK."

7.   In light of Mr Waheed's emphasis on the passionate views  expressed  by
the third appellant in her letter addressed to the judge, I  would  add  the
obvious observation that this paragraph shows that the  judge  clearly  took
full account of this letter.

8.    Fourth,  it  is  clear  from  the  judge's  treatment  of  the   third
appellant's circumstances why she considered there were strong  or  powerful
reasons for refusing her leave in the UK.  Focussing  on  the  some  of  the
ties this appellant had forged in the  UK,  the  judge  adjudged  that  even
though she was doing well at school she had not reached a critical stage  of
her education, stating at para 59 that:

    "59. Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
         requires  that  the  functions  of  the  Secretary  of  State   are
         'discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the
         welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom'.  As was held by
         Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  'this  means  that  any
         decision which is taken  without  having  regard  to  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not
         be in accordance with the law for the purpose of Article 8(2).  The
         RFRL indicates that the Secretary  of  State  has  considered  this
         duty."

She also noted in para 58 with reference  to  Azimi-Moayed  that  the  third
appellant had not been in the UK for seven years from aged 4.

9.    The  judge  further  assessed  that  the  disruption  in   the   third
appellant's  education  would  be  significantly  offset   by   the   likely
educational circumstances she would face on return.  At para 65 she stated:

    "65. So far as education is concerned, I find that  [MG]  were  she  to
         return to India could opt to be taught in the English medium  which
         would mean that all her lessons would be  in  English  save  for  a
         compulsory subject of Tamil.  The same  would  apply  to  [RK].   I
         accept that [MG] would be behind in the subject of Tamil and  would
         face some difficulties  in  catching  up  given  that  a  different
         alphabet applies.  In considering how severe the [sic] I take  into
         account the information before me  of  her  ability.   There  is  a
         letter from Mrs Jackson the headteacher of Kitchener primary school
         on a 25 [sic] saying that [MG] has been registered  at  the  school
         since 2 September 2014,  is  making  very  good  progress  sin  her
         learning and is very settled and happy in school with a good [sic].
          Several school certificates are included in the  bundle  including
         reading challenges, doing her homework and I have read  her  school
         report dated July 2007 which includes the Welsh language A66.   Her
         age standardised scores appear at 69 and show her to be in the main
         blue category of test results in line with  most  children  of  the
         same age which I accept."

10.  The  judge's  assessment  of  the  third  appellant's  extra-curricular
activities was to similar effect.  She attached significant weight  to  them
(see para 68) but did not accept the appellants' submission that  she  would
be prevented from pursuing such activities in India:

    "67. It is said by her father that there  are  no  swimming  facilities
         nearby in India and that she could not undertake  ballet  or  other
         extracurricular activities in India.  He also indicated that he had
         not relied on public funds since arrival in the UK however this  is
         unlikely.  The family have had another child in the UK  and  it  is
         reasonable  to  suppose  that  this  child  was  born  through  the
         facilities of the NHS as it was not  suggested  there  was  private
         care and both children are educated in state  schools.   They  have
         thus had this reliance on public funds.  Given I do not accept  his
         evidence on the issue of public funds  I  have  concerns  with  the
         evidence that [MG] could  not  undertake  all  her  extracurricular
         activities in  India  particularly  given  the  lack  of  objective
         evidence confirming this."

11.  The judge also noted that there was no medical evidence  produced  that
health would impact on the return of any of the appellants:  see para 71.

12.  It is clear that the judge also  considered  the  state  of  the  third
appellant's family ties.  Clearly, if  she  and  her  immediate  family  had
other close relatives in the UK, that might  potentially  have  helped  show
there were not strong powerful reasons for refusing  her  leave  to  remain.
But the evidence was almost entirely the  other  way.   The  appellants  had
made mention of financial support from the second appellant's  brother,  but
it was not submitted that the appellants had close  family  ties  with  him.
On the other hand the lead appellant's evidence was  recalled  as  being  as
follows at para 36:

    "36. She said she had a father and mother, father-in-law and mother-in-
         law, her husband has 2 sisters and she have an  elder  brother  who
         was married with 2 children (aged 1� and baby) in India.  Prior  to
         coming to the UK, they lived with her husband's family."

13.  In the assessment of the evidence the judge found at paras 72-73:

    "72. The family have immediate family in terms of both parents and each
         has siblings in India.  I  heard  evidence  that  Mr  [N]'s  father
         provided them with funds as did his brother.   The  lead  appellant
         and her husband used to live with Mr [N]'s father in India.  I find
         that family financial and practical support will  be  available  to
         both children.

    73.  I have taken into account all the evidence in considering  whether
         it is not reasonable for her to leave the UK.  I bear in mind  that
         she has considerable family in India available to support her  both
         emotionally and practically as there is  no  suggestion  that  they
         would not given the practical support  in  terms  of  finance  they
         provide her parents.  The family would have a home in India with Mr
         [N]'s parents and there is no suggestion that the family  would  be
         impoverished by return."

14.  Hence, even though  the  judge  did  not  expressly  identify  the  key
guidance given in MA (Pakistan), it is  entirely  clear  from  her  decision
that she was not satisfied that  there  were  strong  powerful  reasons  for
refusing the third appellant leave to remain.

15.  Turning to ground (2), it will be apparent from  the  citation  earlier
of several  passages  from  the  judge's  decision  that,  even  though  not
referring to EV (Philippines) as such (albeit she did refer to KO  (Nigeria)
which endorses the approval in EV (Philippines)), she  did  address  all  of
the relevant factors going to the best interests  of  the  child  assessment
and  then  to  the  wider  proportionality  assessment  in  cases  involving
children, including age, length of residence; how long  they  have  been  in
education; what stage their education had reached; to what extent they  have
become distanced from the country of return; how renewable their  connection
with it may be; to what extent they will have linguistic, medical  or  other
difficulties  in adapting to life in the country; and the  extent  to  which
the course proposed  will  interference  with  their  family  life  (see  MA
(Pakistan)  at [48].

16.  Mr Waheed, in oral submissions far more articulate than  those  in  the
written grounds, submitted that the core of the judge's  error  was  in  not
applying  the  clear  findings,  made  at  para  60  regarding   the   third
appellant's best interests to the assessment  of  reasonableness  that  then
follows at paras 61-74.  The best interests of the child findings  are  only
weighed in the balance, he submitted,  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
appellant's circumstances outside the Rules, starting at para 75.   In  this
connection he drew attention to paras 77, 80 and 83 in each of  which  there
is reference to the best interests of the child considerations.

17.  I would agree with Mr Waheed that the judge does  not  in  paras  61-74
refer as such to the best interests of the child(ren).  I would  also  agree
that this stands in contrast to the judge's assessment  of  the  appellants'
circumstances outside the Rules (starting at para 75) where in para  76  she
clearly followed a clear two-stage approach addressing  the  best  interests
of the children alongside other factors.  However, I consider this  omission
to be one of form, not substance.  As already observed  when  analysing  the
judge's treatment of reasonableness in the context of the guidance  set  out
in MA (Pakistan), the burden of paras 61-74 is in  substance  an  assessment
of the best interests of the children, the third  appellant  in  particular.
This assessment begins at para 62 by stating that:

    "62. I have then gone on to consider the issue of whether it  would  be
         reasonable to leave  the  UK.   Again,  in  considering  this  when
         looking at both children  I  do  not  take  into  account  parental
         misconduct."

18.  Given that by  implication  ground  (2)  also  criticises  the  judge's
approach to the judge's best interests of  the  child  assessment,  I  would
observe that even though the judge  does  not  follow  a  strict  two  stage
approach (considering best interests of the child first and  then  assessing
proportionality) that is not a legal necessity and in any event she  made  a
clear finding at para 60 that it was in M's best interests to remain in  the
UK, albeit that was "only on balance" ;  and  her  decision  contains  clear
reasons  for  that   conclusion   and   also   for   the   conclusion   that
notwithstanding this it would be reasonable to expect her to leave  the  UK.


19.  Before turning to the third ground, it is in order that I refer to  two
matters that relate to the drafting of the judge's decision.  I pointed  out
to the parties that there were two passages in which there  appeared  to  be
typos: at para 58 in its second sentence the judge  stated  that  the  third
appellant "has been in the UK for just under 5  years  from  the  age  of  4
years old".  Having heard from the parties I am satisfied that this  is  not
a typo.  In it the judge was not denying that the third appellant  had  been
in the UK for just under 9 years but was simply explaining that she had  not
been here 7 years since the age of 4.  This observation clearly  related  to
headnote 4 of Azimi-Moayed cited in the paragraph before.

20.  However, I take a different view of para 70. In its last  sentence  the
judge's decision reads: "[g]iving this anxious  scrutiny  I  have  concluded
that it is unreasonable that she [the third appellant]  should  be  educated
in India with Tamil as a compulsory subject".  I am entirely satisfied  that
there is a missing "not" before "unreasonable" since  the  judge  made  very
specific findings at para 65 and earlier in para 70 that M would be able  to
opt to be taught in the  English  medium  which  would  mean  that  all  her
lessons would be in English, save for a compulsory  subject  in  Tamil,  but
that given her proven ability (para 65),  her  "resilience  and  thirst  for
learning will stand her in good stead in facing this challenge"  (para  70).
Whilst the grounds did not seek to rely on  either  of  these  sentences  as
evidence of inconsistency, I  have  seen  fit  to  consider  them  and  have
decided that one is consistent with the judge's analysis elsewhere  and  the
other is a simple typo.

21.  Turning then to ground (3), I see no error in the judge's  weighing  up
of the factors in favour of the appellants being  granted  leave  and  those
against and concluding  that  the  factors  weighing  against  carried  more
weight.  It was evident from my earlier analysis of  the  third  appellants'
circumstances why the judge did not find that they weighed as heavy  as  was
argued for by her representatives; and  the  judge  had  explained  why  the
youngest child's circumstances did  not  add  any  significant  weight  when
considering the children's circumstances together (see para 77).  The  judge
properly attached  significant  weight  to  the  fact  that  the  first  two
appellants had overstayed and no argument had been made to the  effect  that
their private life ties in the UK  should  be  accorded  significant  weight
(paras 78-80).  The judge noted that the appellants speak English and  hence
there was no weight to be attached  to  any  linguistic  shortcomings.   The
judge  accepted  also  that  the  first  two  appellants  were   financially
independent albeit it did not weigh against them to a  certain  extent  that
they have relied on public funds for education  and  medical  care  (neither
education nor medical care are "public funds"  within  the  meaning  of  the
Immigration Rules, but the fact that the family had benefitted from the  NHS
and state education were relevant considerations; the grounds take no  issue
to the contrary).

22.  It was entirely open to the judge to treat as a very weighty factor  in
this case that the appellants had strong family ties in India  (Tamil  Noru)
and that they would be returning as a family unit (para 84).

23.  It will be apparent from the above  that  I  am  not  persuaded  by  Mr
Waheed's submissions that the third appellant's  circumstances  were  of  an
exceptional kind in the context of both the reasonableness and  outside  the
Rules  assessment.   That  is  not  at  all  to  belittle   her   remarkable
achievements in her school and extracurricular  activities  or  to  overlook
her very articulate explanation of why for her remaining in the  UK  was  an
imperative.   However,  the  judge's  assessment  both  of  the   issue   of
reasonableness and the issue of Article 8 outside the Rules was  within  the
range of reasonable responses and is not vitiated by legal error.

24.  Accordingly, I conclude that none of the appellants' grounds of  appeal
is made out and hence the  decision  of  the  FtT  judge  to  dismiss  their
appeals must stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  third  and
fourth appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction applies both  to
these two appellants and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 23 August 2019
     [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
