
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/22032/2018
                                                HU/22920/2018, HU/22926/2018
                                                HU/22933/2018, HU/22912/2018
                                                               HU/22936/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2019                       |On 07 June 2019                      |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                            PI - first appellant
                            BI - second appellant
                            WI - third appellant
                            MI - fourth appellant
                            PI - fifth appellant
                            PI - sixth appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Winter, instructed by Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity Order

Although no order for anonymity was made by the First-tier  Tribunal,  since
these appeals relate to children I make an order prohibiting the  disclosure
of any matter leading to the identification of the  appellants  pursuant  to
Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Any  breach
of this order may result in contempt proceedings.



 1. The appellants,  who  are  nationals  of  Nigeria,  have  been  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  C
    Grant-Hutchinson.  For reasons given in her decision dated 21  December
    2018, the judge  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision  dated  15  October  2018  refusing  the  first  named
    appellant's human rights claim.

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 29 October  2010  and
    his wife on 19  May  2011.   The  judge  considered  their  cases  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules and  made  a  number  of
    findings leading to  her  conclusion  that  there  would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to the first and second  appellants'  integration
    into Nigeria were they required to leave the United Kingdom.  This took
    account of the first two appellants having been born  and  spent  their
    formative (and a good part of their) adult lives in Nigeria  and  their
    level of education.  The fact of these appellants speaking only English
    had not prevented them from fully integrating  into  life  in  Nigeria.
    Despite the first appellant  having  fallen  out  with  his  family  in
    relation to his marriage,  the  judge  considered  he  had  had  to  be
    independent  from  an  early  age   and,   having   regard   to   their
    resourcefulness,  found  there  was  no  reason  why  they  could   not
    reintegrate into their own culture and traditions on return.

 3. The judge also assessed the cases under Article  8  after  noting  that
    none of the children had lived in the United Kingdom for at least seven
    years. She addressed their best interests.  She  took  account  of  the
    circumstances they might face and the evidence produced in support  and
    concluded at paragraph 35:

         "35. As both parents were brought up in  Nigeria  speaking  English
             then there is no  reason  why  the  children  would  have  any
             difficulties in this regard as both parents do not  speak  any
             other of the Nigerian languages, although the second Appellant
             says she speaks a little Yoruba.  As the first Appellant  said
             in oral evidence English is the "lingua  franca"  of  Nigeria.
             The said psychological report states  that  the  children  are
             likely  to  face  significant  psychological   and   practical
             barriers to integrating in Nigeria and that they are likely to
             find the move very distressing and unwanted.  Whilst I  accept
             that the children may find the move distressing and  no  doubt
             unwanted and it will take time for them to  re-settle,  in  my
             view the children are bright, intelligent  and  well-adjusted.
             They are socially capable.  They are resilient and  more  than
             able to adapt to be able  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  their
             parents and continue their lives there."

 4. In addition, the judge finally considered the cases with  reference  to
    section 117A-D of Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and concluded at [43]:

         "43. For the reasons given I do not find that the best interests of
             the children  outweigh  the  public  interest.   I  find  that
             interference  by  the  Respondent  for  the   maintenance   of
             effective immigration control is proportionate in  this  case.
             I do not find that the Appellants' appeals succeed outside the
             Immigration Rules."

 5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Gibb  who
    summarised the grounds as follows:

         "2.  The grounds, which were in time, complain that the judge erred
             in: (1) failing to assess  the  psychological  report  in  the
             round; (2) rejecting the impact of  removal  on  the  children
             without evidence; (3) making a  finding  as  to  the  children
             having  knowledge  of  Nigerian   customs   without   adequate
             reasoning and without evidence; (4) not noting  that  with  3C
             leave the appellants had had over 7  years  lawful  residence;
             and (5) not taking cost of treatment into account."

 6. Specifically in respect  of  the  children's  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the judge observed at [4] and [5] of his grant of permission:

         "4.  At [19] the judge concludes that the children had not been  in
             the UK for 7 years at the date of application, but  the  judge
             noted in the Article 8  proportionality  assessment  that  the
             children were all qualifying at the date  of  hearing  (all  4
             arrived in May 2011 and passed 7 years in May 2018).  In  view
             of Para 276ADE(iv) and the policy referred to at para 49 of MA
             (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (leave should be granted unless
             'powerful reasons to the contrary'), arguably  not  overturned
             by KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, it is arguable that the  judge
             erred  in  not  considering  whether  such  powerful   reasons
             existed, and in reaching the finding  at  the  start  of  [31]
             without noting the  Secretary  of  State's  own  policy  which
             accepts  that  qualifying  children  do  have  private   lives
             normally capable of outweighing the interests  of  immigration
             control.  The proportionality assessment should arguably  also
             have considered whether the children met  the  terms  of  Para
             276ADE(iv) as a starting point.

         5.   It is also arguable that the last sentence of [40] amounts  to
             a legal error in view of paras 16-17 of KO, which states  that
             the  reasonableness  question  has  to  be  addressed  without
             reference to the  conduct  of  the  parents.   Overall  it  is
             arguable that the judge erred in not considering the  children
             as a separate matter, thereby omitting  to  consider  the  key
             issue of whether the parents could succeed because of having 4
             qualifying children rather than starting with the parents  and
             then deciding the reasonableness  question  without  assessing
             the   private   life   interference   from   the    children's
             perspective."

 7. Before hearing submissions, I observed the parties that with respect to
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb, his observation that the  reference  in
    MA (Pakistan), 'powerful reasons to  the  contrary'  was  not  arguably
    overturned by the Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  was  not  correct.
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) was considered by Lord Carnwath at [16] to [19]
    as follows:

         "16. It is natural to  begin  with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed solely to
             the position of the child.  Unlike its predecessor  DP5/96  it
             contains  no  requirement  to  consider  the  criminality   or
             misconduct  of  a  parent  as  a  balancing  factor.   It   is
             impossible  in  my  view  to  read  it  as  importing  such  a
             requirement by implication.

         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
             of the rule without material change,  but  this  time  in  the
             context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would  infer
             that it was intended to have the same  effect.   The  question
             again is what is "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ  said
             in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  1  WLR  5093,  para  36,
             there is nothing in the subsection to import  a  reference  to
             the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets out a  number  of
             factors relating to those seeking leave to  enter  or  remain,
             but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B(6)  is  on
             its face free-standing, the only qualification being that  the
             person relying on it is not liable to deportation.   The  list
             of relevant factors set out  in  the  IDI  guidance  (para  10
             above) seems to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the
             context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected
             to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to
             be with them.  To that extent the record of  the  parents  may
             become indirectly material, if it leads to  their  ceasing  to
             have a right to remain here, and having to leave. It  is  only
             if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave that the provision may give the  parents  a
             right to remain.  The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd in
             SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

                  "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                      whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave
                      the UK one has to address the  question,  'Why  would
                      the child be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom?'
                      In a case such as this there can only be one  answer:
                      'because the parents have no right to remain  in  the
                      UK'.  To approach  the  question  in  any  other  way
                      strips away the context in which  the  assessment  of
                      reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
             considering the "best interests" of children in the context of
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

                  "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
                      interests of the children must be made on  the  basis
                      that the facts are as they are in the real world.  If
                      one parent has no right  to  remain,  but  the  other
                      parent does, that is the background against which the
                      assessment is conducted. If neither  parent  has  the
                      right to remain, then that is the background  against
                      which the assessment is conducted. Thus the  ultimate
                      question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
                      child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
                      the country of origin?"

             To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully  disagree.  There  is
             nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is  to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world  in  which  the
             children find themselves."

 8. To my mind it is clear that there  was  no  specific  approval  by  the
    Supreme Court of the approach considered by Elias LJ as cited  by  FTTJ
    Gibb.  The rule requires a test of reasonableness as that set out in KO
    (Nigeria).

 9. Mr Winter clarified at the outset of the hearing that the children were
    aged 3 (twins), 5 and 6 when they arrived with their  mother  in  2011.
    The first appellant's lawful leave came to an end on  18  August  2017.
    The children are thus now  aged  13,  11,  and  10  (the  twins).   The
    children have not visited Nigeria  since  their  arrival.   He  further
    clarified that the policy referred to by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb
    was not before the judge and he confirmed that the policy point was not
    raised as a  ground  of  challenge.   He  nevertheless  relied  on  the
    reference to policy in the grounds and  the  ability  of  the  granting
    judge to raise a point for consideration on appeal.

10. Mr Winter argued that  his  case  with  reference  to  ground  (i)  was
    essentially based on the judge having made findings in respect  of  the
    appellants before considering the psychological report by Dr  Alia  Ul-
    Hassan and Dr Ifaf Asghar, the former a Clinical Psychologist  and  the
    latter a Chartered Clinical Psychologist.   He accepted that the  judge
    had not erred in the reference  to  the  content  of  the  reports  but
    maintained his position that the judge had made findings "against"  the
    family remaining in the UK before  considering  the  report.   Had  the
    report been addressed first, this might have resulted  in  a  different
    view being taken  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  best  interests  were
    undermined  by  this  erroneous  approach  to  the  first  and   second
    appellants' concerns about return to Nigeria.

11. In relation to the other grounds of  challenge  (by  reference  to  the
    paragraph numbering in the grounds), Mr Winter  argued  in  respect  of
    ground (ii) that the judge had  erred  when  rejecting  the  impact  of
    removal on the children without contrary medical evidence  to  that  in
    the report.  As to ground (iii), which argues the inadequacy of reasons
    for the judge's disbelief that the first and second appellants had  not
    instilled Nigerian customs to their children, Mr Winter accepted all he
    was able to say with reference to the report was that children  had  no
    memory of Nigeria.

12. Ground (iv) was not pursued.  Ground (v) challenges the decision on the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its conclusion that the
    cost of treatment (for Type 1 Diabetes) was not something that could be
    taken  into  account.   In  this  regard  reliance  was  placed  on  AM
    (Zimbabwe) & Anor v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64 and  Paposhvili  v  Belgium
    (Application no. 41738/10).

13. In the course of Mr Winter's submissions, I invited him to reflect on a
    number of aspects of the judge's decision in order to  establish  those
    passages which he considered came within the scope  of  his  challenge.
    The detail of that exchange is set out below in my conclusions.

14. By way of response Mr Govan argued that in respect of ground  (i),  the
    judge had looked at the psychologist's  report  and  had  treated  that
    evidence in the round.  Consideration of  the  report  appears  in  the
    middle of the decision and it was clear that the judge was aware of the
    family circumstances.  All factors had been considered in a great  deal
    of detail.  As to ground (ii), the judge had referred to the children's
    high level of resilience.  Here too  there  was  a  careful  assessment
    without error.  As to ground (iii), this was  more  of  a  disagreement
    than an error - all the parties had lived in Nigeria.

15. By way of brief response, Mr  Winter  argued  that  the  tenor  of  the
    judge's decision did not appear to be consistent with the jurisprudence
    in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123  when  I  drew  to  his
    attention [32] where the judge did make reference to the  report  which
    she explained she would be considering later before  reaching  findings
    in relation to the children.  I  had  invited  Mr  Winter  to  consider
    whether that was indicative that the  judge  had  the  report  in  mind
    throughout her findings.

16. The guidance in AM (Afghanistan) relates to the approach  to  be  taken
    where an appellant by virtue of  age  or  other  vulnerability  may  be
    unable to participate effectively and fairly in the asylum process  and
    the appeal.  That issue does not arise in this case.  I can discern  no
    unfairness in the approach by the judge which  on  my  reading  of  her
    decision shows particular care was taken in the assessment  of  all  of
    the evidence.

17. As I have noted above, judge's starting point was paragraph 276ADE with
    particular reference to sub-paragraph (vi) by reference  to  the  first
    and second appellants.  There is no challenge to  the  judge's  correct
    direction as to the test  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  contained
    within that sub-paragraph.

18. The judge structured her decision by beginning with  the  circumstances
    of the first and second appellants and, between [15] and [17], set  out
    the various factors she took into account in reaching her conclusion at
    [18] that there would not be very significant obstacles  to  the  first
    and second appellants' integration into Nigeria.  The judge then turned
    her attention to the children and correctly explained at [19] why  they
    could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  as  none  had
    lived at the date of application continuously in the UK  for  at  least
    seven years and they were all under the age of 18.

19. The next step was her consideration of the  circumstances  of  all  the
    appellants under Article 8.  The judge correctly directed herself as to
    the approach to be taken, including  a  recital  of  the  Razgar  test.
    Correctly, she saw no need to repeat the factors which she had set  out
    previously regarding the ability of the first and second appellants  to
    reintegrate into Nigeria and thereafter looked at the circumstances  of
    the first and second appellants in the United  Kingdom,  in  particular
    the lives they had made and the  connections  established.   The  judge
    specifically addressed the circumstances of  the  first  appellant  who
    suffers from Type 1 Diabetes.   She  directed  herself  correctly  with
    regard to N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 as to the test to be applied  and  at
    this stage observed that access to treatment, funding and resources was
    not something she could take into account in  the  balancing  exercise.
    Ground (v) was relied on by Mr Winter although he did not  advance  any
    argument  based  on  the  reference  to  Paposhvili.   It  is   readily
    understandable why he did not do so since the Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
    (Malawi) & Anor v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  2482  made  it  clear  that  in
    respect of Article 3 medical cases the decision of the House  of  Lords
    in N v SSHD was "... clear  principled  and  binding  on  all  domestic
    courts and tribunals and endorsed by the ECtHR" (per Hickinbottom LJ at
    [7]).  In my judgment, the evidence  before  the  judge  justified  her
    conclusion that Article 8 was not engaged  in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant's medical concerns particularly in the light  of  a  positive
    conclusion as to the way in which he  would  be  able  to  re-establish
    himself in Nigeria and generate income.

20. At [27], the judge turned her attention to  the  circumstances  of  the
    children.  She records the circumstances of each and  includes  in  her
    survey  of  the  evidence  the  children's  own  attitude  towards  the
    prospects of return to Nigeria.  At [29] she explained:

         "29. I remind myself that all the children are  Nigerian  nationals
             and have always lived with  their  parents  who  are  Nigerian
             nationals.  I do not find that any of the children  could  not
             continue their education in Nigeria.  The oldest child is only
             in the second year of secondary  school.   Their  parents  are
             examples of what educational achievements they can  aspire  to
             in Nigeria.  I note that all the children have  moved  primary
             school at least on one occasion and have not had any  problems
             settling into a new school in a new environment and  make  new
             friends.  Whilst it may be said  that  moving  to  Nigeria  to
             continue education there may be  completely  different  and  I
             accept that it may take time for the children to  settle  they
             have the loving  support  of  two  parents  who  have  already
             experienced such an education system.  There is no reason  why
             their parents cannot guide and support their children settling
             them into a different education system.  The  first  Appellant
             has shown that the education system in Nigerian is a good  one
             because he has used it as the foundation  for  being  able  to
             come to the United Kingdom to study  for  his  PhD.   All  the
             children have good ambitions for what they want to achieve and
             there is no reason why they cannot study to obtain their goals
             in Nigeria."

21. After referring to the first appellant's evidence as to the  inadequacy
    of public schools in Nigeria the judge observed at [30]:

         "30. In his witness statement the first Appellant states that  most
             fairly good schools are privately owned and the public schools
             are inadequate in their standards.  In my view this  does  not
             mean to say that education is not available to the children on
             return.  As can be seen the first Appellant achieved his goals
             without having a father and by obtaining a  scholarship  which
             many people do in other parts of the world  including  in  the
             United Kingdom.  There is no reason why  the  children  cannot
             continue their education in the public school system and  once
             he and the second Appellant are established  and  if  they  so
             wish, they can send their children to private schools of their
             choice."

 1. The judge continued at [31] and [32]:

         "31. In my view the children are still young and have not formed  a
             private life of their own.  Their lives revolve  around  their
             parents and their school and the friends that they  have  made
             there.   The  fact  that  they  have  moved  schools  and   in
             accordance with Pauls witness statement he has  moved  primary
             school on three occasions as at the date of hearing.   I  fail
             to see why the children could not make new friends in Nigeria.
              They can use social media  to  maintain  contact  with  their
             friends in the  United  Kingdom  on  return.   They  can  also
             continue with their sports activities in Nigeria.

         32   I find it inconceivable how the first  and  second  Appellants
             would have me believe that  they  have  instilled  into  their
             children none of their culture and traditions from Nigeria  to
             give  them  a  basis  of  identity  considering  that  is  the
             environment from which they both originate from and where they
             lived for many years into adulthood.  I  do  not  accept  what
             they state.  I refer to  the  psychological  report  dated  10
             December 2018 prepared by Dr Asghar and Dr Ul-Hassan which  is
             lodged in the Appellants' bundle (which I will come to in  due
             course).  However the point I wish  to  make  is  the  summary
             assessment for Peter where it is stated that he  sees  himself
             as Scottish as well as Nigerian."

22. The psychological report was analysed by the judge at [33] to  [35]  as
    follows:

         "33. Turning to the said psychological report itself  I  note  that
             this report has only been prepared for this hearing  as  there
             is no evidence that either the first or second  Appellants  or
             their children  have  psychological  or  other  mental  health
             problems.   In  the  interview  with  the  first  and   second
             Appellants they speak about how well they feel supported by  a
             network of  friends  that  they  have  in  the  Aberdeen  area
             (although there is no documentary evidence  in  support  as  I
             have already referred to).  If the first and second Appellants
             can build up a network of friends then there is no reason  why
             they cannot do so on their return to Nigeria.  I do not accept
             that the first and second Appellants do not have friends  from
             their  school  and  university  days.   They  are  social  and
             outgoing individuals as can be seen.

         34.  According to the said psychological report, all  the  children
             are doing very well academically and  in  relation  to  sports
             within their schools.  Williams presents as a  happy  boy  and
             there are clear indicators of  successful  integration  across
             settings.  Maris  has  a  very  close  relationship  with  her
             parents and her siblings and enjoys spending time  with  them.
             She is also presented as a happy young girl who enjoys  school
             and spending time with her friends.  She finds her family  and
             her faith supportive.  Paul is described  as  well  integrated
             into school  despite  having  had  several  school  moves  and
             reports  been  capable  of  accessing   the   curriculum   and
             extracurricular  activities.   He  also  shows   evidence   of
             successful social integration given that he  is  well  settled
             within a friendship group both within school  and  within  the
             community.   Peter   is   also   described   as   successfully
             integrating  across  settings.   He  is  able  to  access  the
             curriculum including extracurricular  activities  and  achieve
             his potential academically.  He has  a  good  sense  of  self-
             esteem and is developing a positive sense of self and identity
             as someone who sees himself as Scottish as well  as  Nigerian.
             All four children show  many  signs  of  positive  and  strong
             integration  within  Scotland  and  that  they  speak  English
             fluently.  I have no reason  to  doubt  the  contents  of  the
             report in this regard.

         35.  As both parents were brought up in  Nigeria  speaking  English
             then there is no  reason  why  the  children  would  have  any
             difficulties in this regard as both parents do not  speak  any
             other of the Nigerian languages, although the second Appellant
             says she speaks a little Yoruba.  As the first Appellant  said
             in oral evidence English is the "lingua  franca"  of  Nigeria.
             The said psychological report states  that  the  children  are
             likely  to  face  significant  psychological   and   practical
             barriers to integrating in Nigeria and that they are likely to
             find the move very distressing and unwanted.  Whilst I  accept
             that the children may find the move distressing and  no  doubt
             unwanted and it will take time for them to  re-settle,  in  my
             view the children are bright, intelligent  and  well-adjusted.
             They are socially capable.  They are resilient and  more  than
             able to adapt to be able  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  their
             parents and continue their lives there."

23. Mr Winter acknowledged the accuracy of  the  judge's  record  of  these
    aspects of the report  but  maintained  as  I  have  noted  above,  his
    submission that the report should have been considered  first.   To  my
    mind I do not find any force in this submission.  This was not  a  case
    that turned on credibility in the sense that the report had been relied
    on to demonstrate a party had been telling the truth but not considered
    until after a conclusion had been reached.  Instead, the report was one
    part of the evidence which was clearly considered by the  judge  in  an
    overall assessment of the circumstances of the case.  I do not consider
    that she had erred in her approach based on  the  challenge  in  ground
    (i).  She had the benefit of the evidence from  the  first  and  second
    appellants and  furthermore  was  approaching  her  assessment  of  the
    factors after a direction as to the approach she was required  to  take
    in the Article 8 consideration.  It cannot be said that the report  was
    itself determinative of the Article 8 outcome.  The factors relating to
    schooling in Nigeria and the likelihood of support by the  parents  for
    the children that were addressed by the judge  at  [31]  and  [32]  and
    earlier at [29] were not specifically addressed  in  the  psychological
    report.  In any event the judge clearly gave careful  consideration  to
    the content of the report before reaching her final conclusion.  To  my
    mind she did not fall into error in  doing  so.   In  my  judgment  the
    findings by the judge were open to her on the evidence and she did  not
    err in law in her approach to the material before her.

24. I turn to the remaining grounds.  As to ground  (ii),  the  judge  took
    account of the medical conditions at [36] which  two  of  the  children
    suffered.  I do not consider that she was required to look for  medical
    evidence to support the findings reached.  These were  rationally  open
    to her and there was no evidence to the contrary to  suggest  that  the
    cosmetic knee surgery and the itchy condition could not be  treated  in
    Nigeria, as treatment in relation to the  first  appellant's  diabetes.
    All the concerns raised in the psychological report were satisfactorily
    considered by the judge and she gave reasons  rationally  open  to  her
    were given why the various points raised would not inhibit return as  a
    reasonable option.

25. As to ground (iii), in my judgment it was properly open to the judge to
    conclude (relevant to this specific ground) at [32]:

         "32. I find it inconceivable how the first  and  second  Appellants
             would have me believe that  they  have  instilled  into  their
             children none of their culture and traditions from Nigeria  to
             give  them  a  basis  of  identity  considering  that  is  the
             environment from which they both originate from and where they
             lived for many years into adulthood.  I  do  not  accept  what
             they state. ..."

26. This is essentially a matter of plausibility.  The finding was one open
    to the judge without further evidence.

27. Ground (iv):  This appears to have been based on a  misconception.   It
    was accepted at the hearing that the appellants had lawful leave  until
    18  August  2017.   It  was  not  until  23  February  2018  that   the
    applications were made leading to the decision  under  appeal.   It  is
    understandable why Mr Winter did not pursue this ground.

28. The final ground relating to the first  appellant's  medical  condition
    has been dealt with above.

29. By way of conclusion I am not persuaded that the judge  erred  in  this
    detailed well structured determination. She correctly directed  herself
    as to the law and made findings open to her on the evidence  all  which
    was correctly evaluated.

NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 3 June 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

