
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-cJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22935/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2019 (in person)        |On 14 September 2020                 |
|And at Field House                   |                                     |
|On 1 September 2020 via Skype        |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           Raz Mohammed JABAKAHEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss B Asanovic, (19/09/19) and
     Mr E Fripp (01/09/2020), both instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe promulgated on 9 May 2019.  That  decision
    was, for the reasons set out in a decision annexed  to  this  decision,
    set aside although the findings of fact were preserved  (see  paragraph
    [16] of that decision).

 2. The remaking of the  decision  was,  however,  delayed  pending  a  new
    Country Guidance  decision  on  Afghanistan  and  by  the  restrictions
    imposed by COVID.

Background to the appeal

 3. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2006 and was eventually granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    on 7 February 2011.  On 20 October 2017 he was sentenced to 32  months'
    imprisonment for supplying class A drugs, a conviction which caused the
    Secretary of State to deem his deportation as conducive to  the  public
    good in accordance with Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 4. As noted above, the appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  but,
    despite the sentencing of the appellant to a term  of  imprisonment  of
    over two years, at no stage was the issue of whether section 72 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or paragraph 339D  of  the
    Immigration Rules was applicable. For  that  reason,  I  directed  when
    giving my reasons for setting aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that this be addressed by the parties

The hearing

 5. The appellant did not attend the hearing remotely.  Mr Fripp  explained
    that the appellant been made aware that he could attend,  but  did  not
    make any  submission  that  the  hearing  be  postponed  to  await  the
    appellant's arrival or that it be adjourned. He  was  content  for  the
    hearing to proceed in the appellant's absence.

 6. In addition to the material which had been placed before the First-tier
    Tribunal, I have the following before me:-

      i) Additional bundle from the appellant  including  witness  statement
         and an expert report from a psychologist.

     ii) Skeleton argument from Mr Fripp.

The Appellant's Case

 7. The appellant's case is that he is at risk on return to Afghanistan  on
    account of his father's activities and involvement  with  Hezb-e-Islami
    and that he had been killed in fighting for the Northern Alliance.   He
    also claimed that he was entitled to humanitarian protection  and  that
    on the particular facts of this case internal relocation would  not  be
    appropriate.

 8. The argument as put forward by Mr  Fripp  is  that  the  appellant  has
    rebutted any presumption applicable under Section 72 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999; that paragraph 339D of the Immigration  Rules  did
    not apply to him for the same reasons, based on a proper interpretation
    of Article 17(1)(b) of the Qualification Directive.   It  is  submitted
    also that, given the acceptance that the appellant is  at  risk  of  an
    Article 15(1)(c) risk in his home area, that  the  remaining  issue  is
    whether it is reasonable to expect him to relocate  to  Kabul.   It  is
    further submitted that the appellant would be at risk in his home  area
    for a Convention reason given the extent to which he would be perceived
    as a westernised person, albeit that that might not  be  applicable  to
    the same extent in Kabul.  It is also submitted that it  would  not  be
    reasonable for him to relocate to Kabul given his lack  of  a  tazkera,
    his current mental ill health, lack of support and contacts  in  Kabul,
    his lack of relevant skills and a network there, the length of time  he
    has spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  age  at  which  he  left
    Afghanistan, mean that taken cumulatively it would not be reasonable to
    expect him to relocate there.

 9. It is also submitted that, if the appellant falls to be excluded  under
    paragraph 339D or that he is not pursuant to Section  72  of  the  1999
    Act, his removal would be in breach of Article 3 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

10. It is also submitted that his removal would be in breach of Article  8,
    there being very  compelling  circumstances  in  this  case  such  that
    deportation would not be proportionate.

Respondent's Case

11. The respondent did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  what  had
    happened to him in Afghanistan, nor his account of his return there  in
    2015. Although accepting that there was an article 15 (c) risk  in  his
    home province, Nangarhar, she concluded that the appellant  is  not  at
    risk in his home  area  for  a  Convention  reason  nor,  on  a  proper
    construction of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2020]  UKUT  130.
    and in consideration of the background evidence, could it be said  that
    it would be unreasonable to expect him to return there or go to Kabul.

12. The  respondent  also  argues  that   section  72  does  apply  to  the
    appellant, given that he has committed a particularly serious crime  as
    defined, presents a danger to the community; and, that he can  thus  be
    deported to Afghanistan,  irrespective  of  whether  or  not  he  is  a
    refugee. She submits also that he is, on account of his conviction  and
    the danger he presents, not entitled to humanitarian protection.

13. Attention is also drawn to the credibility  findings  which  have  been
    preserved and it is submitted  that  the  appellant's  account  of  not
    having a tazkera should not be believed and that in any event  this  is
    unlikely to pose significant difficulties for this appellant.

14. It is submitted that Article 3 would not be applicable in any event and
    that deportation would be proportionate.

15. As regards article 8, the respondent submitted that the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules;  nor  did  he  fall
    within the exceptions set out in section 117C  of  the  2002  Act.  She
    submits that the there are not very compelling circumstances such  that
    deportation is disproportionate.







    Re-making the Decision

16. I now turn to remaking the decision, addressing first  the  interlinked
    issues of section 72  and paragraph 339D before addressing the  factual
    issues which remain.

    Section 72 and Paragraph 339D

17. I am satisfied that the appellant is a person to whom Section 72(2)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies as he has been
    convicted of an offence and sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
    least two years.  That leads to  presumptions  (a)  that  he  has  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime and (b) that this constitutes
    a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.   Although  I  am  not
    required to deal with this first it does appear sensible to do so as it
    covers the rest of the decision.  With regards to the interpretation of
    Section 72, the Court of Appeal in EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    630 said this at [46] to [47]:

         "46. The Appellants submitted that Article 33(2) requires that  the
         danger  to  the  community  must  be  causally  connected  to   the
         particularly serious crime of which the person has been  convicted.
         I would accept that normally the danger is demonstrated by proof of
         the particularly serious offence and the risk of its recurrence, or
         of the recurrence of a similar offence. I would  also  accept  that
         the wording of Article 33(2) reflects that expectation. But it does
         not expressly require a causal connection, and I do not think  that
         one is to be implied. By way of example, I do not see why a  person
         who has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  offence  of
         violence and who the State can  establish  is  a  significant  drug
         dealer should not be liable to refouled under Article 33(2). In any
         event, it seems to me that a disregard for the law, demonstrated by
         the  conviction,  would  be  sufficient  to  establish   a   causal
         connection between the  conviction  and  the  danger.  If  so,  the
         suggested added requirement of a causal connection  has  little  if
         any practical consequence.

         47.  I would add that I have no  doubt  that  particularly  serious
         crimes are not restricted to offences against the  person.  Frauds,
         thefts and offences against property, for example, are  capable  of
         being  particularly  serious  crimes,   as   may   drug   offences,
         particularly those involving class A drugs.  In  addition,  matters
         such as frequent  repetition  or  a  sophisticated  system  or  the
         participation  of  a  number  of  offenders   may   aggravate   the
         seriousness of an offence. It is also of  note  that  at  [62]  the
         Secretary of State accepted that the  relevant  provisions  of  the
         Qualification Directive are directly effective."

18. The court said this at [66] and at [80]:

         "66. I see no reason why a rebuttable presumption, imposed for  the
         purposes of a decision as to whether removal would be in breach  of
         Article 33(1), should be incompatible with  Article  33(2)  of  the
         Convention, at least  in  cases  in  which  it  may  reasonably  be
         inferred that a conviction gives rise to  a  reasonable  likelihood
         that a person's conviction is of a particularly serious  crime  and
         that he constitutes a danger to the community. The Convention  does
         not prescribe the procedure by which  the  conditions  required  by
         Article 33(2)  are  to  be  established;  and  the  creation  of  a
         rebuttable presumption is a matter  of  procedure  rather  than  of
         substance. I accept that the Convention places an onus on the State
         of refuge. Under section 72, it is for the Secretary  of  State  to
         establish that the person in  question  has  been  convicted  of  a
         relevant offence. In practice, once the State has established  that
         a person has been convicted  of  what  is  on  the  face  of  it  a
         particularly serious crime, it will be for him to show either  that
         it was not in fact  particularly  serious,  because  of  mitigating
         factors associated with its commission, or that because there is no
         danger of its repetition he does not constitute  a  danger  to  the
         community.

         ...

         80.  I conclude that section 72 can be and  is  to  be  interpreted
         conformably with Article 14(4) of the Directive, and  therefore  as
         creating  rebuttable  presumptions  in  relation  to  both  of  the
         relevant requirements of Article 33(2), i.e.  in  relation  to  the
         seriousness  of  the  crime  and  in  relation  to  danger  to  the
         community, and I would reject the Secretary of  State's  submission
         to the contrary. Parenthetically, it is interesting  to  note  that
         this result is consistent with the Explanatory Notes to  the  Bill,
         which stated at paragraph 198 in relation to section 72:

             A person may rebut the presumption that they have committed  a
             particularly serious crime and are a danger to the community.

         We were told that this was an  error,  corrected  by  the  Minister
         during the course of the Parliamentary proceedings on the Bill"

19. Paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:

         '339D. A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection
         for the purposes of paragraph 339C  (iv)  where  the  Secretary  of
         State is satisfied that:

         (i)  there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they  have
         committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,  a  crime  against
         humanity, or any other serious crime  or  instigated  or  otherwise
         participated in such crimes;

         (ii) there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they  have
         guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the
         United Nations or have committed, prepared or instigated such  acts
         or encouraged or induced others to  commit,  prepare  or  instigate
         such acts;

         (iii)    there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they
         constitute a danger to the community or  to  the  security  of  the
         United Kingdom; or

         (iv) there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they  have
         committed a serious crime; or

         (v)  prior to their admission to  the  United  Kingdom  the  person
         committed a crime outside the scope of (i) and (iv) that  would  be
         punishable by imprisonment were it committed in the United  Kingdom
         and the person left their country of  origin  solely  in  order  to
         avoid sanctions resulting from the crime.'

20. The respondent's policy on the issue regarding paragraph 339D  provides
    as follows:-

         'Serious crimes

         This must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the policy  on
         Exclusion under Article 1F and 33(2) of the Refugee Convention, see
         section 'particularly serious  crime'.  A  serious  crime  for  the
         purpose of exclusion from HP was previously interpreted to mean one
         for which a custodial  sentence  of  at  least  12months  had  been
         imposed in the UK, but it is now accepted that a 12 month  sentence
         (or more) should not alone determine the seriousness of the offence
         for exclusion purposes. In AH (Algeria) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 395, Lord  Justice  Ward  noted
         that the sentence is a material factor but not a benchmark.

         in deciding whether a crime is serious enough to  justify  loss  of
         protection, the tribunal must  take  all  facts  and  matters  into
         account, with regard to the nature of the crime, the part played by
         the accused  in  its  commission,  any  mitigating  or  aggravating
         features and the eventual penalty imposed.  Therefore,  caseworkers
         must consider the sentence together with the nature of  the  crime,
         the actual harm inflicted  and  whether  most  jurisdictions  would
         consider the offence a serious crime. Examples  of  serious  crimes
         include, but are not limited to, murder,  rape,  arson,  and  armed
         robbery. Other offences which might  be  regarded  as  serious  can
         include those which are accompanied by the use of  deadly  weapons,
         involve serious injury to persons,  or  if  there  is  evidence  of
         serious  habitual  criminal  conduct.  Other  crimes,  though   not
         accompanied by violence, such as large-scale  fraud,  may  also  be
         regarded as serious for the purposes of exclusion.

         Danger to security or the community

         Where a person has been convicted of a criminal offence, the  court
         may  have  considered  whether  they  represent  a  danger  to  the
         community or the security of the UK as part of the  sentencing.  In
         addition, depending on the facts of the case, an individual who has
         not been convicted may also be excluded from  HP.  People  who  may
         represent a danger to the community or to the security  of  the  UK
         can include:

           . those included on the Sex Offenders Register (this would apply
             to those convicted of an offence after 1997)

           . those whose presence in the UK is not conducive to the  public
             good, for example, on national  security  grounds  or  due  to
             their character, conduct or associations

           . those who engage in one or more unacceptable behaviours in the
             UK or abroad, see section on extremism'

    It is of note that  in  this  case  although  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of a crime for which he was sentenced to two years and  eight
    months, the respondent did not invoke Section 72 in the refusal  letter
    or indeed paragraph 339D but equally these issues to do not  appear  to
    have been live at the time.  Asylum and humanitarian  protection  were,
    however, raised in the grounds of appeal.

21. With regard to paragraph 339D and the Qualification  Directive,  it  is
    about the apparent difference between the Directive and  the  cessation
    clause and Article 1F and for that matter Article 33(2) of the  Refugee
    Convention the decision of the  ECJ  in  Ahmed  [2018]  EUECJ  C-369/17
    indicates that they are to be read in the same way.  Although Ahmed  is
    to an extent based on the recitals set out in the  2011  Directive,  it
    has not been submitted to me, nor would I consider that there are,  any
    material  differences  between  the  recitals  in   the   Qualification
    Directive of 2004 and the re-cast Directive of 2011.

22. In her decision Judge O'Keeffe said this:-

         "53. The appellant was sentenced to a term of imprisonment  of  two
             years and eight months for supplying class A drugs.  The judge
             described his role as significant.  The  appellant's  sentence
             was reduced because of his early  guilty  plea.   In  evidence
             before me the appellant sought to downplay the seriousness  of
             his offending behaviour by suggesting that he had been coerced
             into committing offences by being  threatened  at  knifepoint.
             The appellant said that he had raised this at his trial.   His
             explanation for that was that he had  explained  this  to  his
             solicitor and if his solicitor had not  told  the  judge  then
             that was not his fault.  That assertion is undermined  by  the
             fact that the appellant pleaded guilty to the offences.

         54.  The record shows that the appellant was given credit  for  his
             early guilty plea.  The OASys assessment does not  record  the
             appellant saying that he acted because of threats.   His  case
             now that he was acting under duress is in my judgment  nothing
             more than an attempt to disassociate himself from his  serious
             offending behaviour.  His failure to acknowledge and now  take
             responsibility for the gravity of his  offending  does  colour
             the risk of him reoffending as it means that there is  a  risk
             he will be unable to identify and respond to the triggers  for
             his offending behaviour.  I take into account that this is the
             appellant's only conviction and that he has been assessed as a
             low risk of reoffending.  He has taken opportunities in prison
             to undertake courses to assist him with rehabilitation."

23. The judge considered that the respondent was right to draw attention to
    the adverse impact that drug dealing has upon the wider community.  The
    appellant was dealing in  the  most  serious  class  A  drugs  and  his
    sentence reflects that.  The judge did not, however, make any  findings
    as to whether this was a particularly  serious  crime  or  whether  the
    appellant continues to present a danger to the  community;  in  neither
    case did she consider whether the presumptions had been rebutted.

24. I accept that there is no evidence  of  the  appellant  committing  any
    further crime since the offences of which he was convicted in September
    2017.  The OASys Report is now of some vintage and it is of  note  that
    the appellant was assessed as being of low risk of reoffending  and  of
    danger to the community.  Those are points in his favour.

25. I have considered also the report of  Ms  Sarah  Beddows,  a  chartered
    clinical psychologist.  I  am  satisfied  that  she  has  the  relevant
    experience and credentials to be an expert psychologist particularly in
    the area of forensic psychology and I note that she has for some  years
    now worked at Rampton Secure Hospital.  With regard to  the  assessment
    of the risk the appellant presents, it is of note  that  she  did  have
    sight of Judge O'Keeffe's decision.  It is of note that  when  reciting
    the appellant's forensic history at paragraph [3.2.3] Ms  Beddows  also
    refers to the appellant explaining that he had been threatened by "some
    people" with a knife to "make me sell drugs".  She also notes that:-

         "3.2.4   It is noted that  in  his  interview  with  Probation,  he
         remained non-committal about  his  role  in  the  offences  despite
         entering a guilty plea.  He did not deny drug  dealing  however  he
         stated he was forced to do it and was threatened with a knife.   He
         reported that as he was scared for his life, he did  not  tell  the
         police, even though on reflection he knows he should have done."

26. At [3.2.7], Ms Beddows notes with concern the appellant's inability  to
    share more details about the individuals with whom he was involved when
    committing the offence and she notes that in the OASys statement it  is
    said that "he felt pressured into being involved with  the  offence  by
    his  friends  in  Swindon,  he  was  clearly  influenced  by   criminal
    associates.  He mentioned a number of time he would not want to go back
    to Swindon when he is released because he feels that his  friends  from
    Swindon would coerce him into - reoffending -  they  would  "bully  him
    into doing it".  This  shows  that  he  has  some  intention  to  avoid
    criminogenic peers that could encourage him to reoffend.

27. To that  extent  less  weight  can  be  attached  to  Judge  O'Keeffe's
    observation about the appellant changing his mind.

28. At section 4 of her  report  Ms  Beddows  deals  with  the  appellant's
    offending risk noting that the risk would be reduced in the event  that
    he maintains absence from drugs, maintains  distance  from  other  drug
    users and negative peer associations and remains in  stable  employment
    and accommodation.  As regards the assessment of protective factors  at
    section 5 it is noted that he is in paid employment  [5.2.1],  that  he
    does not use alcohol  and  has  abstained  from  drug  use  since  2017
    [5.1.2]; it is  also  noted  [5.3.1]  that  was  an  enhanced  prisoner
    indicating compliance.

29. I am satisfied that the appellant's offending was, given  that  he  was
    dealing in class A drugs, a particularly serious crime.   It  was  done
    for gain, albeit seeing that his reasons for doing so appear  motivated
    by peer pressure.  The reference to being threatened by a knife appears
    to be an exaggeration but otherwise there was a consistent  pattern  of
    peer pressure from antisocial  individuals  and  it  appears  from  the
    sentencing remarks that this was not a one-off offence.  It was part of
    an organised drug dealing operation.  To that end, I conclude that  the
    presumption that this was a particularly serious  crime  has  not  been
    rebutted.  I am, however, persuaded in light of the  OASys  Report  and
    the detailed report of Ms Beddows that the appellant no longer presents
    a danger to the public in that his offending is unlikely to recur.

    The Tazkera

30. Whether or not the appellant now has a tazkera is relevant in the light
    of AS (Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130 at paragraphs [237] to [240].

31. In the appellant's most recent witness statement he states at [2]  that
    he has never been issued with any Afghan identity documents  before  he
    came to the United Kingdom but he does accept that he later obtained an
    Afghan passport from the Afghan Embassy in  London  and  used  this  to
    travel back to Afghanistan in 2015.  He no longer has the passport.

32. In his screening interview the appellant is recorded as having said  in
    response to Q7.37 "Afg. ID card issued in Thesarak (provincial  office)
    six to seven months ago".

33. This is in direct contradiction with what the appellant now  says.   It
    is also recorded in the appellant's initial  self-completion  statement
    at [30] that he was not aware of the documents he used in  his  journey
    to the United Kingdom.  That in my view makes sense given  his  age  at
    the time.

34. It is evident from AS (Afghanistan) that what is in  issue  is  whether
    somebody has a tazkera in their possession otherwise it  would  not  be
    necessary for them to travel to a home area to obtain a new  one.   The
    appellant did not  attend  to  give  evidence  or  adopt  this  witness
    statement and it is difficult to attach much weight  to  it.   I  could
    accept that given the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2006
    that any documents he had with him had been lost over the  years.   The
    statement provides no rational explanation as to why it would have been
    recorded that a card had been issued he had not said so.  Further,  the
    appellant in his most recent statement at paragraphs [4] and [5]  seeks
    to change his account of his journey to  add  in  details  which,  with
    respect, add little although appear to fit with the narrative described
    in the UNHCR document entitled "Trees only move in the wind: A study of
    unaccompanied Afghan children in Europe" published in  2010  which  has
    been admitted in evidence.  Mr Fripp did  not  seek  to  rely  on  that
    document and there is little value in  the  appellant  seeking  now  to
    explain, having discussed with other people, the  route  he  must  have
    taken and the countries he must have passed through at a young  age  to
    reach the United Kingdom.  The  new  witness  statement  does  not,  in
    reality, clarify matters.

35. In assessing whether the appellant has a tazkera or not, I bear in mind
    the negative findings reached by Judge O'Keeffe which are preserved.  I
    bear in mind the dangers of disbelieving a  piece  of  evidence  merely
    because an appellant has not told the truth in other places but bearing
    in mind the length of time that has passed since the appellant  arrived
    in the United Kingdom, his irregular arrival in this  country  and  the
    somewhat chaotic nature of his life since his arrival, passing  through
    foster care and subsequently  being  imprisoned,  I  consider  it  more
    likely than not that he did not  have  in  his  possession  a  tazkera.
    There is no evidence it would be necessary to obtain an Afghan passport
    and  so,  despite  the  misgivings  I  have   about   the   appellant's
    credibility, I do accept that  he  would  be  returned  to  Afghanistan
    without a tazkera as he no longer has one. I do  not,  however,  accept
    that he was never issued with one, and as indicated in AS (Afghanistan)
    to obtain one, he would need to travel to his home area.

    Family Connections

36. The appellant's account of connections with his family was  disbelieved
    by Judge O'Keeffe.  She noted [42] that the assertion the appellant had
    gone back to Afghanistan to look for his mother was  inconsistent  with
    his account given in his asylum interview in 2008 and  also  [43]  with
    the information provided to the probation officer compiling  the  OASys
    Report.  She also found [44] of his account of how  he  spent  time  in
    Afghanistan was inconsistent, concluding at [46]:

         "On the evidence before me considered as a whole and  applying  the
         lower standard of proof applicable, I find that  I  have  not  been
         given a credible account of the appellant's family circumstances in
         Afghanistan.  I find that I have not been given a credible  account
         of the appellant's journey to Afghanistan in 2015 and  the  reasons
         for it.  I  find  the  appellant  was  able  to  travel  safely  to
         Afghanistan in 2015 and to remain there for a substantial period of
         time".

37. The judge also found [47] there was no reason why the  appellant  could
    not be supported financially by his family in the UK and no reason  why
    he could not look to friends for support on  return.   She  also  found
    [48] "I find that I have not been presented with an accurate picture of
    the level of support available to him in  Afghanistan.   The  appellant
    has not demonstrated that he would not have access to accommodation and
    financial support in Kabul".

38. There is nothing material in the new evidence which would, even  had  I
    not upheld these findings, have led me to a different conclusion.

    The Appellant's Mental Health

39. I accept from the evidence provided to me that  the  appellant  suffers
    from a moderate to severe depression.   That  is  consistent  with  him
    being prescribed Sertraline.  Ms Beddows does not set out  much  detail
    of what  she  thinks  would  happen  to  the  appellant  on  return  to
    Afghanistan which given her expertise is understandable.  She says that
    it may be retraumatising for him [6.0.8] given the loss  of  supportive
    relationships but she did not accept that he suffers  from  PTSD.   She
    notes also that although he had suicidal ideation in the  past,  noting
    [6.2.22] that his current  mental  health  functioning  could  indicate
    future problems given his current depressive mood.  There is,  however,
    insufficient evidence to show that he is at risk of committing  suicide
    on return, albeit that there is a possibility that he  might  self-harm
    in some way.  It is of note also that Ms Beddows said at  [8.0.5]  that
    "Mr Jabakahel's current mental  health  difficulties  (depressed  mood,
    anxieties) are assessed as being moderate  in  nature  and  should  not
    significantly affect his ability to provide a  credible,  complete  and
    consistent testimony".  She said also at [8.0.7]:

         "Mr Jabakahel has expressed how he would  cope  with  the  possible
         impact of the threat of removal/actual removal.  He has indicated a
         likely increase in the presence of suicidal ideations, most  likely
         related to the hopelessness he would experience and separation from
         sources of emotional support.  Mr Jabakahel is  at  increased  risk
         for suicide given his past suicide attempt. ... Mr Jabakahel is not
         assessed as being at imminent risk of suicide but close  monitoring
         is  advisable  following  any  adverse  outcome  to   the   current
         proceedings when his suicide risk could increase as a result  of  a
         rise in feelings of hopelessness".

40. There is here insufficient evidence to show any risk  of  him  reaching
    the threshold set out in J v SSHD.

41. The findings of Ms Beddows are predicated on a lack of family or  other
    support for the appellant on return to Afghanistan but it is  difficult
    in light of Judge O'Keeffe's findings to discern  what  family  support
    would be available for the appellant on return to Afghanistan either in
    his home area or elsewhere.  What is certain is that he returned  there
    in 2015 and stayed for some time.  It is reasonable  to  suppose  given
    the explanation of trying to find out whether his mother was  alive  or
    not was discounted, it in turn cast doubt on his entire account why  he
    went there in the first place.

42. Having made these findings of fact, I must consider whether in light of
    the  facts  as  identified  in  AS  (Afghanistan),  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated a well-founded fear of persecution or that he is  entitled
    to humanitarian protection before going on to consider the Human Rights
    Convention.

    Risk in the Home Area

43. Mr Fripp submits on behalf of the appellant that he is at risk of  ill-
    treatment of sufficient severity to engage the  Refugee  Convention  on
    account of being perceived as westernised, that  risk  being  over  and
    above the accepted risk  such  that  Article  15(c)  is  engaged.   The
    primary basis on which this is advanced is that the appellant  will  be
    seen as "Westernised".

44.  An  amount  of  material  on  this  issue  is  set  out  in  the  CPIN
    "Afghanistan: Afghans perceived as  'Westernised'",  of  January  2018.
    Contrasting views emanating from a report by EASO are cited at  [5.1.1]
    to [5.2.3].  It is evident that what is acceptable in terms of  learned
    behaviour in Kabul is different from that in  rural  areas.   It  would
    appear that what is accepted or at best tolerated in Kabul  in  certain
    circles would not be tolerated in home  areas.   The  extent  to  which
    there would be any sanctions for perceived western behaviour in a rural
    area is more difficult to assess.  At [5.2.3] Ali Latifi is  quoted  as
    saying that those who do not adhere to local customs can "play  it  off
    as being urbanised" as the reason they do not know  the  local  custom.
    Dr Schuster quoted at [5.2.1] remarks that a person in Afghanistan must
    be constantly conscious about one's actions, body language and how  and
    what one is saying and how one is perceived.  Someone  who  comes  back
    from Europe and does not know the unspoken  rules,  forgets,  errs,  or
    makes  mistakes,  could  be  perceived  to   be   "cheeky",   rude   or
    disrespectful.   Equally,  at  [5.1.2]  Dr  Schuster  opined  that  the
    development of a critical stance on Islam whilst in the  West  is  what
    puts people at most risk.  And that it will all turn  on  the  specific
    location where a person is returning to, the nature  and  attitudes  of
    their immediate community and family in assessing  whether  the  person
    would encounter problems.

45. It is in this case difficult to  assess  how  the  appellant  would  be
    received on return to his home area in Nangarhar, it being unclear what
    family he has there.  It is also not entirely clear the extent to which
    he has become "westernised" in his habits  but  I  do  note  that,  for
    example, he does not drink.  There is nothing to suggest that he has  a
    critical stance towards Islam but equally he left the  country  at  the
    age of 14 and whilst he  has  contact  with  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has associated with Afghan people, it does not follow  that
    he has any idea about how to behave in Nangarhar as an adult.  Equally,
    that province is one in which owing to the presence of the Taliban  and
    also the self-styled Islamic state, it is reasonable to  expect  people
    to be more circumspect and to avoid trouble, people self-censure  to  a
    significant  degree  and  adherence  to  more  conservative  norms  are
    expected, given the evidence  that  rumours  of  perceived  non-Islamic
    behaviour being passed on to the Taliban and others.

46. I have, as I indicated I would during the hearing, looked at  the  EASO
    Report that the CPIN is based on  in  more  detail.   The  report  does
    indicate at section  8  the  documented  instances  of  the  individual
    targeting of returning Afghans is scarce and also those who return from
    the West indicate a sense of bleak  desperation  for  future  prospects
    [8.3].  As regards attitudes towards those in receiving communities, at
    [8.6] it said that most Afghans return to Kabul due to  the  relatively
    better opportunities there.  Equally, at [8.7] some sources state  that
    deportees and returnees are seen with suspicion and that local mistrust
    and community gossip generate a fear of  problems.   Rumours  may  also
    circulate, it being usual for when a young man returns, to  family  and
    relatives will welcome him and everyone from their neighbourhood,  that
    is the men, who want to see how he has changed.  Ali Latifi who takes a
    more relaxed view said that in rural areas if a person does not try  to
    adhere to local customs and standards, that person will stand out  even
    more.

47. At section 8.8 Dr Schuster is reported as indicating that  those  youth
    who grow up in Europe learn different habits and behaviours and are not
    familiar with where it is safe and who can be trusted.

48. In the context of Nangarhar where it  is  accepted  that  there  is  an
    Article 15(c) risk, I accept that there may well be a greater  risk  to
    those like the appellant who have returned from the West are unfamiliar
    with the customs that this may put them at greater risk from insurgents
    such as the Taliban and/or Islamic State.  There is a fine line  to  be
    drawn between the enhanced risk to certain groups to be  considered  in
    an Article 15(c) case and persecution but I am satisfied that there  is
    a real risk given the circumstances in Nangarhar  where  there  is  for
    everybody an Article 15(c) risk  that  the  enhanced  risk  from  being
    perceived as Westernised would, in some cases,  put  an  individual  at
    risk of persecution for that reason.

49. While the term used in the report is "Westernised", I conclude that  in
    many, if not all cases, this is shorthand for  ceasing  to  follow  the
    expected norms of Islam.  I  accept  that  there  is  a  risk  of  this
    applicant, given the length of time he has  spent  outside  Afghanistan
    and given the likelihood of it becoming known that he had been deported
    from the United Kingdom for drugs offences, that this may  put  him  at
    risk of ill-treatment sufficient to amount to  persecution.   At  least
    one element of the reason for that  would  be  his  perceived  attitude
    towards Islam and thus, on a narrow basis, I am satisfied that he is at
    risk in his home area of persecution for a Convention reason.

    Internal Relocation

50. As both parties are agreed, the core  issue  is  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to  Kabul,  I  have  had
    regard to AS (Afghanistan) which, so far as is relevant to  the  issues
    in its headnote provides as follows:-

         "Reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul

         (iii)    Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation
         in Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by the population living
         there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other  returnees,
         which are not dissimilar to the conditions  faced  throughout  many
         other  parts  of  Afghanistan)  it  will  not,   in   general,   be
         unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health
         to relocate to  Kabul  even  if  he  does  not  have  any  specific
         connections or support network in Kabul and even  if  he  does  not
         have a Tazkera.

         (iv)  However,  the  particular  circumstances  of  an   individual
         applicant must be taken into account in the context  of  conditions
         in the place of relocation, including a person's  age,  nature  and
         quality  of  support  network/connections  with  Kabul/Afghanistan,
         their physical and mental health, and their language, education and
         vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
         the general position set out above. Given the limited  options  for
         employment, capability to undertake manual work may be relevant.

         (v)  A person with a support network  or  specific  connections  in
         Kabul is likely to be in a more advantageous  position  on  return,
         which may counter a particular vulnerability of  an  individual  on
         return. A person without a network  may  be  able  to  develop  one
         following return. A person's  familiarity  with  the  cultural  and
         societal norms of Afghanistan (which may be affected by the age  at
         which he left the country  and  his  length  of  absence)  will  be
         relevant to whether, and if so how  quickly  and  successfully,  he
         will be able to build a network.

         Previous Country Guidance

         (vi) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
         [2012]  UKUT  163  (IAC)  in  relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.

         (vii)    The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG
         [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in  relation  to  the  (un)reasonableness  of
         internal  relocation  to  Kabul  (and  other  potential  places  of
         internal  relocation)  for  certain  categories  of  women  remains
         unaffected by this decision.

         (viii)    The  country  guidance  in   AA   (unattended   children)
         Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) also remains unaffected by this
         decision."

51. In assessing the appellant's return, I bear in mind that he  will  have
    some financial support in the form of grant on  return  and  that  this
    would assist  him  so  that  he  would  be  able  to  find  inexpensive
    accommodation in a "chai khana"[tea house] and be able to work as a day
    labourer.  I accept that the appellant does speak English and I  accept
    the submission that this would not assist him in getting work as a  day
    labourer and that he has no other employable  skills  gained  from  the
    United Kingdom.  I accept that speaking English is unlikely  to  be  of
    assistance in such a  job.   I  accept  also  that  the  appellant  has
    moderate depression and this may make it difficult for  him  to  return
    but I am not satisfied on the basis of the material before me that this
    would prevent him from getting work as a day labourer or  some  similar
    work and I accept that he does not have a tazkera.  There is, I accept,
    only one mental hospital in Kabul but there is no indication  that  the
    appellant requires in-patient treatment or anything  more  than  he  is
    currently receiving.

52. The difficulty in this situation in assessing the appellant's  position
    is that neither I nor Judge O'Keeffe have  been  satisfied  as  to  the
    appellant's account as to what family he has in  Afghanistan  and  what
    support he has there.  He has not given  an  accurate  account  of  his
    family and he has not given an  accurate  account  of  the  reasons  he
    travelled  to  Afghanistan  in  2015.   It  is  in  the   circumstances
    reasonable to infer that he has some contacts within Afghanistan.

53. Viewing the evidence as a whole and taking into  account  the  negative
    credibility findings made by Judge O'Keeffe, in  reality  there  is  no
    reliable evidence as to what support from family or other networks  the
    appellant has either in Kabul or his home area.  It  is,  in  my  view,
    important to bear in mind that the appellant was found not to have told
    the truth about a significant aspect of his case, that is, what he  was
    doing in Afghanistan in 2015 and also about  what  family  continue  to
    live there as that goes to the core of what  resources  he  could  draw
    upon on return.  Similarly, he has put forward,  without  attending  to
    give evidence and without giving any explanation  an  account  of  what
    happened in an  interview  which  is  equally  unreliable  and  appears
    directed to avoid the fact that he may or may not have a tazkera.

54. It is for the appellant to prove his case, albeit to a  lower  standard
    but in the circumstances, I cannot be satisfied that the appellant does
    not have access to a network of support and family in  Afghanistan.,  I
    have only his word for it that the links which existed in the past  are
    no longer there or available to him and I note the  preserved  findings
    that he will get support from family and friends in the United Kingdom.
     In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that  any  difficulties  that
    may arise from his mental ill health would not be solved by support  he
    may receive from the United Kingdom or support that may exist  for  him
    in Afghanistan.  Accordingly, I am  not  satisfied  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to relocate to Kabul.

55. Having made that finding of fact, it follows that he is not entitled to
    recognition as a refugee.  Similarly, I find that he is not entitled to
    humanitarian protection as it would be  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to Kabul where there is not, as was noted in AS (Afghanistan),
    an Article 15(c) risk.

56. Turning next to the Human Rights Convention, I find that returning  the
    appellant to Afghanistan would not, for the same reasons, amount  to  a
    breach of Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention, Mr Fripp  accepting
    in submissions that this issue would arise only if I were to find  that
    the  appellant  were  excluded  from  protection  under   the   Refugee
    Convention or from humanitarian protection.  It is not  suggested  that
    the threat of suicide or his mental ill health is of  such  seriousness
    to engage article 3.

57. I turn finally to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

58. The first hurdle that Mr Fripp faces is that Judge O'Keeffe's  findings
    with regard to Article 8 were not challenged in the appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  Further, the findings of fact made by  Judge  O'Keeffe  were
    preserved, the sole issue of which the appeal was to be re-made was the
    application  of  AS  (Afghanistan).  Accordingly,  despite  Mr  Fripp's
    submissions, I am not satisfied that this is an issue before me.   That
    said, and out of an abundance of caution, I have considered it  in  the
    alternative.

59.  It is not in dispute that the appellant does not meet the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules or the exceptions set out in Section  117C  of
    the Immigration Rules.

60. Mr Fripp submits that the appellant comes close to the requirements set
    out in paragraph 399A and that this  is  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account in assessing whether there are very compelling circumstances.

61. Although I would have accepted that the appellant has  some  degree  of
    cultural and social integration into the United  Kingdom,  he  has  not
    spent over half of his life here.   Further,  I  would  not  have  been
    satisfied  in  light  of  the  findings  above  that  there  would   be
    significant obstacles to his integration into Afghanistan.  In reaching
    that conclusion I do note Mr Fripp's submissions that the test  is  not
    the same as undue harshness.  I bear in mind that the appellant  speaks
    Pushtu and will be able to find employment.  Although he  suffers  from
    some degree of mental ill health, this is not severe  and  viewing  the
    evidence as a whole,  in  light  of  Kamara,  I  would  not  have  been
    satisfied that the test is met.

62. There are, in this case, few compelling circumstances.   The  appellant
    was convicted of a serious offence for which he was  sentenced  to  two
    years and eight months.

63. I accept that the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  since  the
    age of 14 but he has no family  life  here  and  his  private  life  is
    relatively limited.  He does, I  accept,  have  employment  and  has  a
    network of friends and has some family here, but he  is  a  single  man
    with a criminal conviction who does not have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Afghanistan.  Accordingly, even were this in issue, I am
    not satisfied that there are very compelling  circumstances  such  that
    his deportation is disproportionate.

64. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Notice of Decision

65. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.  I re-make  the  appeal  by  dismissing  the
    appeal on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 September 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-cJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22935/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           Raz Mohammed JABAKAHEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss B Asanovic, instructed by Duncan Lewis,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe promulgated on 9 May 2019.

 2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2006 and was eventually granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    on 7 February 2011.  On 20 October 2017 he was sentenced to 32  months'
    imprisonment for supplying class A drugs, a conviction which caused the
    Secretary of State to deem his deportation as conducive to  the  public
    good in accordance with Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 3. The appellant's case is that he is at risk on return to Afghanistan  on
    account of his father's activities and involvement  with  Hezb-e-Islami
    and that he had been killed in fighting for the Northern Alliance.   He
    also claimed that he was entitled to humanitarian protection  and  that
    on the particular facts of this case internal relocation would  not  be
    appropriate.

 4. In addition, it is also the appellant's case that his removal would  be
    in breach of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 5. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was at risk of
    persecution on return to Afghanistan or that his  removal  would  be  a
    breach of article 8.

 6. The judge found at [31] that the appellant was not a  refugee  and  had
    not shown a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis that  he  had
    not given a credible account  of  the  events  which  precipitated  his
    departure from Afghanistan [30]  nor,  even  taking  his  case  at  its
    highest,  had  he  demonstrated  that  he  is  currently  at  risk   of
    persecution  either  from  the  authorities  or  any  other  actors  of
    persecution on return.

 7.  The  judge  went  on  next  to  consider  the  appellant's  claim   to
    humanitarian protection accepting that internal relocation to Nangarhar
    province would not be appropriate.

 8. The judge then noted that AS (Afghanistan) is a country  guidance  case
    and should be followed unless there is a good reason to depart from  it
    [33].  He then went on to consider the UNCHR eligibility guidelines for
    assessing the internal protection needs of asylum seekers issued on  30
    August 2018.

 9. Turning to the appellant's  particular  circumstances  [36]  the  judge
    accepted that the appellant had not worked in Afghanistan but had  some
    work experience in the United Kingdom and found  that  his  ability  to
    speak English may assist him in finding work in Afghanistan.  She found
    the evidence about his  family  to  be  inconsistent  noting  that  the
    evidence of whether he  had  left  Afghanistan  with  his  brother  was
    inconsistent [38] and that his account of travelling to Afghanistan  in
    2015 to try to find his mother [39] was inconsistent with his statement
    of the probation officer compiling the OASys Assessment that his mother
    had been killed when she tried to escape with him [43].

10. The judge did not find  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  aunt  [his
    mother's sister] to be reliable.  The judge also found the  appellant's
    account of how he spent time in Afghanistan in  2015  was  inconsistent
    [44] concluding that  the  appellant's  account  of  his  journey  into
    Afghanistan in 2015 and the reasons for it were  not  credible  finding
    that he was able to travel safely  there  in  2015  and  remain  for  a
    substantial period of time [46].  She also found [48] the appellant had
    not  demonstrated  he  would  not  have  access  to  accommodation  and
    financial support in Kabul  thus  had  not  demonstrated  it  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him to relocate there [49].

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      1) in following AS (Afghanistan) in the light of the decisions of  the
         Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 873  and
         AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 208, it being accepted that
         the former had not been handed down at the date of decision;

      2) that the judge had failed properly to apply the UNHCR  guidance  at
         paragraphs 35 and 36;

      3)  the  judge  had  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the   appellant's
         credibility concerning family circumstances in Afghanistan at  [40]
         to [46] in speculating an excessive  reliance  on  the  absence  of
         corroboration whilst failing to consider the corroborative evidence
         of the applicant's aunt and uncle.

12. I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  err  in  her  approach  to  AS
    (Afghanistan) in the light of the subsequent decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal.  But I  am  not  satisfied  that  her  approach  to  the  UNHCR
    guidelines was impermissible,  contrary  to  what  is  averred  in  the
    grounds  of  appeal.   That  her  approach  to  the  UNHCR  eligibility
    guidelines was necessarily flawed.

13. It is interesting that the grounds of appeal seek to challenge only the
    findings at paragraphs 40 to 46 omitting the following passage:

         "39. The appellant gave evidence that  he  had  travelled  back  to
             Afghanistan in 2015 to try and find his mother.  The  evidence
             of Miss Jabbarkhel was that the appellant's mother had died in
             Pakistan in 2008.  She had not told the appellant  about  this
             as she did not dare tell him what had happened.  She said that
             she had not wanted to tell him but then he went to Afghanistan
             in search of  his  mother.   Miss  Jabbarkhel  said  that  the
             appellant's mother had come to Pakistan to get  treatment  but
             she died after approximately one week."

14. Even allowing for the fact that the  appellant  was  12  when  he  left
    Afghanistan, on any view his evidence is inconsistent with what he told
    the probation officer, which is that his mother had  been  killed  when
    she tried to escape Afghanistan with him.   This  too  is  inconsistent
    with Miss Jabbarkhel's evidence that the mother had died  in  Pakistan.
    In these circumstances and in that context it cannot be argued that the
    judge erred in concluding  that  Miss  Jabbarkhel's  evidence  was  not
    reliable or credible.  Insofar as the judge drew any inferences adverse
    from the absence of an official record, the point is  that  the  answer
    given was that "death had occurred in the house" which is not a  proper
    explanation.

15. This, in any event, is only one factor to be taken into account in  the
    assessment of the witnesses which the judge was entitled to view  as  a
    whole.  Contrary to the submissions the judge was  manifestly  entitled
    to reach adverse credibility findings both as  to  whether  there  were
    relatives remaining in  Afghanistan  and  to  the  explanation  of  the
    appellant as to how he had spent his time in Afghanistan in  2015.   It
    is also of note that there is no challenge to the discrepancies in  the
    evidence and the  narrative  identified  by  the  judge  at  [28],  the
    appellant giving an inconsistent account as to how his father had  been
    killed.  That account also had  been  inconsistent  with  the  evidence
    given by  the  appellant's  uncle.   Inconsistencies  with  the  aunt's
    evidence were also noted.  There appear also to be inconsistencies [37]
    as to which of his brothers is dead.

16. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the judge erred in her findings of
    fact although I do  accept  that  there  was  a  misapplication  of  AS
    (Afghanistan) which requires that issue to be remade.

Additional Issue

17. Since the hearing, I have noted that  neither  party  appears  to  have
    taken into account the fact that the appellant has been sentenced to  a
    term of imprisonment in excess of two years.  Accordingly,  it  is  not
    clear how the appellant would be entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
    and this matter will need to be addressed at the renewed hearing.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be listed for 2 hours.

 3. If any of  the  parties  wish  to  adduce  further  evidence,  oral  or
    otherwise, they must make an application pursuant to rule  15  (2A)  of
    the  Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  at least  21  days
    before the hearing, such application to be accompanied by the  evidence
    upon which it is sought to rely.


Signed   Date 27 August 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

