
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22287/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2019                            |On 13 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                         Ighayere Christian Ebosele
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malik of Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                 (Decision given orally on 22 October 2019)


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Ebosele, a national  of  Nigeria,  born  on  26
    September 1978.  He  appeals  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 14 March 2019 dismissing his appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary of State of 10 October 2018 refusing to grant
    him leave on human rights grounds.

Factual Background

 2. To put the case in its proper context, the  appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully as a visitor in June 2009, with  leave  granted
    until  6  December  2009.  Thereafter,  the  appellant  overstayed  and
    remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom.  On  20  October  2012,  the
    appellant applied for an EEA residence card, but such  application  was
    refused on 3 March 2013. The appellant was  served  with  a  notice  of
    removal on 30 September 2013 informing him of  his  immigration  status
    and liability to removal. The appellant, nevertheless, remained in  the
    UK.

 3. On 17 May 2018, the appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
    on human rights grounds, which was refused in the decision  10  October
    2018. This  application  was  ostensibly  founded  on  the  appellant's
    serious medical condition (see page C1 of the Respondent's bundle)  and
    in particular  his  need  for  dialysis  three  times  per  week  as  a
    consequence of kidney failure. It was observed in the application  that
    this was not a medical condition that the appellant had  prior  to  his
    arrival in the UK and it was asserted, inter alia, that  the  appellant
    would not be  able  to  obtain  employment,  accommodation  or  medical
    treatment in Nigeria, nor would he be able "to maintain a careful  diet
    and fluid restriction."

 4.  The  medical  evidence  identifies  that  there   would   be   serious
    consequences for the appellant should he not receive dialysis, with the
    clearest evidence being in the form of a letter  dated  16  April  2018
    (page F1) authored by Dr Ayub, an associate specialist  in  Nephrology.
    Dr Ayub states that the appellant receives dialysis on  alternate  days
    with a two day gap over the weekend, his health will  deteriorate  very
    rapidly if he is not dialysed "and he will not be able to  survive  for
    more than a week or two". He could travel to Nigeria and then 16  hours
    to his hometown but only "if it is done in such a way that he gets  his
    dialysis before and immediately when arriving in  Nigeria...he  can  be
    left without dialysis for 48 hours."

 5. The Secretary of State rejected the appellant's application  ostensibly
    on the basis that his private life in the United  Kingdom,  absent  the
    medical  treatment,  was  relatively  insignificant,  that  appropriate
    medical treatment could be obtained in Nigeria and, as  a  consequence,
    the very high threshold for demonstrating a  breach  of  Article  3  in
    medical cases had not been met.

Decision and Discussion

 6. The grounds of challenge fall into two limbs. The  first  limb  of  the
    grounds asserts procedural  unfairness  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    proceedings, and the second limb asserts unlawful consideration of  the
    consequences for the appellant of his  illness  and  need  for  medical
    treatment.

 7. Turning then to the first limb of the grounds, which is founded on  the
    appellant's statement that he was first provided with  a  copy  of  the
    Home Office bundle on the day of the hearing, which left  him  confused
    and  unable  to  properly  pursue  his  case.  It  is  asserted,  as  a
    consequence, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing  to  adjourn
    the hearing so as to allow  the  appellant  to  properly  consider  the
    documentation in the bundle. Within this limb of the grounds it is also
    asserted by Ms Malik, although not in the  written  grounds,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to adjourn the hearing  to  enable
    the appellant to obtain expert evidence.

 8. Dealing with these challenges in turn, I observe that the  Home  Office
    bundle was sent to the address provided by the appellant for service in
    good time for the hearing.  Nevertheless, assuming the appellant to  be
    correct in his assertion that he did not receive the  bundle  prior  to
    the hearing, it is important to identify  exactly  what  documents  the
    Home Office bundle contained.

 9. Pages 1 to 4 of the bundle are a combination of a cover letter  and  an
    index to the bundle.  Pages 5 to 36 contain copies of  the  appellant's
    own application form for leave, which he has signed but  which  in  any
    event contains very little information. At page 37 there is a copy of a
    page from the appellant's passport.  Pages 38  and  39  comprise  of  a
    cover letter to the application form, which amongst other things  lists
    the eleven documents attached to the appellant's application  form  and
    sent to the SSHD.

10. As far as I can  ascertain,  and  Ms  Malik  did  not  suggest  to  the
    contrary, the only other documents in the bundle are:

          i) The decision letter under challenge - which the appellant  has
             plainly read because he appealed  against  that  decision  and
             engaged with the refusal letter in the appeal documentation;

         ii) The appellant's notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  -
             which originated from the appellant;

        iii)  A  copy  of  the  Home  Office's  database  relating  to  the
             appellant's visit visa application in 2009;

         iv) A one-page extract from a  June  2017  Home  Office  document,
             which sets out the details of  the  "Treatment  of  liver  and
             kidney conditions" in Nigeria

          v) A four-page internet print  out  relating  to  a  "Nephrology,
             Kidney Transplant & Dialysis Center" in Nigeria; and,

         vi) A three-page internet print out relating to "Kidney  Solutions
             Ltd"

11. As already indicated, the appellant has engaged with the first  of  the
    documents and the second was sent by the appellant  to  the  SSHD.  The
    third document is a brief summary of the appellant's  2009  visit  visa
    application, with the relevant section being summarised in the decision
    letter under challenge. The fourth to sixth  documents  relate  to  the
    SSHD's assertion that there is available  treatment  in  Nigeria.  Each
    document is summarised in the decision  letter  under  challenge,  with
    hyperlinks also provided.

12. I have also considered the First-tier Tribunal's Record of Proceedings.
    The appellant was put on notice of the contents by First-tier  Tribunal
    judge Fisher of 26 April 2019, when refusing permission  to  appeal  at
    first instance. The Record of Proceedings, which are a  contemporaneous
    handwritten note of the  proceedings  taken  by  the  judge,  state  as
    follows:

         "p56 of R's bundle? Not seen that doct before.  I  don't  think.  I
         recognise the other docts in the bundle."

13. Page 56 of the Home Office's bundle is  part  of  the  summary  of  the
    appellant's visit visa application from 2009. The passage  relied  upon
    by the SSHD therein refers to the whereabouts of the appellant's family
    members in 2009. This passage is referred  to  and  summarised  in  the
    decision letter.




14. In short, there was nothing of significance in the respondent's  bundle
    which the appellant would not have been aware of prior to the  hearing.
    Most of the bundle comprises  of  documents  which  the  appellant  has
    produced. The appellant was also clearly aware of the decision  letter,
    and the only documents in the bundle which the appellant would not have
    previously seen (assuming that he did not receive the  bundle  when  it
    was sent prior to the hearing)  are  appropriately  summarised  in  the
    decision letter. At the hearing the appellant identified only one  page
    that he stated he was not aware of. That page contained one  matter  of
    potential relevance to  the  appeal,  which  the  decision  letter  had
    previously summarised and upon which,  in  any  event,  questions  were
    asked of the appellant at the hearing.


15. Looking at all the material in the Home Office bundle for myself  I  do
    not accept that there has been procedural unfairness by the  First-tier
    Tribunal in failing to provide the  appellant  an  adjournment  of  the
    hearing in order that he may have more time to consider the Home Office
    bundle.




16. The second limb of the unfairness challenge is founded on  the  failure
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  adjourn  the  hearing  to  enable  the
    appellant to obtain expert evidence as to the position in  Nigeria  for
    persons with his condition. This  is  not  an  assertion  made  in  the
    written grounds and, in any event, is wholly unarguable.

17. The appellant did not seek an  adjournment  to  enable  him  to  obtain
    further evidence. He had ample opportunity  prior  to  the  hearing  to
    either obtain such evidence or begin the process of doing so. There  is
    no suggestion he  took  any  such  steps,  indeed  there  is  still  no
    indication that the appellant has sought to obtain,  even  tentatively,
    evidence from an expert which might shed a positive light on  his  case
    in this regard. The  appellant  has,  since  the  date  of  the  SSHD's
    decision in October 2018, been aware of the SSHD's position. It was not
    for the First-tier Tribunal to  make  the  appellant's  case  for  him.
    Fairness in proceedings does not just mean fairness to  the  appellant.
    The proceedings as a whole must be fair - there being  two  parties  to
    the proceedings.

18. I am fully alive to Ms Malik's assertion that the  SSHD  accepted  that
    the appellant may (and I emphasis may) not be able to afford  treatment
    upon return, but this does not go to  the  issue  of  the  fairness  of
    proceedings and the need for an adjournment. This was a  matter  to  be
    taken in the round when dealing with the substance of  the  case.   The
    First-tier Tribunal's task is to ensure that there  is  a  fairness  of
    proceedings and to determine the appeal on the evidence available  and,
    in my conclusion, on the information available there is no  reason  why
    the First-tier Tribunal should have  sought  of  its  own  volition  to
    adjourn the proceedings to ascertain, on a speculative  basis,  whether
    the appellant could obtain expert evidence  in  relation  to  an  issue
    which was ventilated in the refusal letter.

19. I find that, when looked as a whole, the proceedings before the  First-
    tier Tribunal cannot be said to be vitiated by procedurally unfairness.



20. Turning then to the second limb of the grounds, which  relates  to  the
    substance of the human rights claim. This limb can be  subdivided  into
    three related submissions:

          i) First, it is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal should  not
             have accepted the assurances of the respondent as the  ability
             of the appellant to travel to  Nigeria  and  obtain  treatment
             upon return.

         ii) Second, a  ground  developed  at  the  hearing  today,  it  is
             asserted that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  adequately
             engage with to take into consideration the fact that the  cost
             of relevant treatment in Nigeria was prohibitive; and,

        iii) Third, it is  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
             concluding that evidence was such that it  does  not  surmount
             the high threshold set out in N v Secretary  of  State  [2005]
             UKHL 31.




21. I do not accept that any of these grounds are made out.




22. In relation to the assurances given by the Secretary  of  State,  these
    are framed as follows in the decision letter:


         "Consideration has been given to travel to return to  Nigeria.  You
         have provided no documentary evidence to confirm that you are unfit
         to fly to Nigeria. It is therefore accepted that you could  fly  to
         Nigeria whereby appropriate safeguards  can  be  put  in  place  to
         ensure your health and well-being....




         The Home Office Assisted Voluntary Returns Scheme can  ensure  that
         appropriate  safeguards  are  put  in  place  pre/post   departure,
         ensuring you have sufficient medication whilst making  arrangements
         for a suitable after-care package upon  return.  Additionally,  you
         may be eligible for financial  assistance  to  aid  with  your  re-
         integration into Nigeria"


23. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with this issue, thus:




         "[17] ...the Respondent has confirmed that  appropriate  safeguards
         can be put in place both pre  and  post  departure  to  enable  the
         appellant to travel safely as recommended  by  Dr  Ayab.  Financial
         assistance is also available with the  Assisted  Voluntary  Returns
         Scheme."

24. I have already detailed  Dr  Ayub's  evidence  on  this  issue.  It  is
    possible for the appellant travel, "if it is done in such a way that he
    gets his dialysis before and immediately when arriving in  Nigeria...he
    can be left without dialysis for 48 hours."

25. The Secretary of State did not  assert  either  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before this Tribunal that she did not intend  to  stand  by
    the assurances set out in the decision letter and referred  to  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal - neither does this appear to  be  the  appellant's
    case.




26. In such circumstances, it is my view that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    perfectly entitled to take account of such assurances. On the basis  of
    the available information it  was  not  necessary  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to delve further into the  minutia  of  how  those  assurances
    would be adhered to out in practice. It is plain that the Secretary  of
    State understood the needs of the appellant insofar as those needs  are
    set out in the  medical  evidence.  There  was  no  evidence  from  the
    appellant to support a contention that there was no  possible  solution
    which could enable him to travel  -  indeed  such  a  contention  would
    appear to be directly contradictory to the medical  evidence  that  the
    appellant relies upon. In my conclusion, the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    perfectly entitled to accept, absent any evidence to the contrary, that
    the Secretary of State will ensure that dialysis  windows  are  adhered
    to.

27. The second limb of this ground  relates  to  the  consequences  of  the
    treatment in Nigeria not being available free  of  charge.  Ms  Malik's
    formulation of this, previously  unpleaded,  ground  asserts  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to take into consideration  the  prohibitive
    cost of the dialysis required by the appellant.

28. This ground is disposed of by the finding at paragraph 16 of the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision that  it  is  not  likely  that  the  cost  of
    treatment would be prohibitive. The First-tier Tribunal's rationale for
    this conclusion is clearly set out: (i) there was no specific  evidence
    as to the cost of the treatment in Nigeria; (ii) the appellant has been
    able to undertake work in the UK and receive support from  the  church;
    (iii)  the  appellant  will  receive  financial  assistance  under  the
    Assisted Voluntary Return Scheme; and, (iv) it is likely the  appellant
    will have family support available to him upon return.

29. Although Ms Malik again drew attention to the reference in the decision
    letter that the appellant may not be able to  afford  to  pay  for  the
    treatment in Nigeria, in my conclusion, on the  limited  evidence  that
    was available to the First-tier Tribunal, it was open  to  it  to  find
    that the cost of treatment in Nigeria would not be prohibitive.

30. The third ground makes the  overarching  assertion  that  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal  demonstrated  that  there  would  be  a
    breach of Article 3 should the appellant be returned  to  Nigeria,  and
    that the conclusion to the contrary is wrong.

31. To put the ground in context, Article 3 may only prevent removal  of  a
    foreign  national  from  the  United  Kingdom   in   very   exceptional
    circumstances in a medical or health case.  The scope of that phrase in
    the present context was settled in domestic law by N v the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31 with Lord Hope giving  the
    leading speech in which he  derived  from  Strasbourg  authorities  the
    following:

         "For the circumstances to be very exceptional it would need  to  be
         shown that the applicant's medical condition  had  reached  such  a
         critical stage that there were compelling humanitarian grounds  for
         not removing him to a place which lacked  the  medical  and  social
         services which he would need to prevent acute suffering  whilst  he
         is dying."

    Baroness Hale and Lord Brown framed the  threshold  for  an  Article  3
    breach in similar terms. This approach was later endorsed by the  Grand
    Chamber of the ECHR in N v United Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR 39.

32. I find that the First-tier Tribunal properly directed itself to the law
    and lawfully applied such direction to the factual  matrix  before  it,
    coming to a conclusion which was  not  only  open  to  it  but,  in  my
    conclusion, was inevitable given the findings of fact it had previously
    made.

33.  Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also  engaged  with  the  threshold
    identified in Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] IAR 867, concluding that  the
    appellant could not succeed if such a threshold is applied, this is  no
    more than obiter and I need  not  engage  with  this  finding,  or  the
    challenge thereto, given the application  of  the  principle  of  stare
    decisis requiring the First-tier Tribunal (and indeed this Tribunal) to
    apply the binding House of Lords authority of N v  SSHD,  and  not  any
    variant to be derived from the decision in  Paposhvili.   Whilst  I  am
    aware that the Supreme Court is shortly to consider the implications of
    Paposhvili, until it has done so I remain bound by N  v  SSHD.  On  the
    evidence  available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  find  that   its
    conclusion, applying the N threshold, was not irrational  or  otherwise
    vitiated by legal error.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Signed
Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
8 November 2019






