
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/22256/2018
     HU/23688/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2019                           |On 15 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                             mr Tharman Garbuja
                              mr Sunel Garbuja
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 11 July 2019 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andonian which refused the Article 8  ECHR  appeals
    brought by the appellants against the refusal of entry clearance as the
    adult dependants of the widow of a Gurkha soldier.

 2. The background to this matter is that  the  appellants'  father  was  a
    driver in the British Army,  serving  from  7  October  1964  until  11
    October 1969.  When the appellants' father was discharged from the army
    on 11 October 1969, the discretionary arrangements for Gurkhas to  come
    to the UK had not come into effect and there was no provision  for  the
    father to come to the UK.

 3. After his discharge from the army the appellants' father married  their
    mother  and  the  five  children  of  the  family,  including  the  two
    appellants were born.  Very sadly, shortly after  the  introduction  of
    the policy allowing him to come to the UK, the appellants' father  died
    in November 2010.  The family were left in very difficult circumstances
    in a remote and rugged area of Nepal with very limited  infrastructure.
    The appellants' mother did not apply immediately to come to the UK,  as
    was her right in law at that time, as she was concerned  about  leaving
    her children.  Further, she only had  sufficient  funds  to  apply  for
    herself and possibly one child to come  to  the  UK.   On  advice,  she
    applied for settlement with a minor child and  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to enter the UK on 10 February 2015, arriving in  the  UK  on  10
    March 2015.  The appellants' case was that after their mother  came  to
    the UK they remained dependent on her, in terms of  finance  and  other
    support including constant contact being maintained, visits,  telephone
    calls and so on.

 4. The application for entry clearance was made on 9 July 2018 and refused
    on 28 September 2018.  An ECM review dated 6 March 2019 maintained  the
    refusal of entry clearance. The appellants proceeded with an appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal

 5. In the First-tier Tribunal decision issued on 11 July 2019 refusing the
    Article 8 ECHR appeals the judge sets out the background to the  matter
    in paragraphs 1 and 2.  He then proceeds to set out key aspects of  the
    development in the law concerning cases of former Gurkha  soldiers  and
    their families across paragraphs 4 to 17.  In paragraphs 18 to  29  the
    judge sets out the oral evidence of the appellants'  mother  and  their
    younger brother  who  lives  with  her  in  the  UK.   He  records  the
    submissions of the parties in paragraphs 30 to 33.  In paragraphs 34 to
    42 the judge sets out further  case  law  and  legal  matters  and  the
    reasons for refusal relied upon by the respondent.   In  paragraphs  44
    the judge stated as follows:

         "Matters  that  were  stacked  up  against  the  appellant  by  the
         respondent  outweighed  the  appellants  argument   of   historical
         injustice

         44.  I was satisfied that the reason for the refusal outweighed the
             consideration of historic injustice.   The  first  and  second
             appellants had grown up in Nepal, the first was 35 of the time
             of application, and his brother was 23; they had  lived  apart
             from their mother for about 4 years, when they had applied for
             entry clearance to join their mother in  the  UK,  who  chosen
             (sic) to apply for a settlement visa which was her right  when
             the appellants were already adults in the full knowledge  that
             her  adult  children  do   not   automatically   qualify   for
             settlement.   The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that   the
             appellants had established family life with their  mother  and
             had emotional ties over and  above  the  normal  ties  between
             adult children and parent and therefore I do not believe  that
             article 8 was engaged in the first place."

 6. The grounds of appeal maintained that in paragraph 44 of  the  decision
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to  make  a  clear  finding  on  whether
    family life existed between the appellants and their mother, failed  to
    apply the correct test required for a finding on  family  life  between
    adult children involved in Gurkha cases as set out in case  law,  erred
    in law in stating that the reason that family life was not  established
    was because the respondent said so in the refusal letter  and,  in  any
    event, referred to irrelevant or impermissible factors when considering
    the situation of the  appellants  and  their  family  life  with  their
    mother.

 7. At the hearing Mr Jesurum took me to the case law concerning the proper
    approach to an assessment of family life between adult children of  ex-
    Gurkha soldiers.  In particular, he took me to the case of Jitendra Rai
    v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.  Mr  Whitwell
    for the respondent did not dispute  that  the  proper  approach  to  an
    assessment of Article 8 family life in the circumstances of this appeal
    is set out in paragraph 36 of that decision as follows:

         "As Ms Patry submitted, it was clearly open to the  Upper  Tribunal
         judge to have regard to the appellant's dependence, both  financial
         and emotional, on his parents.  This was, plainly, a  relevant  and
         necessary consideration in his assessment (see the judgment of  the
         court in Gurung, at paragraph 50).  If,  however,  the  concept  to
         which the decision-maker will generally need to  pay  attention  is
         "support" - which  means,  as  Sedley  L.J.  put  it  in  Kugathas,
         "support" which is "real" or "committed"  or  "effective"  -  there
         was, it seems to me, ample and undisputed  evidence  on  which  the
         Upper Tribunal judge could have based a finding that such "support"
         was present in the appellant's case.  He found, however,  that  the
         appellant had a "reliance upon his parents for income that does not
         place him in any particular unusual  category  either  within  this
         country or internationally" (paragraph 23  of  the  determination),
         and no "indication on balance of a  dependency  beyond  the  normal
         family ties and the financial dependency"  (paragraph  26).   These
         findings, Mr Jesurum submitted, suggest that  he  was  looking  not
         just for a sufficient degree of financial and emotional  dependence
         to constitute family life, but  also  for  some  extraordinary,  or
         exceptional, feature in the appellant's dependence upon his parents
         as a necessary determinant of the existence of his family life with
         them.  Mr Jesurum submitted that this approach  was  too  exacting,
         and inappropriate.  It seems to reflect the earlier  reference,  in
         paragraph 18 of the determination, to  the  requirement  for  "some
         compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  inherent   within   [an
         applicant's] own case".  In any event,  Mr  Jesurum  submitted,  it
         elevated the threshold of "support" that is "real"  or  "committed"
         or  "effective"  too  high.   It  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the
         jurisprudence  -  including  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
         Kugathas - as reviewed by the Upper  Tribunal  in  Ghising  (family
         life - adults - Gurkha policy) (in  paragraphs  50  to  62  of  its
         determination), with the endorsement of this court  in  Gurung  (in
         paragraph 46 of the judgment of  the  court).   It  represents,  Mr
         Jesurum contended, a misdirection which vitiates the Upper Tribunal
         judge's decision."

 8. Reading this paragraph and returning to the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal in paragraph 44 of the decision, I was satisfied that an error
    of law was  shown.   As  conceded  by  Mr  Whitwell,  the  heading  and
    consideration in paragraph 44 of the decision is confused, referring to
    and appearing, certainly in part, to be  a  proportionality  assessment
    being made under Article 8(2) rather than an Article 8(1)  family  life
    assessment. It is therefore not clear that an proper assessment of  the
    existence of family life under Article 8 (1)  took  place.  Also,  even
    reading paragraph 44 of the decision as fairly as possible,  the  judge
    does not follow the approach set out in paragraph 36 of Rai  where  the
    financial dependence of the appellants on their  mother  was  a  factor
    that had to be considered carefully as to whether it  could  assist  in
    amounting to a "real" level of support or dependence that could  amount
    to a family life.  Further, the first and last sentences  of  paragraph
    44 leave me in significant doubt as to whether an independent  judicial
    assessment of the relevant factors in the  evidence  concerning  family
    life was undertaken  by  the  judge  where  he  does  not  analyse  the
    respondent's position in any way  and  appears  to  accept  it  without
    question. Further,  the  judge  also  took  an  incorrect  approach  in
    paragraph 44 in placing weight on the appellants'  mother  choosing  to
    come to the UK knowing that her adult children  did  not  automatically
    qualify for settlement.  This is the specific error found by the  Court
    of Appeal in Rai; see paragraphs 39 and 40 of that decision.

 9. For these reasons, therefore, I found that paragraph 44 of the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error of law where it  did  not
    make a clear finding on whether family life existed for the purposes of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and, even it was  taken  to  be
    such did not conduct that assessment lawfully.

10. That might not amount to a material error where paragraphs 45 to 48  of
    the decision set out a proportionality assessment  in  the  event  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged. The difficulty there is  that  Mr  Whitwell
    conceded for the respondent that  that  the  second  ground  of  appeal
    challenging the proportionality assessment had merit and accepted  that
    paragraphs 45-48 of the decision showed material error on  a  point  of
    law.

11. For these reasons, therefore, I found that the errors in  the  decision
    meant that the entire Article 8 assessment in paragraphs 44  to  49  of
    the decision had to be set aside to be  remade.   Where  there  are  no
    extant findings of fact, the parties were in agreement that the  matter
    should be returned to the First-tier Tribunal for primary  findings  of
    fact to be made in line with the relevant authorities and guidance.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of  law  and
    is set aside to be remade de novo.

13. Where there are no extant  findings  and  the  appeal  must  be  remade
    entirely, the remaking will take place in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed: [pic]                           Date: 13 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
