
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/22442/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 April 2018                           |  On 18 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               TEJINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Franco, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Harbans
                    Singh & Co (Soho Road)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  O'Brien  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 13 October 2017 allowed the appeal of Mr Tejinder  Singh
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on  17  May  2015  to
    refuse him leave to remain on the basis of ten years' continuous lawful
    residence under the provisions of paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me, I will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly, I will refer to  Mr  Tejinder
    Singh as the appellant as  he  was  the  appellant  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   The appellant entered Britain  in  December  2004  and  thereafter  was
    employed as a Sikh minister at various temples in and  around  Bristol.
    He had leave to remain until May 2009. In April that  year  he  applied
    for an extension of stay. That was refused and he became appeal  rights
    exhausted in September 2009. An application for  indefinite  leave  was
    refused without a right of appeal, but after a further application  for
    leave to remain in February 2011 he was granted  leave  until  February
    2013. Although an application made in  January  2013  was  refused  the
    appellant was  granted  leave  until  February  2016.  That  leave  was
    curtailed in April 2015.  An application for indefinite leave  made  in
    February 2015   was refused without a right of appeal,  but  a  further
    application for indefinite leave made in May 2015 was  refused  with  a
    right of appeal.  That appeal  was  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    respondent was to reconsider the application. The application was again
    refused and thus the appeal against  that  refusal  came  before  Judge
    O'Brien on 22 September 2017.

First-tier Tribunal

4.   In paragraph 28 of the determination the judge stated that:-

         "The instant application was for indefinite leave on the  basis  of
         ten years' continuous lawful  residence.   It  is  clear  that  the
         Appellant  does  not  in  fact  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules".

5.   The judge in paragraph 29 also commented that he could  not  allow  the
    appeal on the basis that the decision was "not in accordance  with  the
    law per se".

6.   In paragraphs 30 onwards the judge  considered  the  appellant's  claim
    that the decision was an infringement of  his  Article  8  rights.   In
    paragraph 31 he wrote:-

         "The Appellant has been employed throughout his time in the  United
         Kingdom as a Sikh minister.  I have heard  nothing  to  support  Mr
         Franco's  suggestion  that  the  Appellant  would  have  difficulty
         finding similar employment in India because of possible differences
         in religious practice in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  has  a
         wife and children still in India.  I am satisfied that there are no
         very significant obstacles to his  reintegration  into  India.   He
         does not, therefore, satisfy paragraph 276ADE".

7.   The judge then stated that he was "turning to my assessment of  Article
    8 at large".  Having reminded himself that the maintenance of effective
    immigration control was in the public interest he  considered  evidence
    before him from various temples and local  councillors  which  he  said
    demonstrated  the  appellant's   "significant   contribution   to   and
    integration  with  the  community".   He   then   accepted   that   the
    interference with the appellant's private life would engage  Article  8
    of the ECHR.

8.   Having said that although  he  did  not  consider  that  the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant could  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules to grant indefinite or limited leave  to  remain  was
    determinative but he said that it was capable of being a weighty factor
    in determining whether the refusal was proportionate to the  legitimate
    aim of  enforcing  immigration  control.  The  judge  referred  to  the
    appellant's immigration history and the dismissal  of  the  appellant's
    appeal in 2009, and he asserted that when  the  appellant  was  refused
    then he could have successfully applied for leave to remain within  the
    28 day grace period but had not done so.  He had then learned  that  he
    could make a fresh application which had been made on 29  January  2010
    and had thereafter been allowed to remain until July 2015.   The  judge
    said that he considered that had the appellant made an application  for
    "indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 2 (Minister of Religion) Migrant"
    he considered that the appellant would have  succeeded.   Finally,  the
    judge stated at paragraph 40:-

         "For the above reasons, it appears to me that the  public  interest
         in removing the Appellant is significantly weaker than it otherwise
         might be.  I remind myself that little weight should be given to  a
         private life established whilst a person's presence in  the  United
         Kingdom is precarious.  However, had the  Appellant  been  properly
         advised in September 2009 and had he not placed his  trust  instead
         in his MP to rectify the issues in his failed application, he would
         now be entitled as of right to settlement in  the  United  Kingdom.
         Moreover, I have ample  evidence  of  the  standing  in  which  the
         Appellant is held in the Bristol (sic)".

    He therefore allowed the  appeal,  stating  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would be disproportionate.


9.   The Secretary of State appealed, stating that it  was  clear  that  the
    appellant was not relying on  any  family  life  in  Britain  and  that
    therefore he would need  to  demonstrate  compelling  circumstances  to
    warrant the grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules on  the  basis
    of his private life  -  the  grounds  referred  to  the  head  note  in
    Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part  5A  -  compelling  circumstances
    test) [2017] UKUT 00013 where it was stated:-

         "Where the case of a foreign national who is not an  offender  does
         not satisfy the requirements of the Article 8 ECHR  regime  of  the
         Immigration Rules, the test to be applied  is  that  of  compelling
         circumstances".

  10.    The grounds went on to state that the findings of  the  judge  with
    regard to the appellant's ability to have made applications which might
    have succeeded were speculative as was that that he might now  be  able
    to meet  the  Immigration  Rules.   They  argued  there  was  no  clear
    assessment of the public interest factors in Section 117B  which  would
    be relevant  to  a  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.
    Moreover, there was no consideration given to  the  fact  that  as  the
    appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules and would not face  very
    significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in  India,   it   would   be
    appropriate to require the  appellant  to  return  to  lodge  an  entry
    clearance application to bring himself within  the  provisions  of  the
    Rules, if such  a  provision  existed,  or  that  to  do  so  would  be
    disproportionate.   The  grounds  referred  to  the  decision  of   the
    appellant to choose to seek advice from an  MP  rather  than  making  a
    further application and said that that was not a compelling factor.  It
    was emphasised that it was trite law that Article 8 is not to  be  used
    merely as a way of circumventing the Immigration Rules and that a "near
    miss"  argument  cannot  render  an  otherwise  weak  Article  8  claim
    stronger.

11.  Permission having been granted, the appeal came before me.   The  judge
    granting permission - Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  C  A  Parker  -
    stated that:-

         "... I do not accept that the grounds, insofar as they question the
         Judge's exercise of discretion, in considering and attaching weight
         to factors in the proportionality exercise,  identify  an  arguable
         error of law.  Rather, they  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
         outcome.


         However, the grounds correctly  identify  the  Judge's  failure  to
         refer to the test of compelling circumstances or explain  how  this
         was met, before going on to consider  the  appeal  outside  of  the
         immigration rules.  It is also the case  that  there  is  no  clear
         assessment of the relevant public interest considerations  set  out
         in  section  117B  or  weighing  of  those  considerations  in  the
         proportionality exercise".

12.  At the hearing of the appeal  before  me  I  noted  the  terms  of  the
    grounds of appeal and asked Mr Franco to respond thereto.  He initially
    stated that he did not consider that  there  was  a  challenge  to  the
    proportionality exercise before referring to the judgment of the  Court
    of Appeal in Rhuppiah [2006] 1  WLR  4203  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803.   He
    referred to the statement of Sales LJ where  at  paragraph  49  he  had
    stated:-

         "Where Parliament has itself declared  that  something  is  in  the
         public interest - see sections 117B(1), (2)  and  (3)  and  section
         117C(1) - that is definitive  as  to  that  aspect  of  the  public
         interest.  But it should  be  noted  that  having  regard  to  such
         considerations does  not  mandate  any  particular  outcome  in  an
         Article 8 balancing exercise: a court or tribunal has to take these
         considerations into account and give them considerable  weight,  as
         is appropriate for a definitive statement  by  Parliament  about  a
         particular aspect of the public interest, but they are in principle
         capable of being outweighed by other relevant considerations  which
         may make it disproportionate under Article 8 for an  individual  to
         be removed from the UK".

    He stated that the judge had noted that the  appellant's  private  life
    was precarious and stated that the judge had adequately set out the law
    and had indeed referred to Section 117B subsections (2)  and  (3)  with
    regard to the appellant's English language skills.  Moreover, the judge
    was correct to place  weight  on  the  appellant's  employment  in  the
    Bristol area and that  that  employment  amounted  to,  he  considered,
    compelling circumstances.  He asked me  to  find  that  the  judge  had
    reached conclusions which were fully open to him on the evidence.


13.  Mr Clarke pointed out that although the judge  had  correctly  set  out
    the relevant law he had reached the conclusion that the appellant could
    not succeed under the Rules - that had not been challenged.  He  argued
    that the judge had not properly engaged with the public interest of the
    enforcement of immigration control.

14.   I consider that there are material errors of law in the  determination
    of the judge.  He simply did not consider the public  interest  in  the
    enforcement of immigration control and did not consider  the  issue  of
    whether or not there were compelling  circumstances  which  would  mean
    that this would be a case where the  appellant  should  be  allowed  to
    remain outside the terms of the Immigration Rules.  Indeed, the reality
    is that in paragraph 31 of the determination the judge stated  that  he
    considered that the appellant would be able to obtain work in India and
    pointed to the fact that his wife and children were there.  Indeed,  he
    said in terms that there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration into India.

15.  The reality is that what the judge wrote in that paragraph is  correct.
     He did not identify that there were any compelling circumstances  that
    the appellant should remain rather than return to his family  and  work
    which he could undertake in the country of his nationality.  Nowhere in
    the determination does the judge put  forward  any  compelling  reasons
    relating to the appellant's private life nor does he  appear  to  place
    any weight whatsoever on the public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.  He accepts that the appellant could  not  qualify
    under the Rules but does not show why the appellant should  be  allowed
    to remain on private life grounds. The issue before the  judge  related
    to the appellant's right to private life rather than a determination of
    his usefulness within the community. He was clearly wroog to be  swayed
    by a "near miss" argument. For these reasons I find that the judge  did
    not carry out the appropriate proportionality  exercise  and  therefore
    was in error in allowing the appeal.  I set aside his decision.

16.  I asked Mr Franco and Mr Clarke what they  wished  me  to  do,  stating
    that I considered it would be appropriate for me  to  re-determine  the
    appeal.  Mr Franco pointed  to  further  evidence  from  the  Mayor  of
    Bristol, the Member of Parliament for Bristol West and various officers
    in the Bristol Sikh Temple and the Bristol Ramgarhia Board Sikh  Temple
    as well as from  a  councillor  for  Eastern  Ward  of  Bristol  and  a
    statement of the appellant. While he asked that I remit the appeal I do
    not consider it  appropriate  to  do  so.   The  reality  is  that  the
    documents to which he referred, which I have read and  considered,  and
    the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  do  not  advance  the
    appellant's  claim.   The  relevant  test   relates   purely   to   the
    difficulties or otherwise that the appellant would have  should  he  be
    removed to India.  There is simply nothing to indicate that he would be
    in any difficulties if that happened as is clear from the  findings  of
    the judge to which I have referred above.    There  are  no  compelling
    factors which would mean that he should be allowed  to  remain  outside
    the rules on human rights  grounds.  The  letters  in  support  of  the
    appellant clearly point to someone who is considered  to  be  a  useful
    member of the Sikh community in Bristol who has done  much  to  promote
    community relations there but those factors do not  outweigh  the  fact
    that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  appellant  making  a  further
    application from India should any temple wish  to  employ  him  in  the
    future.  India is where his family lives  and  where  the  religion  of
    which he is a minister is based and where the judge found he  would  be
    able to find work.  There is nothing  compelling  as  required  by  the
    determination  in  Treebhawon  which  would  mean  that  it  would   be
    disproportionate for the appellant to be expected to return to India.

17.  Therefore, having set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge, I re-
    make the determination in this appeal and dismiss this appeal on  human
    rights grounds.


Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed  and  the  decision  of  the
Judge in the First-tier is set aside.

The appeal of the appellant against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
on human rights grounds is dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 13 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
