
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/22912/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2 November 2017             |On 10 November 2017               |
|                               |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                 PAUL ADLAM
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Markus, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

       1. In a decision dated  27  May  2016  the  respondent  maintained  a
          decision to deport  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Jamaica,  and
          certified his human rights claim pursuant to section  94B  of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The  decision  to
          deport was based upon the appellant's criminal  offending,  having
          been sentenced  to  a  total  of  two  years  imprisonment  on  10
          December 2015.  The appellant relied upon  his  family  life  with
          his British citizen partner and his British citizen daughter  born
          in 2014.  The appellant was deported to  Jamaica  on  7  September
          2016, but was provided with an 'out of country' appeal.


       2. First-tier Tribunal Juss refused the appellant's  application  for
          an adjournment at a hearing on  9  February  2017,  at  which  the
          appellant did not appear and was not  represented,  and  dismissed
          his appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  in  a  decision  dated  14
          February 2017.   In a decision dated 22 June 2017  the  First-tier
          Tribunal granted the appellant  permission  to  appeal,  observing
          that there was procedural unfairness in the failure to  grant  the
          adjournment.

Hearing

       3. At the beginning of the hearing before me Mr  McVeety  immediately
          conceded that the failure to adjourn the hearing  was  unfair  and
          an error of law such that the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision.


       4. I had regard to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement, the procedural unfairness  identified  in  the
          First-tier Tribunal decision, and the nature  and  extent  of  the
          factual findings required in remaking the decision, and  I  agreed
          with both representatives that this  is  an  appropriate  case  to
          remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of law discussion

       5. I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted  unfairly  in
          refusing to adjourn the hearing in light  of  the  principles  set
          out in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418.   Mr
          McVeety  quite  properly  conceded  that  fairness   required   an
          adjournment and I can therefore give  my  reasons  briefly.   When
          the  matters  set  out  below  are  considered  together  fairness
          clearly demanded an adjournment.


              i) The appellant made it clear at  a  relatively  early  stage
                 that he was in the process of obtaining  legal  funding  in
                 order to secure  legal  representation  to  assist  him  to
                 prepare for the appeal.  Given the nature of the appeal and
                 the fact that the appellant was outside  the  jurisdiction,
                 legal representation was difficult to obtain but played  an
                 important role in ensuring that his appeal was effective  -
                 see the observations of Lord in Kiarie and R  (Byndloss)  v
                 SSHD [2017] 1 WLR 2380 at [74].

             ii) Funding was only granted funding on 8  February  2017,  the
                 day before the hearing.

            iii) As  explained  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  the  appellant
                 satisfied a high threshold to  be  successful  in  securing
                 exceptional case funding.

             iv) The evidence  available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
                 incomplete, and there was no video link or  other  facility
                 to enable the appellant to appear.

       6. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  considering
          the adjournment  request  "superfluous"  on  the  basis  that  the
          appellant had already been deported [11].  This  is  difficult  to
          follow.  The appellant was clearly  entitled  to  a  fair  hearing
          whether his appeal was brought in or out of country.


       7. The First-tier Tribunal also  failed  to  take  into  account  two
          relevant factors when making the decision not to adjourn: (i)  the
          extent to which the  absence  of  legal  representation,  combined
          with   the   appellant   being   outside   of   the   jurisdiction
          disadvantaged him in being able  to  address  the  matters  raised
          within the  decision  letter;  (ii)  the  potential  prospects  of
          success if the appeal was  properly  prepared,  in  light  of  the
          grant of Exceptional Case Funding.

Decision


       8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

       9. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting in Manchester,  Nottingham,  Birmingham  or  Stoke  (TE:
           2.5hrs).

        2) There shall be a case management hearing listed before the First-
           tier Tribunal, after a period of  two  months,  to  address  the
           appropriate arrangements to ensure that the substantive  hearing
           is effective in light of the observations in Kiarie (supra).

Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
2 November 2017
