
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22033/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 July 2019                      |On 05 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                 secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms N Bustani of Counsel instructed by M&K Solicitors



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

1.   The Respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  7  July  1983.  For
    convenience, I shall refer to him as "the  Appellant".  On  24  January
    2015 he arrived with leave to enter as the spouse of a  woman  who  had
    two children from a previous relationship. On 12 February 2017 a  child
    was born to them: the child is a British citizen. The marriage ran into
    difficulties and on 28 July 2017 the Appellant assaulted his  wife  and
    was made the subject of a restraining order until 8 February 2019 and a
    Community Order  until  8  May  2020  providing  for  a  rehabilitation
    programme for the Appellant.

2.   Some 5 weeks later on 30 August 2017 he applied  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department to whom I shall refer as "the  SSHD"  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his family life with his  wife,
    their child and his two step-children.

3.   On 28 November 2018 the Luton Family Court  magistrates  made  a  Child
    Arrangements Order under s.8 Children Act  1989  providing  for  weekly
    supervised contact between the father and his child.



The Secretary of State's Decision

4.   On 14 October 2018 the SSHD refused the application for further  leave.
    The Appellant did not meet the Eligibility Relationship requirement  of
    Appendix FM paragraph E-LTRP 1.7 because he was no longer  living  with
    his wife and consequently could not meet the  requirements  of  Section
    EX1(b) of Appendix FM. He  did  not  meet  any  of  the  time  critical
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and  there
    were no very significant obstacles to  his  integration  on  return  to
    Bangladesh. He had no parental responsibilities for  his  wife's  other
    two children. His child was only  two  years  old  and  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances warranting  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.



Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

5.   On 26 October 2018 the Appellant lodged  notice  of  appeal  and  by  a
    decision promulgated on 23 May 2019 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Bristow allowed the appeal on human rights grounds and made a direction
    regarding anonymity.

6.   On 26 June 2019 Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McClure
    granted the SSHD permission to appeal because it was arguable the Judge
    had erred in law by failing  properly  to  assess  the  nature  of  the
    parental relationship between the Appellant and his child, particularly
    in the light that since the British citizen child was living  with  the
    mother the child would not be required to leave the United Kingdom.  He
    granted permission on all the grounds pleaded by the SSHD.



Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

7.   The Appellant's solicitors lodged a response under  Procedure  Rule  24
    which included a draft of an order made by the Family Court at Luton on
    10 July 2019 varying the terms of the previous child arrangement  order
    so as to increase on a graduated scale the authorised  contact  between
    the Appellant and his  child  and  an  amended  copy  of  the  skeleton
    argument submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   The Appellant attended but other than to confirm his  address  took  no
    active part in the proceedings.



Submissions for the SSHD

9.   Mr Lindsay submitted that the first ground for appeal was based on  the
    proposition that the Family Court had  not  given  permission  for  the
    documentation referred to by the Judge to be disclosed. There had  been
    no application to the Family Court and no  order  made  by  the  Family
    Court. He referred to the Protocol on communications between judges  of
    the Family Court and Immigration and Asylum Chambers and in  particular
    paragraph 15 of  the  Protocol  which  required  the  Family  Court  to
    indicate the conditions on the use of the  material  disclosed  by  the
    Family Court which may be necessary in the circumstances. I  noted  the
    Child Arrangements order of 16 April 2019 made by the Family  Court  at
    Luton to be found at pages  168-170  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  (AB)
    states in the last recital at the top of the second page:-

         "The applicant father ...... is GRANTED permission to disclose  the
         Family Court Orders to the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Office,  Home
         Office in relation to his appeal against the decision to refuse his
         application for leave to remain in the UK, which is listed  for  an
         Appeal hearing on the 15th May 2019."

    and that the draft of the order made on 10 July 2019  attached  to  the
    Rule 24 response states towards the foot of page 4:-

         "The court grants permission to the parties to share a copy of this
         order with the Home Office (and  any  other  statutory  bodies)  as
         required."

     I noted the proceedings were before the magistrates and took  the  view
    that the reference to the Immigration and Asylum Office  in  the  April
    2019 order was a simple error in nomenclature for the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber. The Tribunals are  creatures  of  statute  and  so  are
    statutory bodies. Both orders specified for  what  purpose  the  Family
    Court orders could  be  disclosed.  Having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective identified in Procedure Rule 2 and taking a pragmatic view of
    the circumstances of this particular case I consider  that  the  Family
    Court's statement of the purpose for which  disclosure  was  authorised
    effectively set the limitations on disclosure. At  that  stage  of  the
    hearing I indicated that this ground disclosed  no  arguable  error  of
    law.

10.  The second ground for appeal was that the  Judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons why he was satisfied contact had taken place  pursuant
    to the April  2019  Family  Court  order.  Mr  Lindsay  noted  that  at
    paragraph 13 of his decision the Judge had  identified  the  issues  in
    dispute and submitted  that  the  finding  at  paragraph  13  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his
    child was insufficiently supported by any reasoning.  The  issue  of  a
    Child  Arrangements  order  was  not   conclusive   that   a   parental
    relationship subsisted. He referred me to paragraphs 106 and 109 of the
    lead and unanimous judgment of Singh LJ in SSHD v AB and AO [2019] EWCA
    Civ.661  of  which  the  relevant  parts  are  recited  in  the  SSHD's
    permission application. Whether there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship would depend upon an assessment of the  facts  in
    each particular case. The Judge had not made any finding or  assessment
    of the facts in the Appellant's case, such as the detailed contact  and
    care arrangements. Paragraph 89 of AB and AO had made the point that an
    assessment of the circumstances would include the role  the  individual
    played in caring for and making decisions  in  relation  to  the  child
    which was identified as a "most significant  factor".  The  April  2019
    order provided for only supervised contact and the Judge needed to have
    considered whether that was  sufficient  to  establish  a  genuine  and
    substantial parental relationship. The Judge had misdirected himself in
    relation to the relevant case law. Mr Lindsay submitted  this  amounted
    to a material error of law.

11.  The last ground for appeal was based on the Judge's  refusal  to  grant
    an adjournment requested by the SSHD in the light of the  Family  Court
    hearing set for 11 June 2019, less than 4 weeks  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 15 May. The Presenting Officer had argued that such
    an adjournment was appropriate and necessary for  reasons  of  fairness
    because of the possible impact a subsequent Family Court order  on  the
    appeal. Mr Lindsay quite properly accepted that this was not  a  strong
    point for the SSHD.



Submissions for the Appellant

12.  I reminded Ms Bustani that I had  already  expressed  my  view  on  the
    SSHD's first ground for appeal and that she need not address me on it.

13.  With reference to  the  second  ground  Ms  Bustani  accepted  that  at
    paragraph 30 the Judge had referred baldly  to  the  two  Family  Court
    orders but at paragraph 7 he had referred to the  relevant  documentary
    evidence contained in the substantial AB. On  the  evidence  the  Judge
    been entitled to reach his conclusions. The AB contained records  of  4
    months of contact sessions between the Appellant and his child at pages
    172ff and the Appellant had referred in his statement to  the  contact.
    The second bundle submitted by the Appellant (AB2) at p.17ff  contained
    evidence of his financial contributions to his child's maintenance  and
    at AB p.191ff there were photographs of the Appellant  with  his  child
    including at contact sessions.

14.  At paragraph 12(h) of the decision that Judge  had  noted  the  parties
    agreed it was not reasonable to expect the Appellant's child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom. At paragraph 102 of AB and AO the Court  of  Appeal
    had noted that it:-

         "... should not lightly interfere with the conclusion  of  a  lower
         court or tribunal on what is essentially a mixed  question  of  law
         and fact, as it involved the application of the statutory  language
         to the facts of this case."

     The Upper Tribunal should exercise similar restraint.

15.  Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as
    amended stipulated that the public interest  did  not  require  removal
    where there is a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship.  The
    Judge had looked at  the  evidence  and  found  it  was  sufficient  to
    establish a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  between  the
    Appellant  and  his  child.  He  had  been  justified  in  refusing  an
    adjournment  and  indeed  the  validity  of  that  refusal   had   been
    subsequently supported by the terms of the draft Family Court order  of
    10 July 2019. The decision contained  no  material  error  of  law  and
    should be upheld.



Response for the SSHD

16.  Mr Lindsay submitted that the submissions for  the  Appellant  were  in
    line with the skeleton argument submitted to the Judge and now  amended
    for the Upper Tribunal. They started from the premise that the evidence
    was undisputed and was sufficient to justify the  Judge's  conclusions.
    The SSHD did not seek to challenge the  documentary  evidence  but  did
    challenge the lack of reasons given by the Judge why  he  accepted  the
    evidence and why he found it supported his conclusions.  Crucially,  as
    the Court of Appeal had made clear in AB  and  AO  referring  to  other
    authorities and decisions, each case turned on its own particular facts
    and merits and the Judge had not given adequate reasons to support  his
    conclusions. The Judge could have decided the  appeal  either  way  and
    needed to give adequate reasons to support his conclusions.



Findings and Consideration

17.  The Judge referred at paragraph 7 of his decision  generically  to  the
    "Appellant's bundle of 3 to 5 pages" and "... supplementary  bundle  of
    25 pages". He expressly identified the Child Arrangements order  of  28
    November 2018. The broad provisions of the 28 November  2018  order  of
    the Family Court are mentioned at paragraph 16 and at paragraph  17  he
    referred to the conviction of the Appellant for  assaulting  his  wife.
    There is no other reference to or finding on any of the oral or written
    evidence submitted to show whether the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his child. The Child Arrangements
    orders put in place a structure and mechanism for the future conduct of
    the relationship between the Appellant and his child but in  themselves
    are not evidence  of  a  subsisting  relationship.  The  Appellant  had
    supplied evidence to support his claim  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his child and it was for the Judge to assess and make
    findings on the evidence with a view to forming part of the reasons for
    his conclusions. He  did  not  do  so  and  consequently  his  decision
    contains a material error of law. It did not explain to  the  SSHD,  as
    the losing party, why he lost.

18.  After  discussion  with  the  advocates,  I  have  concluded  that  the
    appropriate course is to set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    in its entirety and to remit the appeal for  hearing  afresh  before  a
    different judge in the First-tier Tribunal. I do so because of the need
    for an extensive fact-finding exercise and at the  date  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing the latest order of the  Family  Court  has  not  been
    perfected. In the time before the appeal is listed for  re-hearing  the
    Appellant will be able to obtain a copy of the perfected  Family  Court
    order and evidence how in  the  light  of  the  varied  provisions  for
    contact with his child, their relationship has developed.



Anonymity

19.  The anonymity direction previously made by the First-tier  Tribunal  is
continued.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that it should be set aside.

    Anonymity direction continued.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 26. vii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



