
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/22081/2018
                                                               HU/22085/2018
                                                               HU/22088/2018
                                                               HU/22092/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Monday 8 July 2019                |On Thursday 18 July 2019             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             1) MEPA
                             2) MAA
                             3) JEA
                             4) AMA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Dias solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal involving minor children whose identity it is necessary  to  protect,
it is appropriate to continue that order.  Unless and until  a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellants are granted anonymity. No report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies, amongst others,  to  both  parties.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellants appeal against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Colvin  promulgated  on  20  March  2019  ("the   Decision")
         dismissing the Appellants' appeals against the Secretary of State's
         decision dated 18 October 2018 refusing their human  rights  claim.
         The Appellants are a family consisting of  wife,  husband  and  two
         minor children.  The focus of the human  rights  claim  is  on  the
         position of the eldest of those two children, the Third  Appellant,
         who has lived in the UK for over seven years.  The family  are  all
         nationals of the Philippines.

      2. The First Appellant came to the UK as a student in  February  2008.
         Her husband, the Second Appellant joined  her  as  a  dependent  in
         January 2009.  In November 2009, the Third Appellant  was  born  in
         the UK.  The First Appellant continued her studies in  the  UK  and
         graduated in 2013.  In January  2014,  she  was  granted  leave  to
         remain as a Tier 2 migrant with the Second and Third Appellants  as
         her dependents.  Her leave was curtailed to May 2015 after her Tier
         2 sponsor lost its licence.  The family then sought leave to remain
         on human  rights  grounds  which  was  refused,  and  their  appeal
         dismissed.  The Fourth Appellant was born in September 2016.

      3.  The  Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
         Immigration Rules ("the Rules") applying paragraph EX.1 of Appendix
         FM ("paragraph EX.1") to the Rules as it was reasonable  to  expect
         the Third Appellant to return with his family to  the  Philippines.
         For the same reasons, she  found  that  Section  117B  (6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section  117B  (6)")
         did not apply when Article 8 ECHR was considered outside the Rules.



      4. The Appellants raise one ground of appeal that the Judge failed  to
         give adequate or sufficient weight to the  Third  Appellant's  best
         interests and has failed to follow the case-law in relation to  the
         impact on the proportionality assessment of those interests.

      5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Andrew on 29 May 2019 on the basis that she was satisfied that  the
         Decision contained an  arguable  error  of  law  "in  view  of  the
         guidance in AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661".

      6. The matter comes before me to  decide  whether  the  Decision  does
         contain any error of law and, if I so conclude, either  to  re-make
         the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
         making.

    THE DECISION

      7. As I have already indicated, the focus of the  Appellants'  grounds
         is a narrow one based on whether it is  reasonable  for  the  Third
         Appellant to return to the Philippines.  If the Judge is  wrong  in
         her conclusion that it is, the Third Appellant would succeed  under
         paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the Rules  and  the  remainder  of  the
         family would be entitled to remain in the  UK  based  on  paragraph
         EX.1 and/or Section 117B (6) (or at least  that  would  enable  the
         First and Second Appellants to remain and it could not sensibly  be
         suggested that the Fourth Appellant would not then be  entitled  to
         stay with her family - she is now aged two years).

      8. The starting point in this appeal  was  the  previous  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  Manyarara  promulgated  on  23  November
         2016.  The Judge  recognised  that  she  needed  to  make  a  fresh
         assessment of the Third Appellant's position but concluded that  it
         was appropriate to retain the earlier finding that there would  not
         be any very significant obstacles to the  family's  integration  in
         the Philippines ([24] of the Decision).  No  issue  is  taken  with
         that finding.

      9. In relation  to  the  assessment  of  the  Third  Appellant's  best
         interests, the Judge made the following findings:

             "[26]     At the time of this application made in October 2017
             [J], who was born in the UK, had been living  continuously  in
             the UK for 7 years and 11 months  and  at  the  time  of  this
             hearing it is now 9 years and 3 months.   He  lives  with  his
             parents in an area where there  is  a  'huge'  and  supportive
             Filipino community and many Filipino students attend the  same
             school.  He has been in the UK education system since  he  was
             aged 3.  His  school  reports  show  that  he  is  doing  well
             academically, is highly motivated and is reaching the expected
             attainment levels.  His primary school headteacher has written
             a letter dated 12 December 2018 which refers  to  him  as  'an
             incredibly kind and caring pupil who takes great pride in  all
             the work that he produces in school.  He is  a  very  friendly
             boy with lots of friends inside and outside the classroom  and
             is an integral part of the class.  In fact he is a great asset
             to St Joseph's School as a whole.' She further adds  that  she
             knows 'that he will go on to become a  valuable  part  of  our
             society.' His class teacher has also written a  letter  making
             similar points which concludes: '[J] is a valuable  member  of
             our class and his gentle and kind personality  is  appreciated
             by both adults and children alike.'

             [27]      In both the written and oral evidence  before  me  a
             significant focus was placed on the claim that  [J]  does  not
             speak or understand the Tagalog language.  I have set out this
             evidence in some detail above.   However,  on  re-reading  the
             previous appeal Decision since the hearing, I am surprised  to
             find that there appears to be no reference to a claim that [J]
             cannot speak or understand Tagalog and was not an issue in the
             appeal.  It is unfortunate that this fact was not  brought  to
             my attention and that the parents were not  asked  to  explain
             this significant omission at the hearing before me.  In  these
             circumstances I am left with the strong impression that  on  a
             balance of probabilities both parents were not giving accurate
             evidence on this language issue especially as it was  accepted
             that [J} has listened to the Tagalog language being spoken  in
             the family home and in the community since  he  was  born.   I
             accept that it may well be that [J} prefers to  speak  English
             but this does not mean that he  cannot  speak  and  understand
             Tagalog as well.

             [28]      As stated in the previous appeal Decision, it is  in
             the best interests of [J} to be with his parents and he  would
             be returning to the Philippines  with  them  and  his  younger
             sister as there is no question of the family being  separated.
             There are family members there including the first appellant's
             sister and brother and their children which means that [J} has
             cousins there.  The parents admitted that  they  had  made  no
             enquiries of schools in their home area in the Philippines for
             [J] including no  enquiries  of  international  schools  where
             English is spoken.  At the age of 9 [J} is not at  a  critical
             stage in his education which would make relocation  to  a  new
             education system more difficult."

     10. The  Judge  then  turned  to  the  question  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable for the Third Appellant to return  to  the  Philippines.
         In so doing, she had regard to the  cases  of  EV  (Philippines)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 ("EV
         (Philippines)"), MA (Pakistan) and others v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 ("MA  (Pakistan)")  and  KO
         (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2018] UKSC  53  ("KO  (Nigeria)")  as  well  as  the  Home  Office
         guidance.   Having  directed  herself  as  to  the  case-law  which
         applied, she made the following assessment:

             "[33]      As  already  stated  it  is  clear  that  the  best
             interests of [J} are served by  remaining  to  live  with  his
             parents in a family unit.  Also, in terms of the fact that  he
             has lived all his life in the UK for the past 9 years  and  is
             well-established in the education system and in other  aspects
             of his private life outside of the family means that his  best
             interests would be to remain in the UK with his parents as  an
             ideal result.  However I must go beyond this  and  assess  the
             'reasonableness' test particularly as it has  been  considered
             in the recent case of KO when it comes to looking at the facts
             in the 'real world' and asking the ultimate  question:  is  it
             reasonable to expect this  child  to  follow  his  parents  to
             Pakistan [sic] as they have no right to remain here.

             [34]       This  has  to  be  put  in  the  context   of   the
             circumstances of the parents and the family as a whole.  There
             is no question that these parents have anything other  than  a
             good immigration history although their actual status  -  only
             ever having had limited leave to remain  -  means  that  their
             entry and presence in  the  UK  is  considered  to  have  been
             'precarious' and without any expectation  of  settled  status.
             The position now is that they have no further right to  remain
             in the UK  unless  their  removal  would  breach  their  human
             rights.  I have set out why the finding in the previous appeal
             Decision still stands in relation to the parents returning  to
             the Philippines when it was concluded that there are  no  very
             significant  obstacles  to  their  reintegration  into   their
             country of origin and therefore removal would not breach their
             human rights.

             [35]      The findings in the previous  appeal  Decision  also
             suggest  that  these  parents  will   be   able   to   provide
             satisfactorily for the welfare of their family on  return.   I
             am also in no  doubt  that  they  will  provide  a  supportive
             setting to assist both their children to adapt to life in  the
             Philippines and, in this context, it is to be noted  that  the
             eldest child, [J], has lived within the culture of his parents
             and a strong Filipino community in the UK and has been exposed
             to a multi-cultural school population over several years.  The
             issue of whether [J] speaks and understands Tagalog  is  dealt
             with above in some detail above.  Even if he is not fluent  in
             this language it is reasonable to assume that he would  become
             so relatively quickly as a bright and confident  child.   And,
             in any event, there is the possibility - as yet  un-researched
             by the parents - of him being able to attend an  international
             school where the pupils are taught in English.

             [36]      there is no doubt on the basis  of  the  above-cited
             cases that the fact that a child has been in the UK for over 7
             years needs to be  given  significant  weight.   And  this  is
             confirmed in the Home Office's own guidance  which  makes  the
             clear statement that: 'The starting point is that we would not
             normally expect a qualifying  child  to  leave  the  UK.'  And
             certainly before the Supreme Court in KO  I  would  have  been
             minded to follow the decision in MA, namely, that the starting
             point is that leave should be granted  in  such  circumstances
             unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary which  I  do
             not find that there are on the facts in this  case  as  it  is
             only the parents lack of immigration status  that  it  is  the
             adverse factor.

             [37]      However, there is now the decision in  KO  which  is
             specifically referred to in the recent Home  Office  guidance.
             In applying the test  of  reasonableness,  the  Supreme  Court
             (when making particular reference  to  the  case  of  NS  (Sri
             Lanka)) held that if a child's parents are  both  expected  to
             leave the UK, the child is normally  expected  to  leave  with
             them,  unless  there  is  evidence  that  it  would   not   be
             reasonable.  In applying this to the  facts  in  this  case  I
             consider that I am bound to make a different  decision.   This
             is because the parents (who it should be noted do not  have  a
             bad immigration history as was the case  in  NS  (Sri  Lanka))
             have no leave to remain and therefore are  expected  to  leave
             the UK.  And I find that the kind of matters set  out  in  the
             Home Office guidance that might make  it  unreasonable  for  a
             qualifying child to leave the UK do not apply to the facts  in
             this case for all the reasons given above relating to both [J]
             and the family as a whole.  This means that I  find  that  the
             reasonableness test in EX.1(a) and paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of
             the Immigration  Rules  does  not  apply  to  this  qualifying
             child."

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     11. I begin with one narrow challenge  to  the  Judge's  findings.   Mr
         Ahmed said that,  although  at  [35]  of  the  Decision  the  Judge
         referred to having given detailed  reasons  for  finding  that  the
         Third Appellant does speak and understand Tagalog, she had  not  in
         fact given such reasons.   That  submission  has  no  merit  as  is
         evident from what is said at [27] of the Decision which I have also
         set out above and which in turn cross-refers back to  the  evidence
         recorded at [5], [7] and [8] of the  Decision.   In  light  of  the
         inconsistency  between  the  First  Appellant's  written  and  oral
         evidence as there recorded, and for the reasons given at [27],  the
         Judge was entitled to reach the finding that  the  Third  Appellant
         can speak and understand the language spoken in the Philippines.

     12. Turning then to the general ground, Mr Ahmed said  that  the  Judge
         failed to have  regard  to  some  of  the  relevant  case-law.   He
         referred me in particular to the guidance given by  a  Presidential
         panel of this Tribunal in JG (s 117B (6)):  "reasonable  to  leave"
         UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT  72  (IAC)  Rev  1  ("JG").   That  case  is
         reported only for the proposition that "[s]ection  117B(6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requires  a  court  of
         tribunal to hypothesise that the child in question would leave  the
         United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to be the case, and  ask
         whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to do  so".   As
         is evident from what is there said, that has little bearing on this
         case as the position which the Judge had to  and  did  consider  is
         that the Third  Appellant  would  be  required  to  return  to  the
         Philippines if she found that it was reasonable for him to  do  so.
         There was no question of him remaining in the UK  with  one  parent
         who was  entitled  to  stay.   The  factual  scenario  there  being
         considered is very different, therefore, to this case.

     13. It is also appropriate at this point  to  refer  to  the  cases  of
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v AB  (Jamaica)  and  AO
         (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 which are referred to  by  the  Judge
         granting permission.  Mr Ahmed did not refer to those cases in  his
         submissions and there is no reference to them  in  the  Appellants'
         grounds.  In any event, as appears at [48] to [52] of the  judgment
         and the discussion which follows, those cases were considering  the
         issue for which JG was reported, namely whether it is relevant when
         considering whether it is reasonable to expect  a  child  to  leave
         whether he will in fact do so.  In other words, those cases concern
         the factual scenario where a child would be able to remain  in  the
         UK with one parent and whether in such cases  the  Respondent  (and
         the Court/Tribunal) is  required  to  consider  whether  the  other
         parent can be removed without looking at the reasonableness of  the
         child being expected to leave.

     14. Mr Ahmed drew my attention to what is said at [41] in JG  that  the
         interpretation  which  the  Tribunal  placed  on  the  Home  Office
         guidance which  was  there  being  considered  "may  result  in  an
         undeserving individual or family remaining in the  United  Kingdom"
         but that, having regard to what was said by Elias LJ at [44] of  MA
         (Pakistan), that must be taken to be  Parliament's  intention  when
         approving Section 117B(6). However, the Tribunal also said at  [37]
         of its  decision  that  "[t]he  citation  of  KO  (Nigeria)  merely
         recognises that, in deciding what would  be  reasonable,  one  must
         have regard to the fact that one  or  both  parents  is  liable  to
         removal under immigration powers." No doubt  there  will  be  cases
         where it is found not reasonable to expect a child to  leave  where
         the parents even though undeserving due to their own  conduct  will
         be allowed to stay.  However, the crucial issue  which  is  a  fact
         sensitive one in each case is whether it is  reasonable  to  expect
         the qualifying child to leave.

     15. Mr Ahmed accepted that the issue of what would happen in  the  real
         world is a factor to which the Judge was entitled to  have  regard,
         but he said that it was not the only factor and that the Judge  had
         failed to carry out a  proper  balance  as  to  what  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the Third Appellant to do.  He said  that  the
         passage which I have set out at [33] to [36] of the Decision failed
         to provide cogent reasons for  the  conclusion  reached.   He  also
         relied on the Home Office guidance as set out in JG to  the  effect
         that the Home Office would not normally expect a  qualifying  child
         in the position of the Third Appellant to leave the UK.   He  added
         that the need for the existence  of  powerful  reasons  to  require
         removal in such circumstances was underlined by the Court of Appeal
         in MA (Pakistan) (see [44] of that judgment as also  relied  on  in
         JG).  However, even that paragraph makes clear that a child in  the
         Third Appellant's position should be allowed to stay "if  it  would
         not be reasonable to expect them to leave".  The  Court  of  Appeal
         also made clear that it was not there advocating a  return  to  the
         DP5/96 policy which has been repealed where the starting point  was
         that a child with seven years' residence  could  be  refused  leave
         only in exceptional  circumstances.   As  the  Court  said,  "[t]he
         current provision falls short of such a presumption".

     16. Mr Tufan submitted that what the Judge was required to consider was
         the isolated requirement whether it was reasonable  to  expect  the
         Third Appellant to leave  the  UK  notwithstanding  his  length  of
         residence in the UK.  The Appellants' challenge is  in  reality  an
         assertion that the factors should have tilted the balance in  their
         favour.   He  accepted  that  another  Judge  may  have  reached  a
         different conclusion on these facts but that is not the issue.  The
         natural expectation is that a child will go where his parents  are.
         In this case, the parents have  no  leave  to  remain  and  so  the
         expectation is that the child will return to the  Philippines  with
         his parents provided it is reasonable for him to do  so.   Although
         the Third Appellant is in education in the UK, as the  judgment  in
         EV (Philippines) makes clear, the UK cannot be expected to  educate
         the world.  The parents have in the past had precarious  status  in
         the UK (and in fact the family has had no leave to remain since  29
         September 2017).  The Third Appellant has  grown  up  in  a  strong
         Filipino community and the Judge found that he has knowledge of the
         Filipino language or would pick  it  up  readily.   Those  are  the
         Judge's reasons for concluding that it would be reasonable for  the
         Third Appellant to leave.

     17. The Judge considered that she  was  applying  the  guidance  in  KO
         (Nigeria). That  is  also  of  course  the  most  recent  and  most
         authoritative consideration of how  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(iv)  and
         Section 117B (6) are to be  interpreted.   One  finds  the  Supreme
         Court's discussion in this regard at [16] to [19] of the  judgment.
         A Tribunal Judge is required to consider the position of the  child
         leaving out of account any adverse history  of  the  parents.   The
         question is what is reasonable for the child.  When looking at that
         issue, however, the Supreme Court approved as  "wholly  appropriate
         and sound in law" the Home Office guidance cited  at  [10]  of  the
         judgment to the effect that for  a  non-British  citizen  child  it
         would generally be in the child's best  interests  to  remain  with
         their parents and to leave with their parents if their parents  had
         no right to remain.  The factors to be considered when  looking  at
         reasonableness included any risk to the child's health, family ties
         in the UK and ability to integrate into life in their home country.



     18. I recognise that the Home Office guidance has  been  updated  since
         the judgment in KO (Nigeria) as is evident from the guidance  cited
         at [32] of the Decision.  However, the statement that a  qualifying
         child would not normally be expected to leave is qualified by  what
         follows by reference to the judgment in KO  (Nigeria).   The  Judge
         therefore applied the whole of the  guidance  and  not  simply  the
         extract cited at [36] of the Decision.   She  recognised  that  the
         issue for her was whether it was reasonable for the Third Appellant
         to leave.  That is the assessment made  at  [33]  to  [35]  of  the
         Decision.  That assessment is consistent with what is  said  in  KO
         (Nigeria), in particular at [19]  of  the  judgment  that  what  is
         reasonable has to be considered in the "real  world  in  which  the
         children find themselves."

     19. I have considered carefully whether it might be said that the Judge
         has erred at [36] of the Decision in her comment that KO  (Nigeria)
         effectively mandated  the  conclusion  she  reached  and  that  the
         conclusion is likely to have been different if she had applied  the
         guidance in MA (Pakistan).   The  Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)
         approved the way in which the Court of  Appeal  indicated  that  it
         would have decided those cases had it been free to do so (with  the
         possible exception of [40] of the judgment).  However,  as  I  have
         pointed out at [15] above, the Court of  Appeal  itself  recognised
         that there was no presumption of leave being granted once  a  child
         had been in the UK for seven years.  The  question  still  remained
         whether it was reasonable to expect the child to  leave.   That  it
         was reasonable for the Third Appellant to leave was the  conclusion
         the Judge reached for the reasons given at  [33]  to  [35]  of  the
         Decision and there is  no  error  of  law  in  that  assessment  or
         conclusion.  The  Judge  has  given  adequate   reasons   for   her
         conclusion.

     20. Insofar as the Appellants'  grounds  suggest  that  the  conclusion
         fails to  give  adequate  weight  to  the  Third  Appellant's  best
         interests, that argument has no merit.  The Judge  recognised  that
         the child's best interests "as an ideal result" were to  remain  in
         the UK.  However, to suggest that having  reached  that  conclusion
         the Judge could not then find it to be reasonable to expect him  to
         leave is to accord undue weight to best  interests.   Those  are  a
         primary  consideration  and  not  the  primary  consideration.   To
         suggest that the finding in relation to best  interests  in  effect
         mandates a result consistent with those interests is to elevate the
         weight given to them beyond that required.  For the  reasons  given
         by the Judge in the passage which follows that conclusion, she  was
         entitled to decide that  it  would  nonetheless  be  reasonable  to
         expect the Third Appellant to leave the UK and therefore to dismiss
         the Appellants' appeal.

    CONCLUSION

     21. For all of the above reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision does
         not contain an error of law. Accordingly, I uphold the Decision.

    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law.  I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colvin
    promulgated on 20 March 2019 with the consequence that the  Appellants'
    appeals stand dismissed




    Signed [pic] Dated: 12 July 2019
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
