
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22175/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 May 2021                            |On 15 June 2021                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              PAULINE CAMPBELL
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kwaku Antwi-Boasiako (Legal representative) on
                    behalf of Spio & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica born on 20  March  1961,  appeals
       with permission a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor ('the
       Judge') promulgated in the 18 May 2020 in which the  Judge  dismissed
       the appellants appeal against the  refusal  of  her  application  for
       leave to remain on human rights grounds.
    2. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the  Judge  erred
       in law in finding (i) that the appellant is a grandparent, was not  a
       parent within the meaning  of  paragraph  EX.1  Appendix  FM  of  the
       Immigration Rules, arguing paragraph EX.1(a) is not limited to  birth
       parents, or biological  parental  relationships,  (ii)  by  making  a
       decision  that  is  perverse,  in  particular  in  stating  that  the
       relationship between the appellant  and  her  granddaughter  and  her
       daughter did not engage  Article  8  and  in  failing  to  apply  the
       principles set out in Razgar correctly to the  circumstances  of  the
       appeal, arriving at a conclusion that was "clouded by the Appellant's
       immigration history" resulting in a failure  to  apply  the  relevant
       legal principles correctly, (iii) concluding there was no family life
       between the appellant and her granddaughter  and  her  children  when
       there was independent evidence that  the  appellant  does  the  daily
       school run for her daughter, which it is argued,  is  sufficient  for
       the definition of family life as held in ZB (Pakistan) and  that  the
       Judge failed to  apply  relevant  legal  principles  correctly,  (iv)
       incompletely failing  to  adequately  assess  the  interests  of  the
       grandchildren, and whether removal of the appellant will result in  a
       disproportionate impact on  the  welfare  of  the  child  Jessica  as
       required pursuant to section 55 Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
       Act 2009, and, (v) that no reasonable Tribunal  seized  of  the  case
       would have concluded that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
       appellant  and  her  grandchildren  and  that  her  presence  is  not
       necessary or essential in the  functioning  of  the  family  and  the
       grandchildren's lives, such that the determination amassed  an  error
       of law on the grounds of perversity.
    3. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 reply  dated  14  August  2020,
       opposes the application.

Error of law

    4. The assertion of perversity is totally without  merit.  In  R  (Iran)
       [2005] EWCA Civ 982 it is stated  that  perversity  requires  a  high
       hurdle to be crossed and defines a perverse  decision  as  one  taken
       without any evidence or upon a view of the facts that  could  not  be
       reasonably  entertained.   Establishing   perversity   requires   the
       appellant to show this is a case in which the facts as found are such
       that no person acting judicially and properly instructed  as  to  the
       relevant law could come to the same conclusion.
    5. The Judge's findings are set out from  [39]  of  the  decision  under
       challenge and can be summarised, inter alia, in the following terms:

         i. That  the  appellant  does  not  have  a  partner,  parent,  or
            dependent child in the UK, although it is accepted she has  two
            daughters and grandchildren living here [41].


        ii. The appellant is a grandmother and not a parent  of  the  minor
            children, her daughter Melisha having primary  responsible  for
            her child  Jessica,  and  although  it  is  accepted  that  the
            appellant does, to some degree, assist her in that care but the
            fact she does assist does not elevate her  status  to  that  of
            parent. [43].


       iii. There is no relationship between the appellant  and  her  grand
            daughter, which is capable of satisfying  the  requirements  of
            Appendix FM, the Rules, let alone paragraph EX.1.[43].


        iv. There is no merit in the argument  raised  by  the  appellant's
            representative that the appeal can succeed on  the  basis  that
            the refusal would be incompatible with the Appellant's right to
            respect for family life as considered under the Rules [43].


         v. It is not disputed that the appellant has not been  present  in
            the United Kingdom for 20 years, or that she cannot qualify  by
            virtue of age because she is over the age of 25 years, pursuant
            to paragraph 276ADE (1) [44].


        vi. Pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) the  appellant  failed  to
            establish that she  cannot  reintegrate  into  Jamaica  on  her
            return, and that the appellant could not succeed on this  basis
            [45 - 50].


       vii. Considering article 8 ECHR outside the rules and section 55, it
            is a matter of convenience that the appellant  is  involved  in
            taking and collecting her daughter  Jessica  from  school.  The
            appellant's oral evidence was that these arrangements were  not
            essential and that other arrangements  are  made  when  Jessica
            attends after school clubs as the appellant does  not  have  to
            leave her other daughter's children to collect her [51].


      viii. The appellant has resided with her daughter Melisha  throughout
            the time she has been in the UK, but that daughter  is  now  an
            adult. There is no  evidence  supplied  to  show  that  if  the
            appellant is returned to Jamaica that her  daughter  could  not
            make arrangements for Jessica to be taken to and collected from
            school or for her  extracurricular  activities.  There  was  no
            evidence from the daughter Melisha other than what was said  in
            a brief witness statement to say she relies upon her mother. It
            was accepted that Jessica is nine years of age  and  will  have
            known her  grandmother  throughout  the  whole  life,  but  the
            appellant is a grandmother and not a parent.  No  evidence  has
            been adduced that would "remotely suggest" that Jessica's  care
            and welfare is likely to be harmed to any degree as a result of
            the appellant's return to  Jamaica.  Jessica's  mother  Melisha
            will continue as her primary carer [52].


        ix. The relationship between the appellant and her daughters is not
            sufficient to amount to family life for the purposes of article
            8 and article 8 is not engaged [54].


         x. The relationship between  the  appellant  and  Jessica,  whilst
            close, is capable of  being  maintained  upon  the  appellant's
            return to Jamaica. On the balance of probabilities family  life
            does not exist for  the  purposes  of  article  8  between  the
            appellant and her  granddaughter  Jessica  and  therefore  such
            rights are not engaged [55].


        xi. The appellant does not live with her daughter Taneisha. Account
            is taken of the fact that  the  15-year-old  grandson  of  this
            family unit has autism, but the appellant is  not  the  primary
            carer and does not live with  them.  Although  the  appeal  was
            adjourned to enable specialist evidence/reports to be  obtained
            to show that this was a relationship which could  be  adversely
            affected by the  appellant's  removal,  no  such  evidence  was
            forthcoming. In the absence of any  evidence  to  suggest  that
            this grandson will be adversely affected or that the other  two
            grandchildren of the family who are extremely young would  face
            adverse  consequences.  It  was  not   made   out   that   such
            relationship as subsists between them was sufficient to  amount
            to family life for the purposes of article 8 [56].


       xii. In the alternative, if article 8 is engaged,  the  decision  is
            proportionate for the reasons set out at [57 - 64].

    6. It is noted that the appellant has lived with  her  daughter  Melisha
       since she entered the United Kingdom on 9  May  2002  as  a  visitor,
       although her application for leave on arrival was  refused  with  the
       appellant being granted temporary  release  until  10  May  2002  but
       overstaying  thereafter.  Any  protected  right  the  appellant   has
       developed has been during the time her status in the  United  Kingdom
       has been precarious, as it is unlawful.
    7. It is not made out there is any merit in the assertion the  appellant
       should have succeeded under the Immigration Rules. Under  the  Rules,
       the terms "parent" is defined as:

          "Parent" includes:


           (a)    the stepfather of a child whose father is dead, and
           reference to stepfather includes a relationship arising through
           civil partnership; and


           (b)    the stepmother of a child whose mother is dead, and
           reference to stepmother includes a relationship arising through
           civil partnership; and


           (c)    the father, as well as the mother, of an illegitimate
           child where the person is proved to be the father; and


           (d)    an adoptive parent, where a child was adopted in
           accordance with a decision taken by the competent administrative
           authority or court in a country whose adoption orders are
           recognised by the UK or where a child is the subject of a de
           facto adoption in accordance with the requirements of paragraph
           309A (except that an adopted child or a child who is the subject
           of a de facto adoption may not make an application for leave to
           enter or remain in order to accompany, join or remain with an
           adoptive parent under paragraphs 297 to 303); and


           (e)    in the case of a child born in the UK who is not a
           British citizen, a person to whom there has been a genuine
           transfer of parental responsibility on the ground of the
           original parents' inability to care for the child.

    8. The appellant's role with her grandchildren has been to  support  her
       own children who are the natural parents and primary carers of  those
       children. It was not made out that  the  appellant  can  satisfy  the
       above definition on the evidence and the specific  findings  made  by
       the  Judge  that  the  appellant  had  not   established   that   the
       relationship was sufficient to satisfy the definition of  a  'parent'
       is a finding clearly within the range of those available to the Judge
       on the evidence.
    9. There is a difference between de facto family life, which  the  Judge
       does not dispute exists between the appellant and  her  grandchildren
       or other family members, and family  life  recognised  by  article  8
       ECHR, the existence of which is a question of fact.
   10. I find there is no legal error made out in the Judge  conclusion  the
       relationship between the appellant and her daughter Taneisha and  her
       family unit does not engage article 8, as there was  no  evidence  to
       support a finding that  it  did.  There  is  also  no  basis  for  an
       assertion the  Judge  failed  to  properly  consider  section  55  in
       relation to Stephen as despite time being granted for evidence to  be
       provided to demonstrate the adverse effect of the appellant's removal
       upon Stephen no such evidence was  provided.  The  lack  of  relevant
       evidence is a material issue in this appeal.
   11. So far as the appellant's relationship with her daughter  Melisha  is
       concerned, the Judges factual findings show that  the  appellant  has
       since entry to the United Kingdom lived with this  daughter  and  her
       child Jessica who was born after the appellant arrived in the  United
       Kingdom, as noted by the Judge, and that the appellant has  lived  in
       that family unit for all the child's life. The Judge may have  failed
       to properly analyse  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
       appellant  who  is  dependent  upon  Melisha  for  accommodation  and
       possibly other financial support  in  the  absence  of  evidence  the
       appellant  has  an  income  of  her  own.  If  that  relationship  is
       sufficient to amount to family life recognised by article 8, which  I
       find it is likely to be the  case,  it  is  a  relationship  born  of
       necessity, reflecting the appellant's illegal presence in the  United
       Kingdom and a dependence created as a result of having no independent
       means  of  her  own.  That  is  relevant  to  the  weight  that  such
       relationship warrants being given  as  part  of  any  proportionality
       assessment.
   12. So far as Jessica is concerned, the Judge clearly considered  section
       55, but found insufficient evidence had been provided  to  show  that
       the impact upon the appellant's removal warranted  a  decision  other
       than that made by the Judge.  It  was  not  shown  on  the  available
       evidence, for example, that the best  interests  of  Jessica  or  any
       other child was for the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom and
       that this was the determinative factor.
   13. There is merit in the argument the Judge erred in finding  article  8
       did not exist as it will also exist on  the  basis  of  private  life
       established between the appellant and members of her family, even  if
       family life recognised by article 8 did not.
   14. Any such error is not, however, material,  as  the  Judge  from  [57]
       considered the position  in  the  alternative  is  if  article  8  is
       engaged. The Judge undertakes a  proper analysis of  the  reality  of
       the factual situation and clearly undertook  the  required  balancing
       exercise. Although the grounds assert the Judge did  not  follow  the
       Razgar guidance the Judge was  not  required  to  set  out  the  five
       required stages provided they were considered, which in this  appeal,
       I find they were.
   15. The appellant's representative in his  submissions  referred  to  the
       evidence  of  school  runs  and  that  available  in  the  statements
       supporting the appellant's claim, but the  Judge  clearly  took  that
       evidence into account and it was a  conclusion  wholly  open  to  the
       Judge that that evidence was not sufficient  to  warrant  the  appeal
       being allowed. Indeed, it is a fair  observation  that  the  material
       provided was not very strong in  support  of  the  appellant's  claim
       being based, as  the  Judge  noted,  on  a  desire  to  continue  the
       arrangement  which  are  more  convenient  for  the  family   members
       involved.
   16. The submission that had further  evidence  been  made  available  the
       outcome could have been different may be the case, but there  was  no
       such evidence before the Judge. The grounds fail  to  establish  that
       evidence of the required quality exists in any event.
   17. The Judge's finding in the alternative that any interference  with  a
       protected family or private life is proportionate is within the range
       of findings reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence and,  having
       read the evidence and having heard submissions, is likely to  be  the
       only finding  reasonably  open  to  the  Judge  when  the  matter  is
       considered as a whole.
   18. Whilst the appellant does not like this decision and wishes to remain
       in the UK with her family the grounds falls foul of the judgement  in
       Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412 in which the Court of Appeal  said
       that appellate tribunals must always guard against the temptation  to
       characterise as errors  of  law  what  are  in  truth  no  more  than
       disagreements about the weight to  be  given  to  different  factors,
       particularly if first tribunal had  the  advantage  of  hearing  oral
       evidence. In this case there is insufficient material  to  support  a
       finding the Judge has erred in  law  in  a  manner  material  to  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

   19. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   20. The First-tier Tribunal made an no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 1 June 2021




