
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/22971/2016
                                                HU/22977/2016, HU/22982/2016
                                                HU/24597/2016, HU/22976/2016
                                                HU/22981/2016, HU/24594/2016
                                                               HU/24599/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 August 2018                         |On 02 November 2018            |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mrs Noor [A]
                              Mr Hamdullah [A]
                                    [K A]
                               Mr Mohammad [A]
                              Miss Basbibi [A]
                                 Mr Amir [A]
                                Mr Gulab [A]
                                Mr Rahmat [A]
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Trevelyan, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondents  are  referred  to  as  the  Claimants.   The
    Claimants appealed decisions of the Secretary of State originally  made
    by a decision dated 22 September 2016 to refuse leave to remain  and  a
    human rights based claim was also refused.   A  supplementary  decision
    letter of 9 November 2017 was produced by the Secretary of State but it
    does not substantively add to the issues  so  much  as  iterates  to  a
    degree the general claim that the First Claimant had used a proxy  test
    taker in order to obtain an English language certificate.

2.   Before the Judge the issue was raised as to  whether  or  not  she  had
    ever take a test let alone paraded a certificate.  The  Judge  received
    evidence and heard oral evidence which presumably was cross-examined to
    by the Secretary of State's representative at the hearing.   The  Judge
    heard submissions and made an assessment of the evidence and it is fair
    to say he accepted the statement and evidence of the Claimant that  she
    had not used a proxy test taker but in fact had sought from the  outset
    an extension of time which was allowed then under the Rules in order to
    take the test once qualified leave had been granted.  That was an issue
    plainly before the Judge.

3.   It was fully open to Mr Venables, the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    and Mr Neville, Counsel who appeared for the Claimants, to  argue  this
    issue which they seemingly did.  The Judge concluded that a proxy  test
    taker had not been used and gave full and  adequate  reasons  why  that
    view was reached and the decision D42-44 addressed the  issues  as  did
    address the look-up tool issue in paragraph 45 of the decision.

4.   The circumstances therefore were that the Judge was  entitled  to  take
    the view, as she did finally  and  set  out  at  paragraph  60  of  the
    exercise, that there was no question that the First Claimant and indeed
    the other Claimants had poor immigration histories.  The First Claimant
    had acted correctly in making the application she did with a request to
    be given time and the Judge found as a fact when the issue was  plainly
    before her that Mrs Bibi did not employ a proxy test taker.

5.   It is trite to say that the Judge did not ignore the  generic  evidence
    but simply reached the view in the light of the material that, if there
    was such a  person  as  claimed  to  be  the  applicant  and  used  the
    applicant's identity, it was not the claimant who had  taken  the  test
    which was a view the Judge was entitled to reach.  I see  no  basis  on
    which there is a lack of rationality or perversity in  that  conclusion
    reached.  It is not for me to substitute a different view even if I was
    to have formed one.  Therefore I concluded when the Judge  went  on  to
    address the proportionality of  the  decision  in  the  context  of  an
    Article 8 ECHR claim, the Judge properly took  into  account  the  best
    interests of the  child  Claimants,  properly  took  into  account  the
    considerations that arise in relation to the conduct of the parents and
    the case of EV (Philippines) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

6.   The Judge did not make reference to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  60,
    nor to other case law which moves along the issue of conduct  pertinent
    to the consideration of requiring qualifying children to leave and also
    the relevance to the overall assessment of proportionality.

7.   This was after all a  human  right  based  appeal  and  the  Judge  was
    entitled in assessing that matter, I find, to set out the factors  that
    she did and the answer to the question of whether or not  there  was  a
    proper consideration of it was that  adequate  and  reasoned  decisions
    were given.  I conclude that there was no error of law in the Judge  in
    assessing proportionality by not following the Respondent's line that a
    proxy test taker had been used and therefore deception  and  dishonesty
    were material to the exercise and weight to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest.

8.   It is clear the Judge did consider the  public  interest  and  in  this
    case therefore I find nothing to suggest there is a material  error  of
    law by the Judge in the Article 8 ECHR considerations  that  she  gave.
    It should be noted that  the  Respondent,  despite  being  directed  to
    produce the test certificate, never did so and never gave by way of any
    supplementary material an answer to the general point that  had  always
    been made that a test  certificate  had  not  been  provided  with  the
    application.

9.   In the circumstances it  is  extremely  unfortunate,  but  this  is  no
    criticism of Ms Aboni, that the Secretary of State sought to  challenge
    the decision.  It is evidence that the person who  drafted  the  appeal
    grounds from the Specialist Appeals Unit  probably  did  not  have  the
    bundle of documents that were  before  the  Judge:  In  particular  the
    evidence which the Judge had accepted, putting aside the oral evidence,
    of the fact that the First Claimant had not used a  proxy  test  taker,
    quite simply because she did not take a test at all.

10.  Ultimately I find therefore the  Original  Tribunal  made  no  material
    error of law.  The decisions stand.  The appeals of  the  Secretary  of
    State against the various decisions are dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was previously made and none has been sought  and  I  see
no reason to impose one now.

DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decisions stand.  The appeals of the  Claimants  are
allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

The Secretary of State's appeals are dismissed.


Signed
    Date 01 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

