
                                  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22385/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2021                           |On 23 February 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                              MUHAMMAD SULEMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Lawfare
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal N M Paul ("the judge") promulgated on 18 October  2019  in
         which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the
         respondent dated 16 October 2018 refusing his  human  rights  claim
         based on his long residence in the UK.

      2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born on  12  August
         1982. He first entered  the  UK  on  2  December  2007  with  entry
         clearance as a student. He was granted further periods of Leave  To
         Remain (LTR), the last period valid to 7 March 2013. By this  time,
         he had resided  in  the  UK  for  a  continuous  lawful  period  of
         approximately 5 years and 3 months.

      3. On 7 March 2013 the appellant applied for an EEA residence card  as
         confirmation of his right to reside in the  UK  as  the  spouse  of
         Elizabeth Anne  Yarsuvat,  a  Swedish  national  exercising  Treaty
         rights in the UK as a qualified person. He had marred  Ms  Yarsuvat
         on 6 March 2013. The residence card was issued  on  19  June  2013,
         valid until 19  June  2018.  It  is  important  at  this  stage  to
         appreciate that the appellant's right of residence was not bestowed
         by the  issuance  of  the  residence  card  but  derived  from  his
         relationship with his EEA national spouse who was  working  in  the
         UK. The residence card simply evidenced  that  right.  It  is  also
         important to appreciate that the appellant's  right  to  reside  in
         this country was  no  longer  governed  by  the  immigration  rules
         because, as the family member of a qualified  person,  he  was  not
         subject to immigration control (this is reflected in paragraph 5 of
         the immigration rules).

      4. According to the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 16  October  2018
         the registration certificate issued to Ms Yarsuvat on 19 June  2013
         as a qualified person was revoked on 13 May 2014 as she  failed  to
         establish that she was exercising Treaty rights at that time.

      5. On 15 June 2018  the  appellant  made  a  human  rights  claim  (an
         application for Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR)) on the basis that
         he had lawfully resided in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  10
         years,  with  reference  to  paragraphs  276A  and  276B   of   the
         immigration rules. The covering letter accompanying the application
         indicated that the appellant and his spouse had separated  "in  the
         last few months" but that they  were  not  divorced.  The  covering
         letter indicated that the appellant  was  unable  to  provide  "her
         documents" as "all efforts to convince her to  assist  have  proved
         futile" ("her" being Ms Yarsuvat).

      6.  In  refusing  the  application  the  respondent  referred  to  her
         published guidance on long residence which noted  that  individuals
         who had resided in  the  UK  by  virtue  of  rights  under  EU  law
         (detailed in the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
         2016) were not required to have leave to enter or remain and  could
         not therefore meet the requirements of paragraph 276B. The guidance
         however indicated that the decision-maker had to  apply  discretion
         and count time spent in the UK as lawful  residence  for  a  family
         member of an EEA national who was exercising their  Treaty  rights.
         The respondent noted that the  appellant  had  separated  from  his
         spouse but that they were not divorced. The respondent additionally
         noted the appellant's claim that, because of the separation, he was
         unable to provide documentation to support  his  application  other
         than some of Ms Yarsuvat's bank statements dating  from  2013.  The
         respondent then stated  that  the  appellant  had  been  unable  to
         provide any evidence to support his claim that he  had  been  in  a
         subsisting relationship with Ms Yarsuvat for the period claim,  and
         that he had failed to establish that she had been exercising Treaty
         rights for the period claimed (given that the appellant had already
         achieved 5 years and 3 months lawful residence by 7 March 2013,  it
         is tolerably clear that the 'period claimed' related to the  period
         continuing from that date making up a  total  of  10  years,  which
         would be approximately December 2017/January 2018). The  respondent
         was not, as a consequence, satisfied that the appellant could  rely
         on the period of time that he sought to rely in  his  human  rights
         claim as the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national.  The  application  was
         therefore  refused  under  paragraph  276B(i)(a)  and  (v)  of  the
         immigration rules.  The  respondent  then  considered  whether  the
         appellant met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
         immigration rules, relating to his private  life  in  the  UK,  but
         found, based on hisparticular circumstances,  that  there  were  no
         very significant obstacles to his integration in Pakistan. Nor  was
         the respondent satisfied that the refusal of the appellant's  human
         rights claim would breach rights protected by Article 8 ECHR.


      7. It is apparent from the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter,  which  was
         received by the applicant on 20 October 2018, that  the  respondent
         was not satisfied that  Ms  Yarsuvat  had  been  exercising  Treaty
         rights following the issuance to her of a Registration  Certificate
         up to and including the date  of  the  application.  The  appellant
         would therefore have been aware that this concern was  a  principle
         issue that needed to be addressed at any appeal hearing,  and  that
         central to his appeal was the question whether his spouse had  been
         exercising Treaty rights  following  the  issuance  of  appellant's
         residence card. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision to
         the First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 3 October 2019 the respondent
         produced three letters; one addressed to Ms Yarsuvat, the other two
         addressed to a Mr B Shahid and a Mr  M  Shahzad  respectively.  The
         letters were all dated 13 May 2014 and were all sent  to  the  same
         address. The letter for Ms Yarsuvat explained that, in light  of  a
         recent application made to UK Visas and Immigration  in  which  she
         was identified as the sponsor,  several  unsuccessful  phone  calls
         were made to verify her employment. It  was  therefore  decided  to
         revoke her Registration  Certificate  as  the  respondent  was  not
         satisfied that she was still exercising her Treaty rights. The  two
         other letters were in very similar terms. An application  had  been
         made by Mr B Shahid and Mr  M  Shahzad  as  family  members  of  Ms
         Yarsuvat but the nature of the relationship was not clear. The Home
         Office was not satisfied that either gentleman was a family  member
         of Ms Yarsuvat, or that she had,  in  any  event,  been  exercising
         Treaty rights as a qualified person. The judge stated, at  the  end
         of [7]:


             "Thus, the reason for the revocation  of  the  EEA  national's
             registration certificate is made explicit. It appears that she
             was being claimed as an  EEA  national  wife  by  3  different
             people."


      9. The appellant's barrister, Mr Plowright, took issue with  the  late
         provision of these letters and requested  that  they  be  excluded,
         alternatively, that the appellant  be  granted  an  adjournment  to
         enable the appellant to consider the letters and  to  give  him  an
         opportunity to provide rebuttal evidence.


     10. The judge refused to exclude the letters and refused  to  grant  an
         adjournment. At [9] the judge noted that the appellant could not be
         said to have been taken by surprise  as  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter referred to the revocation  of  Ms  Yarsuvat's  registration
         certificate on 13 May 2014 on the basis  that  she  had  failed  to
         establish that she was exercising Treaty rights at that  time.  The
         judge noted that the appellant had  made  no  application  for  any
         relevant material to be disclosed  by  the  respondent.  The  judge
         concluded  that  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
         (Immigration  &  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  were   sufficiently
         flexible to allow for the late admission of evidence if it  was  in
         the interests of justice to do so.

     11. At [10] the judge stated:

             "I also rejected the application for an adjournment because  I
             could not see that there was any sensible basis on  which  any
             evidence could be obtained that could  alter  this  situation.
             The Home Office documents spoke for themselves, and so far  as
             the EEA national was concerned, it was part of the appellant's
             case that after their separation she had refused to  cooperate
             or communicate with him. there was thus no reasonable prospect
             of any evidence to be obtained by an adjournment."

     12. At [11] the judge stated:


             "The appellant's case, as set out in his witness statement and
             attached representations, is that he has been in the UK for  a
             number of years, and has  had  an  extremely  good  employment
             history; successfully passed a Life in the UK  test;  and  has
             the relevant English language requirement on the basis of  his
             Masters degree. He was also in possession of a valid residence
             certificate that was never revoked.  On  that  basis,  it  was
             submitted that either in relation to the 267B  long  residence
             Rules, or in relation to his Article 8 claim, that  he  should
             be allowed to remain."


     13. In the section headed "Conclusions & Reasons" the judge stated,  at
         [13]:


             "The starting  point  is  whether  or  not  he  can  meet  the
             requirements of the Rules. In simply [sic] terms he cannot. It
             is  quite  plain  that,  from  the  point  at  which  the  EEA
             national's certificate of registration was revoked, that meant
             that the appellant's  situation  in  this  country  which  was
             contingent upon his wife's  [sic]  ceased  to  be  lawful.  It
             therefore follows that, on a simply [sic] construction of  the
             principles of lawful residents, he cannot succeed."


     14. At [14] and [15] the judge proceeded to consider  the  appeal  from
         the point of view of the appellant's Article 8 private life rights.
         The judge found that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  the
         appellant's  return  to  Pakistan,  by   reference   to   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules. The  judge  noted  in  this
         regard that the appellant had "excellent qualifications",  that  he
         had maintained ties with Pakistan by reason of having  returned  to
         visit, and that there was nothing that could point to the appellant
         experiencing "... All sorts of difficulties that  would  crush  the
         threshold of showing that life would be intolerably difficult." The
         judge then considered whether there were any factors  in  the  case
         before him could point to  any  consideration  of  the  appellant's
         Article 8 rights that were not  properly  contemplated  within  the
         immigration rules. The judge found there were no such factors.  The
         judge stated:

             "This is a straightforward case of a man who has come  to  the
             UK and completed his education over a number of years, and has
             benefited from being able to work here with all the experience
             that he has acquired, and that has meant that although he  may
             have established a private life to that extent, it is  not  so
             strong or compelling as to mean that it should trump the basic
             requirement to maintain  proper  immigration  control.  In  my
             view, there was nothing in the human rights claim  that  takes
             it outside a proper application of Article 8 under the Rules."

     15. The judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     16. The grounds of appeal as  originally  drafted  (not  by  either  Mr
         Plowright of by Ms Anzani) challenged the  judge's  decision  on  a
         range of issues. The grounds are lengthy and, in relation  to  some
         of the issues under challenge, betray a lack  of  understanding  on
         the part of the author of the nature of rights derived under EU law
         and the consequences of a grant of a residence permit. The  grounds
         contend that the judge erred in law  in  refusing  to  exclude  the
         letters produced by the  respondent  on  the  day  of  the  hearing
         (including a failure to ask the  respondent  to  explain  what  the
         documents had not been served earlier and  an  assertion  that  the
         respondent was using "unfair tactics"), and that the judge erred in
         law in failing to grant the adjournment to enable the appellant  to
         assess and "verify the factual accuracy"  of  the  letters  and  in
         concluding that there was no reasonable prospect  of  any  evidence
         capable of being obtained by an adjournment.  The  grounds  further
         contend that the judge failed to  record  a  full  account  of  the
         evidence given by the appellant, although no details  are  provided
         as to what material evidence was left out of account. The judge was
         said to have  failed  to  take  into  account  a  letter  from  the
         appellant's previous legal representatives indicating that they had
         never received any correspondence from the Home Office relating  to
         the revocation of Ms Yarsuvat's registration certificate,  and  the
         judge failed to take into account that the applicant and his spouse
         had never received any such letter as they  had  moved  address  by
         that time. The grounds contend that the judge  failed  to  consider
         that the appellant had never been stopped whilst  entering  the  UK
         following the revocation of his spouse's  registration  certificate
         and that the judge failed to consider a letter in support  provided
         by his former employer indicating that he was, inter alia,  a  role
         model employee. The  grounds  contend  that  the  judge  failed  to
         consider that a person is entitled to a grant of  Indefinite  Leave
         to Remain under paragraph 276B  and  that  the  appellant  remained
         lawfully  in  the  UK  since  acquiring  his  EEA  residence  card,
         although the author of the grounds failed to  appreciate  that  the
         residence card did not bestow lawful residents. The grounds contend
         that the respondent (not the judge) failed to properly exercise her
         discretion given that the appellant was "an exceptionally  talented
         person" who would always sought to make his applications within the
         legal framework and who had resided continuously without  breaching
         the immigration rules. The grounds finally contend that  the  judge
         erred in his approach to Article 8 as he should have considered the
         legality of removal in accordance with Strasbourg jurisprudence and
         that he failed to consider Article 8 outside the immigration rules,
         and that the judge failed  to  consider  the  length  of  time  the
         appellant resided in the UK.


     17. In granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal judge of the
         First-tier Tribunal Chohan stated:

             "I note the reasons  given  by  the  judge  for  refusing  the
             adjournment request and the reasons for allowing the evidence.
             However, in the interests of fairness and bearing in mind  the
             impact of the new  documentary  evidence  on  the  appellant's
             case, if not to exclude the evidence, perhaps the judge should
             have given the appellant an adjournment to  consider  the  new
             documentary evidence and prepare accordingly.
             This is an issue that must be  looked  into  further  but  the
             appellant must note that  it  must  be  established  that  the
             refusal to exclude the documentary evidence and the refusal to
             grant an adjournment had a  material  impact  on  the  overall
             decision made by the judge."


     18. In the course of issuing directions for determining the  appeal  in
         light of the Covid-19 pandemic Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson stated,
         in paragraph 4 of directions issued on 7 July 2020:


             "On a preliminary view of the papers, it is difficult  to  see
             what if any difference the further documents produced  by  the
             Respondent had on the outcome of the appeal as with or without
             them, it appears that the Appellant has  failed  to  establish
             that he  was  residing  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
             (European Economic Area)  Regulation  2006  (under  which  the
             Residence Card was issued in 2013) as the family member of  an
             EEA national exercising treaty rights. A Residence  Card  does
             not confer any leave to remain and a person is still  required
             to establish that they were residing in  accordance  with  the
             regulations for the purposes of lawful residence in the United
             Kingdom. In  the  absence  of  this,  the  Appellant  did  not
             establish 10 years continuous lawful residence in  the  United
             Kingdom, and he could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE of the Immigration Rules."


     19. On 14 July 2020 the appellant provided a supplementary bundle  that
         contained, amongst other things, a post-decision statement from the
         appellant and some P60 End of Year  Certificates  relating  to  his
         spouse for the years ending April 2017, 2016, 2015  and  2014.  The
         supplementary bundle did not contain any documentation dealing with
         the letters produced by the respondent on the day of the First-tier
         Tribunal hearing. In further directions issued on 29 September 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan acknowledged the supplementary bundle
         but indicated that it did  "not  contain  any  submissions  on  the
         point."


     20. At the remotely conducted 'error of law' hearing Ms Anzani sensibly
         narrowed the focus of her  submissions  to  the  strongest  of  the
         grounds, that concerning the issue of fairness. She argued that the
         judge was wrong to have refused to adjourn the  hearing  to  enable
         the appellant to deal with evidence that had only been provided  on
         the day of the hearing. The judge's conclusion at the  end  of  [7]
         that  Ms  Yarsuvat's  registration  certificate  had  been  revoked
         because she was being claimed as an  EEA  national  wife  by  three
         different people was not borne out by the  actual  letter  revoking
         her registration certificate which indicated that attempts  by  the
         respondent to  contact  her  employer  had  failed  and  there  was
         therefore no evidence that she was exercising  Treaty  rights.  The
         letters and  the  judge's  comments  raised  issue  concerning  the
         appellant's relationship with Ms Yarsuvat and the nature  of  their
         marriage.  It was unreasonable and unfair for  the  judge  to  have
         suggested that the appellant was aware of  any  concerns  that  two
         other people had  made  applications  with  Ms  Yarsuvat  as  their
         sponsor. There was inherent unfairness in the  decision  to  refuse
         the adjournment.

Discussion

     21. The 'Modernised Guidance, Home Office Long  Residence',  extant  at
         the material time, states:

             Time spent in  the  UK  with  a  right  to  reside  under  EEA
             regulations


             This  page  tells  you  how  to  consider  a  long   residence
             application when a person has spent time  in  the  UK  with  a
             right  to  reside  under  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)
             regulations.


             Time spent in the UK does not count as lawful residence  under
             paragraph 276A of the  Immigration  Rules  for  third  country
             nationals who have spent time in the UK as:
             . the spouse, civil  partner  or  other  family  member  of  a
             European Union (EU) national
             . an EEA national exercising their treaty rights  to  live  in
             the UK but have not qualified for permanent residence
             . former family members who have retained a right of residence




             During the time spent in the UK under the  provisions  of  the
             EEA  regulations,  the  individuals   are   not   subject   to
             immigration control, and would not be required to  have  leave
             to enter or leave to remain. See EEA  Nationals  guidance  for
             further information.


             However, you must apply discretion and count time spent in the
             UK as lawful residence for an EU  or  EEA  national  or  their
             family members exercising their treaty rights to reside in the
             UK.


             Sufficient evidence must be provided to demonstrate  that  the
             applicant has been exercising  treaty  rights  throughout  any
             period that they are seeking to rely on for  the  purposes  of
             meeting the long residence rules.


             This does not affect the  rights  of  family  members  of  EEA
             nationals to permanent residence in the UK, where they qualify
             for it after a period  of  5  years  residence  in  the  UK  -
             Regulation 15 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2006. More information can be found on the  GOV.UK
             website - apply for a UK residence card.


             If an applicant was in the UK with a  right  to  reside  under
             European Economic Area (EEA) regulations, continuous residence
             is not broken if they leave the UK and  are  then  re-admitted
             under the EEA regulations.


             When granting a Long Residence application in which  a  person
             has relied on a period of leave in the  UK  exercising  treaty
             rights as an EEA national or their family member, any grant of
             leave must be made outside the Immigration Rules.

     22. It is readily  apparent  from  the  Modernised  Guidance  that  the
         respondent will exercise her discretion and grant leave outside the
         immigration rules provided that an applicant can show  that  he  or
         she was the spouse of a qualified person who was exercising  treaty
         rights for the necessary period of time.


     23. Regardless of why the spouse's registration  certificate  had  been
         revoked, and indeed regardless of whether it had  been  revoked  at
         all, the appellant  needed  to  show  that  Ms  Yarsuvat  had  been
         exercising Treaty rights as a qualified person after their marriage
         for a period of time sufficient to amount to the equivalent  of  10
         years continuous lawful residence so as to enable the  respondent's
         discretion to be exercised in  accordance  with  her  guidance.  It
         should have been apparent to the appellant, and  certainly  to  his
         legal representatives, that the central  issue  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal appeal was whether,  despite  the  issuance  of  documents
         evidencing or revoking rights derived under EU law, Ms Yarsuvat had
         been exercising Treaty rights for a period of 4 years and 9  months
         since their marriage (the period of time  required  to  established
         the equivalent of 10 years continuous lawful residence  given  that
         the appellant had already been lawfully resident through grants  of
         leave to enter and leave to remain for 5 years and 3 months).  This
         central issue, in actuality, had little if anything to do with  the
         letters produced by the respondent on the day of the hearing.


     24. Even if it was unreasonable for the judge to have presumed that the
         appellant would be aware of concerns that two other people had made
         applications with Ms Yarsuvat  as  their  sponsor,  the  respondent
         never asserted that the marriage was one  of  convenience  and  the
         judge made no such finding. The judge's decision was not  based  on
         any dishonesty or abuse of Treaty rights, but on  the  simple  fact
         that there was insufficient evidence  that  Ms  Yarsuvat  had  been
         exercising Treaty rights as a qualified person for a  period  of  4
         years and 9 months. This was the pivotal issue that  needed  to  be
         determined at the hearing and which was clear from the Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter.

     25. Under section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
         the Upper Tribunal may, if it finds that the making of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error on a point
         of law, but need not, set the decision aside. An error of law  must
         therefore  be  material  to  the  decision.  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
         fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC),  a  decision  of  the  former
         President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (IAC),  dealt  with  procedural
         fairness in the context of adjournments. The test to be applied  is
         that of fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected party's
         right to a fair hearing? The issue of materiality was  nevertheless
         relevant when determining whether to set  the  decision  aside  and
         therefore whether to allow or dismiss the appeal. In Nwaigwe itself
         the Tribunal found that the error of law in refusing to  grant  the
         adjournment was not material and that  the  refusal  to  grant  the
         adjournment would not have made any difference to  the  outcome  of
         the appeal (at [11] & [12]).

     26. Despite the indication of the appellant's barrister at  the  First-
         tier Tribunal hearing that  the  adjournment  was  being  requested
         solely in order to  obtain  rebuttal  evidence  to  deal  with  the
         letters provided by the respondent on the day of the  hearing,  and
         despite the grant of  permission  to  appeal  indicating  that  the
         appellant  had  to  establish  that  the  refusal  to   grant   the
         adjournment had a material impact  on  the  overall  decision,  and
         despite Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson's preliminary view that it was
         difficult to see what if any difference the further  letters  would
         have had on the outcome of the appeal, and despite the  observation
         of Upper Tribunal Judge  Sheridan  that  the  supplementary  bundle
         provided on 14 July 2020 did not contain  any  submissions  on  the
         relevant point, the appellant has failed to  provide  any  evidence
         engaging with or in  rebuttal  to  the  letters  of  13  May  2014.
         Moreover, even if such evidence had been provided, it is  extremely
         difficult to see how it would have been  relevant  to,  or  how  it
         could have affected, the pivotal issue in the appeal, which was the
         absence of any evidence that Ms Yarsuvat had been exercising Treaty
         rights. It follows inexorably  that  the  refusal  to  adjourn  the
         hearing was not unfair,  since  the  appellant  could  not  on  any
         showing have succeeded even if an adjournment had been granted.


     27. Although the appellant has now produced a supplementary bundle that
         contains documents that appear to be P60s issued to the appellant's
         spouse for the tax years ending April 2014 to 2017, these documents
         were not before the judge when he made his decision and, as pointed
         out by Judge Sheridan, they do not constitute rebuttal evidence  in
         response to the letters produced by the respondent on  the  day  of
         the First-tier Tribunal hearing. Ms Anzani did not  seek  to  argue
         that the P60s should be admitted in order to determine whether  the
         judge erred in law, and she was right not to do so. At the time  of
         both the First-tier Tribunal hearing  and  decision  the  appellant
         maintained that he was  unable  to  obtain  any  evidence  that  Ms
         Yarsuvat was exercising Treaty rights  due  to  their  breakup.  No
         application appears to have been made by the appellant for an 'Amos
         Direction' pursuant to Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  552  to  obtain
         HMRC records relating to Ms Yarsuvat's employment, either prior  to
         or at the First-tier Tribunal hearing. The appellant could not,  on
         any rational view, meet the requirements for demonstrating that the
         judge made a mistake of fact amounting  to  an  error  of  law,  as
         considered in E & R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49. Whilst the documents
         in the supplementary bundle  may  form  the  basis  for  a  further
         application by the applicant, they are not relevant in  determining
         whether the judge's decision contains errors of law  based  on  the
         evidence that was available to him.

     28. Ms Anzani did not advance any of the  other  grounds  in  her  oral
         submissions and I need only deal with them briefly. Given that  the
         letters produced by the respondent on the day of  the  hearing  did
         not make any material difference to the judge's assessment  of  the
         pivotal issue in the appeal, there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
         decision not to exclude them. Nor is there any error of  law  based
         on the judge's failure to mention the letter from  the  appellant's
         previous representatives relating to the non-receipt of the  letter
         revoking her registration certificate; whether or  not  the  letter
         was received, there was simply no evidence  that  Ms  Yarsuvat  had
         been exercising Treaty rights.  To  the  extent  that  the  grounds
         contend  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of   relevant
         considerations such as the appellant's length of residence  or  his
         good employment record,  this  is  not  made  out.  The  judge  was
         demonstrably aware of the appellant's length of residence in the UK
         (see [1], [5], and [11]) and his good work history  (see  [11]  and
         [12]). Nor was there any material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
         Article 8 assessment.  Whilst  the  immigration  rules  are  not  a
         complete code as to how article 8 should be applied, but a starting
         point,  the  judge's  findings  at  [15],   that   the   particular
         circumstances of the appellant (including his length of  residence,
         his education and his employment history) were  not  sufficient  to
         overcome the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration control, was one rationally open to him. Indeed  it  is
         difficult to see how any judge would have been  entitled  to  allow
         the appeal given the absence of any  evidence  that  the  appellant
         actually had a right to reside in the UK (a valid residence  permit
         does not bestow a right of residence) since being issued  with  his
         residence permit.


     29. For these reasons I find that the grounds of appeal  are  not  made
         out and I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of errors on points of law requiring it to be set aside.

The appeal is dismissed.



D.Blum                              9 February 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



