
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22378/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2019                |On 04th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                         hiren sureshchandra rajput
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Acharyas, Acharyas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 4 May 1979.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk  promulgated  on
    20 June 2019 dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's refusal  of
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E  M
    Simpson on 23 September 2019 on the grounds it was arguable  the  judge
    had failed to thoroughly assess the country information concerning  the
    socio-political economy of the country, save in the briefest of  terms,
    when concluding that the employment situation was 'not very  good'  and
    the Appellant would 'encounter a level of difficulty' in finding  work.
    Judge Simpson was of the view that the judge's findings concerning  the
    Appellant's lack of family life in the UK were open to the judge on the
    evidence before her, but that the decision otherwise disclosed  a  lack
    of reasoning.


Submissions

3.   Mr Acharyas submitted that the issue  in  this  case  was  whether  the
    judge had  considered  the  test  of  'very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration'. It was clear from paragraph 34 of the decision  that  the
    Appellant had no family in Zimbabwe. He had heart problems and was  not
    in a position to engage in employment since he had no accommodation  in
    Zimbabwe and no family members or other form of support. The judge  had
    erred in law in not considering  relevant  objective  evidence  of  the
    economic situation in Zimbabwe. The judge acknowledged that  the  level
    of unemployment was 95% but had failed to  refer  to  or  consider  the
    other objective evidence at pages 230 to 317 of the bundle. This showed
    that the Appellant would not be able to reintegrate in Zimbabwe because
    he would be unable to find employment and accommodation.

4.   The judge's finding that  the  Appellant  could  receive  support  from
    those who supported him in the UK was irrational.  There  was  credible
    evidence from the Appellant's witness that he  could  not  support  the
    Appellant on return to Zimbabwe.  The  Appellant  would  be  unable  to
    establish human relationships without family or other support.  He  had
    no accommodation and no prospect of employment. He had been in  the  UK
    in excess of 16 years. Applying Kamara v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,
    there were very significant obstacles to integration  and  the  judge's
    conclusions were irrational.

5.   Further, there was sufficient evidence to show  that  the  support  the
    Appellant received from his uncle and family was  real,  committed  and
    effective such that family life existed. The judge failed  to  consider
    the impact  on  family  members  in  particular  the  relationship  the
    Appellant had with his cousin  who  was  like  a  sister  to  him.  The
    Appellant's medical history, requiring regular check-ups with  his  GP,
    and the dire employment prospects was sufficient  to  show  significant
    obstacles  to  reintegration.  Mr  Acharyas  accepted  the  Appellant's
    circumstances did not reach the high threshold of Article 3.

6.   Mr Kotas submitted that the Appellant's claim to have  family  life  in
    the UK was unarguable. The Appellant had an uncle and cousins in the UK
    but he did not live with them and he was not directly related to  them.
    His cousin, whom he considered to be a sister, was not  emotionally  or
    financially  dependent  on  the  Appellant.  The  judge's  finding   at
    paragraph 41 that the Appellant had failed to establish family life  in
    the UK was the only conclusion the judge could reach  on  the  evidence
    before him.  The judge dealt with the Appellant's medical condition  at
    paragraph 32. The GP's letter did not  state  that  the  Appellant  was
    unable to care for himself or unable to obtain employment or that there
    was any risk of a health  problem  in  the  future.   Accordingly,  the
    health facilities in Zimbabwe were not likely to be material.

7.   The Appellant was focusing on his employment position in  Zimbabwe.  It
    was submitted that the judge failed to refer to the other  articles  in
    the Appellant's bundle but this did not  really  add  to  the  position
    which the judge considered in any event.  The articles  in  the  bundle
    were repetitious and whether there were very significant  obstacles  to
    integration was not confined to whether the Appellant could get a  job.
    The judge properly directed herself applying Kamara at paragraph 22 and
    found that the Appellant would find it difficult to get a job. However,
    the level  of  difficulty  was  not  such  that  he  could  not  obtain
    employment within a reasonable time. Mr Acharyas  submitted  the  judge
    should have found that the Appellant could not get a job. However, this
    was not the only conclusion open to the judge on  the  evidence  before
    her. Even if the Appellant could not get a job, the judge found that he
    would not be destitute. She rejected the evidence that all the  support
    in the UK would be suddenly cut off. Further, the Appellant could  take
    advantage of the voluntary returns service for financial assistance  on
    return.

8.   Mr Kotas submitted the judge had  considered  the  objective  material,
    the Appellant's circumstances on return to Zimbabwe and the  likelihood
    of support from those here in the UK. The judge's findings were open to
    her on the evidence before her.  Although the level of unemployment was
    high and the economic situation in Zimbabwe  was  poor,  the  Appellant
    would be enough of an insider to be able to integrate. He would  be  in
    no worse  position  than  any  other  Zimbabwean.  The  fact  that  the
    Appellant would be returning without family members or other support in
    Zimbabwe did not mean he could not integrate. The judge had  applied  a
    broad evaluative assessment to integration consistent with Kamara.  The
    Appellant would have a reasonable opportunity of  obtaining  employment
    within a reasonable time. Lack  of  employment  opportunities  was  not
    enough to reach the elevated threshold of 'very  significant  obstacles
    to integration' and the judge had properly dealt with that  test.   The
    Appellant came to the UK as a young adult and the judge considered  all
    relevant factors.  Her conclusions were open to  her  on  the  evidence
    before her.

9.   Mr Acharyas submitted that the Appellant had no support from anyone  in
    Zimbabwe.  He required check-ups for  his  medical  condition  and  the
    medical system in Zimbabwe  had  collapsed.   The  Appellant  would  be
    unable  to  participate  in  normal  life.  He  had  been  away  for  a
    significant amount of time and could not support himself because  there
    were no jobs available. Looking at the evidence in the round, the judge
    had not considered all  the  objective  evidence.  There  were  over  1
    million people on food aid and someone like the Appellant arriving with
    no support would not  be  able  to  build  up  relationships  within  a
    reasonable amount of time.

10.  The judge's conclusion at paragraph 34 that he could obtain  employment
    did not take  into  account  the  change  in  circumstances  since  the
    Appellant left Zimbabwe. It was not about the level  of  difficulty  in
    obtaining employment because it was more or less impossible  to  obtain
    such employment. The Appellant would not be able to support himself  or
    engage in a normal lifestyle. The judge had failed to look at  all  the
    circumstances in the round.


Conclusions and reasons

11.   The  Appellant  came  to  the  UK  on  27  March  2003  as  a  working
    holidaymaker and was subsequently granted leave to remain as a student.
    He has remained in the UK without leave since May 2009. His  subsequent
    asylum application was refused and his appeal dismissed in August 2009.
    His further submissions were refused as a  fresh  claim  in  2014.  The
    Appellant applied on 30 October 2017 for leave to remain on  the  basis
    of family and private life which was refused on 17 October 2018.

12.  It is the Appellant's case that he is supported by his uncle in the  UK
    and has a strong bond with his uncle and his  family.  There  are  also
    numerous other family members and friends in the UK who  have  provided
    him with financial support. The Appellant has become  fully  integrated
    into life in the UK. He has no friends or family in Zimbabwe and  would
    face very significant obstacles to  integration  because  he  has  only
    spent six years of  his  adult  life  in  Zimbabwe.  The  situation  in
    Zimbabwe is extremely poor. He may face harassment as an MDC  supporter
    and he was very concerned about the impact of the economic state of the
    country.  There  was  a  shortage  of   jobs,   medicines,   food   and
    accommodation. The Appellant had heart surgery in  June  2018  and  his
    health would suffer if he returned.

13.  The Appellant was diagnosed with an  acute  myocardial  infarction  and
    underwent coronary surgery and had a cardiac stent placement on 26 June
    2018. He was discharged from the hospital and is now seen by his GP. He
    required regular reviews for health checks and blood tests,  monitoring
    and medication but there were no forthcoming appointments  referred  to
    in the GP's letter.

14.  I am satisfied that the judge properly  directed  herself  in  law  and
    applied the correct test following Kamara v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813. At paragraph 22 the  judge  quotes
    from Kamara stating:


         "The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the society  and  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it so as  to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

15.  In summary, the judge found the Appellant had  been  in  the  UK  since
    March 2003, which was insufficient to  meet  paragraph  276ADE(vi).  He
    came to the UK as a young adult and therefore  was  familiar  with  the
    lifestyle,  culture,  language,  religion,  politics  and  society   of
    Zimbabwe. His sixteen-year residence in the UK  did  not  diminish  his
    knowledge of Zimbabwe given his evidence that he took  an  interest  in
    the news and mixed  with  family  members  and  friends  of  Zimbabwean
    descent. He remained aware of the culture and  social  aspects  of  his
    country and his length of time in the UK would not be a barrier to  his
    integration.

16.  The Appellant was able to speak English,  which  is  widely  spoken  in
    Zimbabwe, and there were no issues regarding his ability to communicate
    with people. Although he had no family  or  friends  to  return  to  in
    Zimbabwe, he had the ability to make new friends  and  develop  support
    networks. His medical condition required medication but he  had  failed
    to establish that it would not be available in Zimbabwe. The  Appellant
    did not require on going treatment for  his  heart  condition  and  was
    currently under the care of his GP. He had failed to show that he would
    not be able to obtain access health reviews upon return. The GP  letter
    did not state that the Appellant was unable to care for himself or seek
    employment.

17.  At paragraph 34 the judge stated:


         "I take into account the employment situation in  Zimbabwe  is  not
         very good. I take into account the media report at page 317 of  the
         Appellant's bundle, which states that  the  unemployment  rate  was
         reported to be 95% in May 2017. I find that the Appellant does have
         employment prospects because he speaks English,  he  is  physically
         and mentally able to work, he was educated in Zimbabwe and he has a
         good level of education, and he has previous experience of being in
         employment. Although he would struggle to find  a  significant  job
         which is highly paid, his oral evidence was that he could only do a
         general type of job. I find that although he would have  to  search
         and apply  for  jobs  and  that  he  would  encounter  a  level  of
         difficulty in doing so, that he has not established that  he  would
         be able to secure some form of employment in a reasonable period of
         time. This would give him the means to accommodate and provide  for
         himself."

18.  At paragraph 35, the judge found:


         "I have considered the written evidence of his family  members  and
         friends especially that of Mr Dayi (sic). I  do  not  find  at  all
         credible that they would all fail to assist him financially on  his
         return.  This  is  because  Mr  Daya  has  been  making   financial
         contributions towards the Appellant's upkeep  for  many  years,  as
         have a number of his different family members and  friends  and  to
         suddenly stop this just because he has left the country means  that
         I cannot place any weight on the depth of  support  that  they  say
         that they have individually provided for him  over  the  years.  It
         does not make any logical sense that they would withdraw their help
         and support and I found Mr Daya's evidence  on  that  point  wholly
         unconvincing."

19.  The judge went on to find that each person in the UK  would  contribute
    according to their ability to do so which would potentially add up to a
    significant amount. But in any event,  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    Appellant could not access the voluntary returns service for  financial
    assistance and therefore he would have sufficient  funds  to  help  him
    until he found employment. The judge placed little weight on the letter
    from the Appellant's father who had moved to the USA in 2006 and  found
    that he was not an active supporter of the  MDC.  The  judge  concluded
    that the factors referred to in the above paragraphs did not reach  the
    high threshold of 'very significant obstacles to reintegration'.

20.  I am of the view that this  finding  was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her. The Appellant accepted in re-examination  that  he
    would be able "to do general employment".  He  had  the  assistance  of
    family and friends in the UK or through the voluntary returns  service.
    He had spent six years of his adult life in Zimbabwe before  coming  to
    the UK where he had maintained his cultural links. His heart  condition
    did not prevent  him  for  working  and  he  did  not  require  further
    treatment. On the evidence before the judge, the Appellant was able  to
    operate on a day-to-day basis and to build up within a reasonable  time
    a variety of human relationships to give substance to his private  life
    in Zimbabwe.

21.  Mr Acharyas referred to articles in the Appellant's bundle  and  stated
    that the judge failed to take these into account. However,  looking  at
    the totality of that objective evidence, it did not alter the  position
    the judge considered. The judge was well aware that  the  situation  in
    Zimbabwe was economically poor and that the unemployment rate was  very
    high. However, it was not the case that the Appellant would not be able
    to find a job at all.  There  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant had  failed  to  show  'very  significant
    obstacles to integration'.

22.  There was no error of law in the judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant
    had not established family life in the UK. He did  not  live  with  his
    uncle or his uncle's family. His uncle's children were adults  and  the
    level of support did not go beyond normal emotional ties.

23.   Even  if  Article  8  is  engaged,  the  judge   properly   considered
    proportionality. The Appellant has remained in  the  UK  illegally  for
    over nine years. The weight to be attached to the  public  interest  is
    significant. The judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant's  family  and
    private life could not outweigh the public interest was open to him  on
    the evidence before him.

24.  Accordingly, I find that there is no  error  of  law  in  the  decision
    promulgated on 20 June 2019 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 29 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 29 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

