
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22151/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th February 2019                |On 12th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                           Mr Trung Nguyen Nguyen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Record, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Vietnam, appeals  with  permission  against
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Geraint  Jones  QC)
    dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  of   7th
    September 2016 refusing his application for leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of his Article 8 family/private life.
Background

 2. The Appellant was born on 25th June 1992.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in February 2011 in possession of a student  visa  valid  until
    21st October 2013.  On 10th October 2013 he  made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain as  a  student,  with  that  application  being
    refused.  The Appellant then made a  fresh  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a student  which  was  granted  on  28th  November  2013  and
    remained valid until 29th February 2016.  However on 23rd June 2015 the
    Appellant's extant  student  visa  was  curtailed  on  account  of  the
    Respondent being informed that the Appellant had completed his  course.
    The curtailment took effect from 22nd August 2015. He remained  without
    leave.

 3. On 7th April 2016 the Appellant made a further application for leave to
    remain based upon his Article 8 private/family life.  He had married Mr
    [TC] on 9th March  2016  at  a  ceremony  in  the  Newham  Registration
    District.  That application resulted in a  refusal  by  the  Respondent
    dated 7th September 2016 and it is this application and  refusal  which
    forms the basis of the appeal before me.

 4. The Appellant's case is based upon his relationship with  Mr  [C].   It
    was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant is in a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with him, but nevertheless the Respondent  said
    that it was proportionate to expect the Appellant to return to  Vietnam
    either to live there with Mr  [C]  or  to  apply  for  entry  clearance
    through the proper channels.

FtT HEARING

 5. The FtTJ judge heard oral evidence from  both  the  Appellant  and  his
    husband Mr [C].  He noted that the Respondent had refused the  decision
    because the Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules  and  had  not
    demonstrated that there were "insurmountable obstacles" to such  family
    life as exists between the Appellant and his husband continuing outside
    the United Kingdom that is in Vietnam (or elsewhere).

 6. In analysing the oral evidence the FtTJ set out that the Appellant  had
    said that his father who resides in Vietnam reacted angrily to the fact
    that he had married a man. He did not contend however that upon  return
    to Vietnam he would of necessity have to have contact or reliance  upon
    his father or indeed any other family member. The judge also  recorded,
    that the Appellant made a "bald assertion"  that  "there  is  bullying,
    name calling and harassment in Vietnam for gays" [10].  The judge noted
    that in cross-examination the Appellant accepted that gay marriage  was
    legal in Vietnam and that the country  hosts  one  or  more  gay  pride
    marches each year, albeit it  was  said  that  such  marches  were  not
    attended by very many people [11].

 7. So far as the Appellant's husband's evidence is  concerned,  the  judge
    recorded that he referred to his relationship with the  Appellant,  his
    own employment and to "not wanting to be separated" from the Appellant.
     When cross-examined he gave several reasons for not wanting  to  leave
    the United Kingdom, asserting that he could not  live  in  Vietnam  but
    acknowledging that the prospect of doing so had not even been discussed
    between him and the Appellant [14].

 8. The FtTJ concluded that the Appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  he
    could meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules because it had not
    been shown that there were compelling or exceptional  circumstances  in
    his case such as to  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles  within  the
    Rules.

 9. So far as a consideration under  Article  8  is  concerned,  the  judge
    recorded that there was nothing to justify proceeding to an  Article  8
    assessment but nevertheless at [23] did  go  on  to  say  that  had  an
    Article  8  assessment  been  undertaken,  the  Appellant  would   have
    undoubtedly failed at that hurdle.  He dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the  FtTJ
    had failed to properly assess the background evidence  concerning  same
    sex marriages in Vietnam, had failed to appreciate  the  discrimination
    and stigma the Appellant (and his husband) would face on return and had
    failed  to  properly  factor  those   matters   into   an   Article   8
    proportionality assessment outside the Rules.

11. Permission was granted in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has attached insufficient weight  to
         the available background material in relation to  the  question  of
         recognition of same sex marriage in Vietnam.  It is  arguable  that
         the evaluation of the consequences of the lack  of  recognition  of
         same sex marriage is capable of playing a more significant role  in
         the proportionality exercise.  It is arguable that the approach  to
         the definition and  scope  of  insurmountable  obstacles  has  been
         affected.  It is arguable that the Judge has attached  insufficient
         weight to the degree of discrimination and stigma  referred  to  in
         the permission application."

12. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the FtTJ contains such error that it requires it to set aside  and  re-
    made.

Error of Law Hearing

13. Before me Miss Record appeared on behalf of the Appellant and Mr  Duffy
    for the Respondent.  Miss Record's submissions followed  the  lines  of
    the grounds seeking permission.  She pointed out that the  core  ground
    centred on the judge's finding at [20]  that  the  Appellant  had  come
    nowhere near to making out his case on the issue of whether or  not  he
    would face insurmountable  obstacles  on  a  return  to  Vietnam.   She
    emphasised that although same sex marriage was no longer illegal there,
    nevertheless there is no framework put in place to  support  those  who
    are  in  such  a  marriage.   There  is   bullying   and   stigma   and
    discrimination against  gay  people.   The  FtTJ  had  failed  to  give
    sufficient consideration and weight to these factors.  If looked at and
    weighed  properly,  these  factors  would  amount   to   insurmountable
    obstacles sufficient to bring the Appellant within the Rules.

14. In support of this she referred  me  to  several  background  documents
    including  those  contained  in  the  Respondent's  own  bundle.    The
    documents included extracts from the USSD reports dated 2014 and  2017,
    together with a "World Vietnam" article dated 18th January  2016  (this
    article was also referred to in the Respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter).  Those documents set out  that  there  is  discrimination  and
    bullying in respect of same sex marriages.  This is material which  the
    judge had in front of him and which he should properly have  considered
    but which he had not.  She continued her submissions  saying  that  the
    above point in turn impacted on the Article 8 assessment.  She  pointed
    out that a reading of [23] shows that the judge has simply  not  turned
    his mind to undertaking the proportionality balancing exercise.  Indeed
    he has closed his mind to an Article 8 assessment, focusing instead  on
    Section 117B (iv) of the 2002 Act.  The decision should  be  set  aside
    and reheard.

15. Mr Duffy in  response  relied  on  a  Rule  24  response  opposing  the
    application.  He submitted that the  grounds  were  not  made  out.   A
    reading of [10] and [11] demonstrated that the FtTJ had turned his mind
    to the issue before him and had kept in mind that the Appellant's claim
    was one  of  insurmountable  obstacles.   The  FtTJ  had  analysed  the
    evidence  before  him  including   some   documentary   evidence,   but
    nevertheless concluded that the Appellant's case was not made out.  The
    judge is not obliged  to  list  every  piece  of  evidence  before  him
    provided he has demonstrated that he has kept the issues in mind.   The
    findings made by the judge were clear and reasoned and were ones  which
    were open to him to make. The  evidence  referred  to  by  Miss  Record
    simply does not go far enough to undermine the judge's decision.

16. Mr Duffy acknowledged that the judge could be said to be  in  error  in
    the way he had framed matters re the Article 8 assessment [23], but the
    error was not material. A reading of the decision showed the judge  had
    in any event reviewed the evidence that would have formed the basis  of
    any  proportionality  assessment.  This  was  a  matter  of  form  over
    substance.  The judge had given adequate consideration to the Article 8
    proportionality test, and had correctly identified that  the  Appellant
    was in the UK without leave and thus any private  life  built  up  here
    whilst without leave could only be afforded little weight.  The judge's
    findings were open to him on the evidence. Altogether the decision  was
    sustainable and it should therefore stand.

17. In a final response Miss Record urged upon me to look  closely  at  the
    documents that  she  had  referred  to  in  her  main  submissions  and
    reiterated that there was a  failure  to  take  into  account  relevant
    factors in the Article 8 assessment.   At  the  end  of  submissions  I
    reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.

Error of Law Consideration

18. Both representatives were in agreement that the issue before me centres
    on a consideration  of  whether  there  are  significant  difficulties/
    insurmountable obstacles to such family  life  as  exists  between  the
    Appellant and his husband continuing outside the United  Kingdom,  that
    is in Vietnam (or elsewhere).  The same factors pertain to  both  S.276
    ADE and EX. 1 of the Rules.

19. The FtTJ did not accept that the Appellant had made out his case.   His
    reasons for this are set out at [17] where he says as follows:

         "... It was urged upon me that the appellant and his husband  would
         be subjected to bullying and harassment if they resided in Vietnam,
         by reason of their homosexuality; a  proposition  which  I  do  not
         accept.  That proposition is based solely upon an assertion made by
         the appellant in the course of his evidence, which is, undoubtedly,
         self-serving.  If the  appellant  had  wished  to  make  good  that
         assertion  by  reference  to  reputable  and   reliable   objective
         evidence, he has had every opportunity to do so.  The fact that  he
         has adduced none, speaks volumes.  Indeed, it suggests to  me  that
         the information provided by Lonely Planet is likely to be tolerably
         accurate and reliable. It is for the appellant  to  prove,  on  the
         balance of probabilities, each factual assertion that he makes and,
         in respect of this  assertion,  his  evidence  comes  nowhere  near
         satisfying me to that standard."

20. As Miss Record pointed out there was  evidence  in  the  form  of  USSD
    reports and an article dated 18th January 2016  (an  article  which  is
    also referred to in the Respondent's own bundle).   I  agree  at  first
    sight it seems that the judge may have side stepped evidence which  was
    before him. Certainly the USSD reports cannot be characterised  as  not
    being reputable sources. However on a full reading of [17] it is  clear
    that the judge did keep the documentary  sources  in  mind  because  he
    specifically makes reference  to  a  Lonely  Planet  article  which  he
    considered to be to "likely to  be  tolerably  accurate  and  reliable"
    [17].

21. The difficulty for the Appellant is that whilst it could be  said  that
    the judge was in error in failing to give weight to the USSD reports, I
    find I am in agreement with Mr Duffy  that  even  if  I  accepted  this
    contention, the error is  not  materially  sufficient  to  vitiate  the
    decision. I have looked carefully at the USSD reports and I agree  with
    Mr Duffy that an examination  of  these  reports  shows  they  are  not
    sufficiently detailed in themselves to further the Appellant's case. On
    the contrary what they say is that societal discrimination  exists  and
    remains pervasive but there was "no reported official  discrimination".
    The same reports go on to acknowledge that same sex marriages  are  now
    legal and that Gay Pride marches take place.

22.  The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had   come   "nowhere   near"
    demonstrating that there would be insurmountable obstacles to  him  and
    Mr [C] enjoying family life outside the UK [20].  Whilst  the  language
    used may be described as overstatement,  nevertheless  I  am  bound  to
    agree that in substance the evidence falls short of  that  required  to
    show that insurmountable  obstacles  /significant  difficulties  exist.
    Thus the FtTJ cannot be said to have fallen into  legal  error  in  the
    making of his decision.

23. That being so, I look finally at the concern raised over the Article  8
    assessment.  As Mr Duffy acknowledged, the judge was wrong in  the  way
    he approached Article 8 outside the Rules.  However once  again,  I  am
    bound to agree with Mr Duffy in that the whole of the Appellant's  case
    is predicated upon him and his husband not being able  to  enjoy  their
    Article 8 family life rights outside the UK  because  they  would  face
    discrimination and bullying on account of their sexuality.   Article  8
    outside the Rules cannot prosper without some  separate  or  additional
    factual element which brings the case within the  Article  8  paradigm.
    In my judgment there is essentially  nothing  further  in  this  appeal
    other than that which has already been considered within the Rules. The
    Appellant does not meet the Rules.

24. Further and in any event in deciding  whether  an  Appellant  ought  to
    succeed in relation to  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  as  the  FtTJ
    correctly identified, it is necessary to take into account the  factors
    set out in paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act.

25. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest.  The Appellant's immigration history is that, having  arrived
    lawfully as a student, he overstayed after  his  leave  was  curtailed.
    Little weight should be given therefore to either his private  life  or
    his relationship with his husband because it was established at a  time
    when he was in the UK  unlawfully.  There  is  nothing  further  of  an
    exceptional nature.  Therefore the consideration given to  the  factors
    in [23] is sufficient to demonstrate that the judge has given  adequate
    reasons for arriving at a conclusion that the Respondent's decision  is
    not a disproportionate one in the context of an Article 8 assessment.

26. For the  above  reasons,  I  find  no  legal  error  in  this  decision
    sufficient to vitiate the decision.  The decision therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

This  appeal  is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
promulgated on 14th September 2018 discloses no material error of  law.  The
decision stands

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     09 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     09 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
