
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/22052/2016(V)
                                                            HU/00189/2017(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2020                  |On 11 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                 MOSHOOD [S]
                                 KULTHUM [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms. B Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Danielle
                    Cohen Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr. E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hoffman ('the Judge') sent  to  the  parties  on  7
    January 2020 by which the appellants' appeal against decisions  not  to
    grant them settlement under the Immigration Rules  ('the  Rules')  were
    dismissed.

 2. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison granted the appellants
    permission to appeal on all grounds by a decision dated 17 April 2020.

Hearing

 3. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing  room  at
    Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public.
    The hearing and its start time were listed in the  cause  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we  were
    together in the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this  constituted  a
    hearing in open  court;  that  the  open  justice  principle  has  been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as  there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest,  it  is  justified  as
    necessary and proportionate.

 4. The  parties  agreed  that  all  relevant  documents  were  before  the
    Tribunal.  The  video  and  audio  link  were  connected  between   the
    representatives  and  the  Tribunal  throughout  the  hearing.  At  the
    conclusion of the hearing both parties confirmed that the  hearing  had
    been completed fairly.

 5. The appellants attended the hearing remotely.

Anonymity

 6. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and no request for  such
    direction was made before me.

 7. I observe paragraph 18 of the Guidance Note 2013 No  1  which  confirms
    that the identity of  children  whether  they  are  appellants  or  the
    children of an appellant (or otherwise concerned with the proceedings),
    will not normally be disclosed nor will  their  school,  the  names  of
    their teacher or any social worker or  health  professional  with  whom
    they are concerned, unless there are good reasons in the  interests  of
    justice to do so. I am satisfied that there is no requirement  to  name
    the appellants' children in this matter.

Background

 8. The appellants are a married couple and citizens of Nigeria.

 9. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 29 August  2006  with
    leave to enter as a student. He made  in-time  variation  applications,
    initially as a student and then as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    and as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant which were successful. His last grant
    of leave to remain was valid until 18 March 2016.

10. The second appellant was granted entry clearance as a dependent partner
    of her husband and was granted leave to enter on her  arrival  in  this
    country on  12  May  2010.  It  is  understood  by  the  Tribunal  that
    consequent to variation applications she enjoyed  leave  to  remain  in
    line with her husband.

11. The first appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  1
    migrant on 22 February 2016. The respondent refused the application  on
    22 February 2016.  The  first  appellant  requested  an  administrative
    review of that decision on 7 March  2016,  but  on  16  March  2016  he
    withdrew his request. On the same day he applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain on the basis of 10 years' continuous lawful  residence  under
    the paragraph 276B of the Rules. The respondent refused the application
    by a  decision  dated  8  September  2016,  asserting  that  the  first
    appellant had misrepresented his earnings at various times to either or
    both the respondent and Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.

12. The second appellant applied on 16 March 2016 for leave  to  remain  as
    the spouse of a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom.  The
    respondent refused her application by a decision dated 28 October  2016
    detailing that neither her husband nor their children enjoyed  a  right
    to remain in this country and there were no  exceptional  circumstances
    that justified a grant of leave outside of the Rules  on  human  rights
    (article 8) grounds.

Appellate history

13. This matter enjoys an unfortunate appellate history.

14. By a decision dated 30 November 2017 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Grimmett refused the appeals. The appellants were granted permission to
    appeal and by a decision dated 28  November  2018  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Upper Tribunal Judge Latter) set aside the decision of  JFtT  Grimmett
    consequent to several factual errors arising in her decision,  both  as
    to documentary and oral  evidence.  Such  factual  errors  amounted  to
    material errors of law.

15. The matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and heard  by  Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bristow  who  allowed  the  appeals  by  a
    decision dated 25 March 2019.  The  respondent  secured  permission  to
    appeal and the Upper Tribunal (Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Hutchinson)
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by a  decision  dated
    13 June 2019. The Tribunal found that JFtT Bristow had erred in finding
    that the respondent's bundle did not contain the first appellant's  tax
    returns for the years April 2011 and April 2013. Further, it was  found
    that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  findings   beyond   undertaking   a
    consideration in line with Muhandiramge (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT
    00675 (IAC) with there being no judicial  consideration  of  the  first
    appellant's explanation as to the purported discrepancies.  The  matter
    was remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Hearing before the FtT

16. The matter was transferred from the First-tier Tribunal  in  Birmingham
    to Taylor House and came before the Judge on  20  December  2019.  Both
    appellants attended and gave evidence. The Judge dismissed the appeals.





Grounds of appeal

17. The appellants rely on grounds of appeal authored by Ms.  Asanovic  who
    has represented them throughout. Five grounds of appeal are advanced.

18. In  granting  permission  to  appeal  JFtT  Grant-Hutchison  succinctly
    identified the grounds:

         '2.  It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law

               a) By relying on a number of perceived defects in  the  first
                  appellant's evidence which were never  raised  or  put  to
                  him, for example,

                   i) in relation to establishing a centre in Scotland, and

                  ii) for rejecting the explanation that  instead  of  real
                      expenses the first appellant sent projected  expenses
                      for  2013  when  there  is  no  such  requirement  or
                      expectation for sole traders of limited turnover such
                      as the appellant;

               b) By placing weight on an account in interview,  a  copy  of
                  which was never given to the first appellant and  was  not
                  disclosed with proper (or any) notice until the day of the
                  hearing and which the Judge said contained errors  instead
                  of the first appellant's account of events (paras. 43  and
                  44 of the decision);

               c) In relation to the standard of proof when it  is  arguable
                  that the first appellant offered full  disclosure  of  all
                  the  relevant  financial  documents  and  explained   what
                  happened and it is then for the respondent to  dispel  any
                  doubts; and

               d) Which assessment  could  arguably  undermine  the  Judge's
                  findings in relation to the article 8  considerations  and
                  the children, particularly the best interests and  private
                  life of [H] and the weight given to the public interest.'

Decision on error of law

19. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Tufan accepted that  the  'questions',
    or issues, considered by the Judge as identified in ground 1, which are
    extensively detailed at para. 6 of the grounds, had not been  asked  of
    the appellants. He  confirmed  that  he  had  intended  to  defend  the
    decision because it remained the respondent's position that there  were
    serious discrepancies in the  accounts  of  the  first  appellant,  but
    acknowledging that the questions were not  asked,  and  the  subsequent
    adverse findings were at the core of the Judge's findings, he  accepted
    that the decision was not sustainable on procedural fairness grounds.

20. I am satisfied that Mr. Tufan was correct to adopt such  approach.  The
    appellants can expect compliance with the well-established  common  law
    rule of evidence identified by the House of Lords  in  Browne  v.  Dunn
    (1893) 6 R. 67, namely that it is only fair to witnesses that if  their
    evidence is to be disbelieved, they must be given a fair opportunity to
    deal with the allegation. As observed by Lord Herschell L.C., at  [70]-
    [71]:

         'I cannot help  saying  that  it  seems  to  me  to  be  absolutely
         essential to the proper conduct of a cause, where it is intended to
         suggest that a witness is not speaking the truth  on  a  particular
         point, to direct his attention to the fact by some questions put in
         cross-examination showing that that imputation is  intended  to  be
         made, and not to take his evidence and  pass  it  by  as  a  matter
         altogether unchallenged, and then, when it is impossible for him to
         explain, as perhaps he might have been able to do if such questions
         had been put to  him,  the  circumstances  which  it  is  suggested
         indicate that the story he tells ought not to be believed, to argue
         that he is a witness unworthy of credit. My Lords,  I  have  always
         understood that if you intend to impeach a witness you  are  bound,
         whilst he is in the box, to give him an opportunity of  making  any
         explanation which is open to him; and as it seems to  me,  that  is
         not only a rule of professional practice in the conduct of a  case,
         but is essential to fair play and fair dealing with witnesses.'

21. Newey LJ confirmed in Howlett v. Davies [2017] EWCA Civ 1696; [2018]  1
    W.L.R. 948, at [39]:

         '39. ... where a witness' honesty is  to  be  challenged,  it  will
             always be best if that is explicitly put to the witness. There
             can then be no doubt  that  honesty  is  in  issue.  But  what
             ultimately matters is that the witness has had fair notice  of
             a challenge to his or her honesty and an opportunity  to  deal
             with it. It may be that  in  a  particular  context  a  cross-
             examination which  does  not  use  the  words  "dishonest"  or
             "lying" will give a witness  fair  warning.  That  will  be  a
             matter for the trial judge to decide ...'

22. Whilst the appellants in this matter were on notice that the respondent
    considered the first appellant  to  have  been  dishonest  in  previous
    interactions and applications, fairness required that  concerns  as  to
    certain documents were expressly identified  by  the  Judge  so  as  to
    permit the first appellant the opportunity to explain his  position  in
    circumstances where concerns arising  from  these  documents  were  not
    expressly relied upon by the respondent in  her  decision  letter,  nor
    were  they  addressed  during  relatively  short  cross-examination  or
    ultimately by the presenting officer in submissions. The purpose of the
    rule in Browne v. Dunn is well-grounded; witnesses should be  given  an
    opportunity to respond to competing versions of events.

23. Whilst Mr. Tufan expressly agreed on behalf of the respondent that  the
    decision of the Judge be set aside for the reasons set out in ground 1,
    I observe that ground 2 also raises  meritorious  concerns  as  to  the
    Judge's approach to the evidence  presented.  I  further  observe  that
    there were strong merits to grounds 4 and 5, concerned with the article
    8 appeal.

24. In the circumstances the decision  of  the  Judge  exhibits  procedural
    unfairness and consequent to such material error it must be set aside.

Remaking the decision

25. As to the re-making of this decision I note the fundamental  nature  of
    the material errors identified. On behalf of the respondent  Mr.  Tufan
    observed that this Tribunal had now set aside three  decisions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in this matter and so the remaking of this decision
    should properly be undertaken by this Tribunal. Ms. Asanovic noted  the
    poor procedural history but observed that to date  the  appellants  had
    not enjoyed a fair hearing and should not  themselves  be  punished  by
    losing their first stage of appeal because of the failings of the First-
    tier Tribunal to date.

26. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal that reads as follows at paragraph 7.2:

         'The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.'

27. I have considerable sympathy for the approach identified by Mr.  Tufan.
    There is much to  be  said  for  seeking  finality  in  these  appeals.
    However, having read all the previous decisions in  this  matter,  both
    First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, I have ultimately decided  that
    Ms. Asanovic is correct in her submission that the appellants have  not
    received a fair hearing to date and to lose the opportunity to  advance
    their appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  would,  in  effect,  be  a
    punishment upon them for the failings exhibited  by  that  Tribunal  to
    date.

28. I therefore set aside this decision and remit it back to the First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House. Though this Tribunal  is  hesitant  to  issue
    directions to the First-tier Tribunal, in  the  circumstances  of  this
    matter I direct that upon its return to Taylor House the  appeal  files
    are to be placed before the Resident  Judge  to  undertake  appropriate
    case management.

29. The parties agreed before me that this  matter  is  not  to  be  listed
    before January 2021 consequent to the second appellant's  expected  due
    date in October 2020.

Directions

30. I direct:

      i) Upon their return to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House,  the
         appeal files in this matter are to be placed  before  the  Resident
         Judge for appropriate case management.

31. I make the following observation to the  Resident  Judge  that  at  the
    hearing before me the parties were in agreement as  to  the  following,
    such agreement not being conveyed as directions by  this  Tribunal  but
    for consideration as part of the First-tier Tribunal's case management:

     ii) The appellants are to file and serve  all  evidence  to  be  relied
         upon, including evidence previously served and, if  so  advised,  a
         report from an independent social worker, in a new  hearing  bundle
         no later than 4pm on Monday 16 November 2020.

    iii) The hearing of this matter by the First-tier Tribunal  is  to  take
         place on the first available date on or after 4 January 2021.

     iv) Listing is to ascertain Ms. Asanovic's availability  for  the  next
         hearing via her clerks at Lamb Building.



Notice of Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 7
    January 2020 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

33. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any Judge other than Judges Grimmett, Bristow and Hoffman.

34. No findings of fact are preserved.

Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 9 September 2020

