
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22888/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely via Skype for Business               |                              |
|On 12 February 2021                           |On 1 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                MOHSIN ASHRAF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karim
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  28  May
    1992. He appealed a decision of the Secretary of State dated 31 October
    2018 refusing his application to remain on human rights grounds to  the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  3  December
    2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a student  in  2011.  A
    subsequent asylum application had been withdrawn. The appellant married
    the sponsor,  a  United  Kingdom  citizen  of  Afghan  origin  who  had
    previously been a party to a forced marriage,  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under Sharia law in March 2017. Their marriage was registered in  April
    2018.

 3. There are four grounds of appeal. First, the appellant argues that  the
    judge erred in law by giving insufficient  weight  to  the  possibility
    that the appellant and sponsor  would  be  regarded  as  adulterers  on
    return  to  Pakistan.  At  [12]  the  judge  found  that  'whilst   the
    appellant's marriage to the sponsor may not be recognised in  Pakistan'
    he found that there was insufficient evidence that the sponsor's former
    husband or her own  family  would  be  aware  of  their  presence.  The
    appellant submits that the judge also gave  inadequate  weight  to  the
    observations of the appellant's expert, Dr Wali, on this issue. In  her
    Rule 24 statement, the Secretary of State points out that the appellant
    and sponsor 'are in fact married' and that there would be 'no inference
    [in Pakistan] that they are not married.'

 4. In my opinion, the judge did not err in law. The sponsor and  appellant
    have married in the United Kingdom including  under  Sharia  Law.  They
    would have no reason whatever to disclose their pre-marriage history to
    any third party whilst there would  arise  no  suspicion  generally  as
    regards that history in any community in Pakistan in which  they  might
    live. The finding that the couple would  not  encounter  the  sponsor's
    former husband or her own family was patently available to the judge on
    the evidence. Neither the extract quoted in the ground from the CPIN or
    the evidence of the  expert  compels  a  conclusion  that  the  judge's
    finding was in any way perverse. The ground  is  nothing  more  that  a
    disagreement with the Tribunal's findings.

 5. Ground 2 argues that the judge failed to address the  circumstances  of
    the  sponsor  is  reaching  his  conclusion   that   there   exist   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the couple's return to Pakistan. At  [7a-g]
    of the grounds those circumstances are set  out  and,  in  addition  to
    those referred to at [2] above,  include  the  fact  that  the  sponsor
    suffers depression, does not 'speak the language',  is  undergoing  IVF
    treatment, has a job in the United Kingdom and has been the subject  of
    a Protective Order as a consequence of her forced marriage. The grounds
    state that the 'the unduly harsh test would  have  been  met'  had  the
    judge applied these factors.

 6. That latter statement indicates that the appellant considers  that  the
    factual matrix is such that only one outcome of the appeal is  possible
    and that the judge's analysis is, therefore, perverse.  I  reject  that
    argument. I am satisfied that the judge has considered all the relevant
    evidence whilst there is nothing to indicate that he  took  account  of
    irrelevant matters. It was open to the judge to find [12(vi)] that  the
    sponsor had spent time in Pakistan in the past and that  there  was  no
    reason to think  that  her  Afghan  ethnicity,  which  had  not  caused
    difficulties then, would be a problem now.  The  judge  correctly  gave
    weight to the fact that the appellant's family have fully supported the
    couple and would continue to do so. That support, as the  judge  found,
    would be an important factor in  enabling  the  couple  to  ingrate  in
    Pakistan. The judge's findings regarding the appellant's mental  health
    are detailed and sustainable. Significantly, the appellant had lived in
    Pakistan until  his  adulthood  and  was  found  by  the  judge  to  be
    'resourceful.'

 7. Ground 3 is without merit. The appellant asserts that the judge appears
    to have considered only whether the appellant  would  return  alone  at
    [12(xi)] and  comments that family life could  be maintained by 'social
    media and visits'. The ground choses to overlook the remainder  of  the
    judge's analysis which addresses in  detail  the  consequences  of  the
    couple retuning together to Pakistan. Given that I find that  there  is
    no legal error in that part of the decision, which is determinative  of
    the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds, this challenge fails.

 8. Ground 4 is also without merit. It raises the judge's treatment of  the
    judgment in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40.  First,  the  relevance  of  the
    judgment is not clear here; the appellant  is  not  being  required  to
    return to Pakistan for the sole reason that a policy of  the  Secretary
    of State requires that he do so, as in Chikwamba. Secondly,  the  judge
    considered all the relevant factors before concluding that there  exist
    no exceptional circumstances in this case  which  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the appellant making an application to out of country. That
    finding is not, in my opinion, wrong in  law.  The  grounds  implicitly
    acknowledge that the approach of the judge was legitimate and certainly
    not perverse when they  speak  of  the  circumstances  being  'arguably
    exceptional' and that  the  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
    successful as 'the appellant is likely to  find  employment  [and  the]
    financial requirements could be met, even  if  not  already  met.'  [my
    emphasis]. Plainly, the judge reached a finding which was open  to  him
    on the evidence.

 9. For the reasons I have  given,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in law and I find that its decision should  stand.
    The appellant is dismissed accordingly.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 14 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

