
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22024/2016
                                                               IA/00551/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2018                           |On 1 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MOHAMMAD HOSSAIN
                             Mrs Nasrim Sultana
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents: Mr S Hydel, Reza solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer in this decision to the Respondents as the Appellants  as
    they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  They  are  citizens  of
    Bangladesh and married to each other. Mr Hossain's date of birth is  31
    December 1977. Mrs Sultana's date of birth is 2 June 1985.

2.   They made what appears to be a joint application for  leave  to  remain
    which was refused on 4 December 2015. My  understanding  is  that  they
    both appealed  against  this  decision.   Mr  Hossain  made  a  further
    application on 20 August 2016 for leave to remain, relying on the  long
    residence rules. He withdrew his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  4
    December 2015. Mr  Hossain's  later  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 10 September 2016. He appealed against the  later
    decision. From the paperwork before me, it seems to be  the  case  that
    Mrs Sultana did not withdraw her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  4
    December 2015. Therefore they both had pending appeals and the  matters
    were linked. They were heard on 10  May  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Telford who purported to allow  Mr  Hossain's  appeal  under  the
    Rules and he dismissed Mrs Sultana's appeal on  human  rights  grounds.
    Though not raised in the grounds, Mr Tufan argued  that  there  was  no
    appeal before the FtT in respect of Mrs Sultana because her application
    was dependent on her  husband's  and  therefore  her  appeal  had  been
    withdrawn when his was. From the  paperwork  before  me,  there  was  a
    separate decision of the Secretary of State relating to  an  individual
    called Farida Yasmin. I suspect that this is an error because the  body
    of the decision appears to relate to Mrs Sultana. In the absence of  an
    application and notice of withdrawal as regards her appeal  before  the
    FtT, she had an extant appeal.

3.   Permission  was  granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robertson on 11 December 2017.


The Grounds of Appeal

4.    The  grounds  of  appeal  argue  that  the  judge  made   a   material
    misdirection in respect of the burden and standard of proof. He did not
    properly apply  SM  and  Qadir  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229  and
    Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615. He failed to give adequate reasons.
    The judge failed to determine  Mr  Hossain's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.


The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge at [6] cited the material cases of SM and Qadir  and  Shehzad
    & Anor. He found as follows:

         "8.  ... This claim was made out on the available evidence for  the
         husband. He does qualify to remain under the Rules. The  respondent
         failed to establish that he was not the person who  had  taken  the
         English language test. His dependent wife therefore qualifies under
         his permission to remain. I do not go on to consider  Human  Rights
         for him.


         9.   I do not find her case made out separately under human  rights
         because despite having a series of serious ailments, she  has  been
         able to survive well enough whilst in  her  home  country  and  has
         failed to show that she cannot access the same amount  of  care  as
         she had before she came to the UK.

6.   The reasons for the decision are set out at [10] to  [13]  and  are  as
    follows;

         "10.     There was a claim that this appellant was a  person  whose
         voice had been  individually  identified  and  "matched"  by  voice
         recognition software. That came down to the print out at F10 in the
         respondent's bundle coupled with  the  witness  statements  showing
         that the Synergy College was in the habit of producing or  allowing
         false certificates to be issued and false in  the  sense  that  the
         person's voice on the language test was shown by computer generated
         software to be not that of the person whose name  had  been  given.
         The French statement did not take the matter  any  further  because
         although it reduced the chance of a software mismatch, it only  did
         so when there was individual checking. Here that was not the case.


         11.  In fact, the case  was  here  that  a  person  with  the  name
         Mohammed Hossain- (Not an uncommon name or surname to be fair)  had
         on 13 December 2011 taken a test which was shown by software to  be
         invalid. Unfortunately for the  respondent,  the  figures  for  the
         scores claimed differ between that which was on the  print  out  of
         190 and that which was on the email from the  respondent  when  the
         scores were checked at 160. This called  for  some  explanation.  I
         gave time for this to be forthcoming from the responded. There  was
         time given for a CD of the voice of the person taking the test  but
         none was forthcoming.


         12.  I find the appellant husband entirely credible. The respondent
         has failed to establish their case. I applied the principle of  SM.
         The  appellant  comes  within  those  provisions.  Proper   process
         required disclosure of the CD of his voice. It did not happen.  The
         discrepancy in number of score cannot be ignored. The chances of it
         not being him are irrelevant in the light of this.


         13.      His case is properly made out on the Rules and I do not go
         onto consider article 8."


Submissions

7.   Mr Tufan relied on the grounds. He raised at the hearing  before  me  a
    jurisdiction issue relating to Mrs Sultana (discussed above). Mr  Hydel
    made submissions effectively re-arguing the Appellant's  (Mr  Hossain's
    case) as it was advanced before  the  FtT  relating  to  the  deception
    issue.


The Law

8.   It is necessary to set out the following paragraphs of SM and Qadir:

         67. We begin by asking ourselves whether the  Secretary  of  State
             has discharged the  evidential  burden  of  proving  that  the
             Appellants were, or either of them was, guilty  of  dishonesty
             in the respects alleged. Bearing in mind that, as noted above,
             all of the Secretary of State's evidence  was  adduced  first,
             reflecting the burden of proof, it is  appropriate  to  record
             that at the stage when the Secretary of  State's  case  closed
             there was no submission on behalf of either Appellant that the
             aforementioned evidential burden had not been discharged.   We
             draw attention, en passant, to a procedural issue which may be
             worthy  of  fuller  consideration  in  an  appropriate  future
             appeal, namely the question of whether in  a  case  where  the
             Secretary of State bears the evidential burden of establishing
             sufficient evidence of deception and,  at  the  hearing,  goes
             first in the order of  batting,  the  Tribunal  should  invite
             submissions from the parties'  representatives  at  the  stage
             when the Secretary of State's evidence is completed.


         68. As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding
             section make clear, we have substantial reservations about the
             strength and quality of the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence.
             Its shortcomings  are  manifest.  On  the  other  hand,  while
             bearing in mind that the context is one of alleged  deception,
             we must be mindful of the comparatively modest threshold which
             an evidential burden entails.  The  calls  for  an  evaluative
             assessment on the part  of  the  tribunal.  By  an  admittedly
             narrow margin we are satisfied that the Secretary of State has
             discharged this burden.  The effect of this is that there is a
             burden, again an evidential one, on the Appellants of  raising
             an innocent explanation.


         69. We turn thus  to  address  the  legal  burden.  We  accept  Mr
             Dunlop's submission  that  in  considering  an  allegation  of
             dishonesty in this context the relevant factors to be  weighed
             include (in  exhaustively,  we  would  add)  what  the  person
             accused has to gain from being dishonest; what he has to  lose
             from being dishonest; what is known about his  character;  and
             the culture or environment in which he  operated.   Mr  Dunlop
             also   highlighted   the   importance   of    three    further
             considerations, namely  how  the  Appellants  performed  under
             cross examination, whether the Tribunal's assessment of  their
             English language proficiency is commensurate with their  TOEIC
             scores and whether their academic achievements are  such  that
             it was unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated".

 9. The Court of Appeal in Shehzad and Anor stated as follows:

         "21. For present purposes, it is  significant  that  in  Qadir  the
             tribunal stated (at [67] -  [68])  that  the  evidence  of  Mr
             Millington and Ms Collings sufficed to  shift  the  evidential
             burden onto the person whose leave had been curtailed. In that
             case, there was no submission  that  their  evidence  did  not
             discharge the evidential burden  lying  on  the  Secretary  of
             State  at  the  initial  stage.  The  tribunal  described  the
             threshold  which   an   evidential   burden   entails   as   a
             "comparatively  modest  threshold"  and  stated  that  "by  an
             admittedly narrow margin, we are satisfied that the  Secretary
             of State has discharged this burden" and that the  effect  "is
             that there is a  burden,  again  an  evidential  one,  on  the
             appellants of raising an innocent explanation".  The  tribunal
             then  considered  the  evidence  before  it  and  reached  the
             conclusion that the Secretary of State had not discharged  the
             legal burden of proof that lay on her.


         22.  As I have stated, the question in these appeals only  concerns
             the initial  stage  and  whether,  with  the  evidence  of  Mr
             Millington and Ms  Collings,  the  evidential  burden  on  the
             Secretary of  State  is  satisfied.  If  it  is,  it  is  then
             incumbent on the individual whose leave has been curtailed  to
             provide evidence in response raising an innocent explanation.


         23.  At the hearing, Ms Giovennetti informed  the  court  that  the
             other cases pending in the tribunal or in this court involve a
             range of different evidence adduced by the  individual.  These
             included an independent comparison of that person's voice with
             the voice tested by ETS, evidence  of  attainment  in  English
             language, for example by educational qualifications in English
             (some  in  this  country),  and  evidence  of  spoken  English
             ability. I do not address the question of what  evidence  will
             be sufficient to enable a tribunal to conclude that there  has
             been no deception. That is likely to  be  an  intensely  fact-
             specific matter.  These  appeals  and  my  judgment  are  only
             concerned with the initial stage and the evidential burden  at
             that stage.


         24.  (ii) Mr Chowdhury's case: It appears that the  FtT's  decision
             rests   solely   on   its   refusal   to   accept   that   the
             Millington/Collings evidence, together with identification  of
             the individual as a person whose test has been  "invalidated",
             suffices to shift the evidential burden. Although Mr Chowdhury
             had submitted a witness statement  together  with  educational
             qualifications taught in English, both in this country and  in
             Bangladesh  (see  FtT  determination  at  [24])  ,  these  are
             referred to only in the most general terms. The decision rests
             on the approach of the tribunal to the  Secretary  of  State's
             evidence and it is clear that the FtT judge misunderstood that
             evidence.


         25.  The FtT judge stated that there was no evidence identifying Mr
             Chowdhury as a person whose test was "invalid". In  fact,  the
             evidence included a screenshot of  the  results  which  stated
             this was the position. The evidence  also  included  the  "ETS
             Lookup Tool" which showed the tests that were  "invalid".  The
             determination also shows other mistakes and  misunderstandings
             of  the  process  undertaken  by  ETS  and  explained  in   Mr
             Millington and Ms Collings's statements.  In  particular,  the
             FtT judge's conclusion (see [7] above) that  "there  could  be
             multiple reasons for  invalidation,  some  of  which  may  not
             involve  fraud  or  deception",  failed  to   appreciate   the
             distinction in  the  evidence  between  cases  categorised  as
             "questionable"  and  those  categorised   as   "invalid".   In
             "questionable" cases it was accepted that there may  not  have
             been deception. In "invalid" cases,  this  was  not  accepted.
             That was because the voice on the audio recording of the  test
             under consideration (e.g. Mr Chowdhury or Mr  Shehzad's  test)
             matched the voice of someone who had taken another test  using
             a different name.


         26.  With regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal, I accept Ms
             Giovennetti's submission that it is  not  possible  to  derive
             from  the  FtT's  determination  that,  as  the  Deputy  Upper
             Tribunal judge found, the FtT judge was  "well  aware  of  the
             straightforward ETS Lookup  Tool  document"  that  she  stated
             showed Mr Chowdhury's test to be invalidated.  This  statement
             also shows that the Deputy Upper Tribunal judge  misunderstood
             the nature of the evidence. Had she  understood  it  properly,
             she would have had to deal with the failure of the  FtT  judge
             to treat the "ETS Lookup Tool" as evidence that Mr Chowdhury's
             test   had   been   invalidated.   The    reason    for    the
             misunderstandings by the tribunals may be  that  the  language
             used by Mr Millington and Ms Collings in their  statements  to
             explain a technical process  is  not  altogether  clear.  But,
             whatever the reason, in these circumstances,  in  my  judgment
             the in limine rejection of the Secretary of  State's  evidence
             as even sufficient to shift the evidential burden was an error
             of law."


Conclusions

10. The judge erred in his application of the standard and burden of proof.
    It is not clear that he  applied  an  evidential  burden.  He  made  no
    reference to it. If he did, it was not properly applied considering the
    low threshold and the evidence (spread sheet  and  witness  statements)
    before him.  The conclusion of the judge that "the claim was  made  out
    on the available evidence" and  the  "respondent  failed  to  establish
    their case," makes no reference the low  threshold  of  the  evidential
    burden and is inadequately reasoned.  Although material  case  law  was
    cited, it was not applied to the evidence in this case. There was clear
    evidence that that the English Language test had been invalidated  (see
    F10 and F12 in the Secretary of State's bundle).   The  judge  attached
    weight to an email produced by the Secretary of State which records one
    of the scores as 180 which is inconsistent with other sources. However,
    the other scores recorded  in  the  email  are  consistent  with  those
    recorded elsewhere.  Mr Tufan submitted that the explanation relied  on
    at the hearing was that this was a typographical error. This  does  not
    appear to have been considered by the judge.   Furthermore,  the  judge
    concluded that Mr Hossain was entirely credible without giving a single
    reason for having reached this conclusion. Whilst I note what  is  said
    by the Appellant in his witness statement at [16] - [18], the  decision
    is inadequately reasoned. It appears from the  last  sentence  at  [12]
    that because there was a failure by the Secretary of State to provide a
    copy of the CD and there was an  inconsistent  score  recorded  in  the
    email, according to the judge whether the  Appellant  was  telling  the
    truth was not material.   Maybe  what  the  judge  meant  is  that  the
    Secretary of State  failed  to  discharge  the  evidential  burden  and
    therefore it was not necessary for the Appellant to raise  an  innocent
    explanation, but this is not properly expressed. In any event, for  the
    reasons stated the judge did not properly apply the evidential  burden.
     Mr Hydel informed me that the Appellant asked for the audio  recording
    once only in an email dated 13 December 2016 and there was no  response
    other than an acknowledgement of the same date. The Appellant  had  not
    chased the matter up (the hearing was on 8 May 2017).

11. The  appeal  was  allowed  under  "the  Rules."  Mr  Hossain  made  the
    application for leave on 20 August 2016 under the long residence rules.
    The judge did not have jurisdiction  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    rules, taking into account the date of the application  and  amendments
    made by the  Immigration  Act  2014  to  Part  5  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge should have determined  the
    appeal under Article 8.  The judge dismissed the appeal of Mrs  Sultana
    on human rights grounds; however, he gave inadequate reasons for  doing
    so.  (The application was made on 30 March 2015; however  the  decision
    on human rights grounds post-dates the amendments and the  transitional
    provisional do not apply in these circumstances). There was  no  lawful
    basis to conclude that "she qualifies under [Mr  Hossain's]  permission
    to remain" (see [8].)

The Decision

12. The decision of the judge to allow the appeal is set aside.

13. The matter is remitted to the First -tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

14.  Mr Hossain has an appeal on human  rights  grounds  under  the  current
    statutory regime.  As part of that assessment whether he meets the long
    residence rules will need to be determined.  The Secretary  of  State's
    position is that he has used deception and he falls for  refusal  under
    para 322 (2) of the rules,  with  reference  to  the  English  Language
    certificate.  On the papers before me, it appears that Mrs Sultana  did
    not withdraw her appeal in respect of the earlier  decision.   The  FtT
    should check that this is the case and  if  so  her  appeal  should  be
    determined on human rights grounds.


Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 21 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

