
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22866/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 March 2018                          |On 27th March 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        mr christopher george gruber
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:        In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals in the case  of  Mr  Christopher  Gruber
    (HU/22866/2016) against a determination that  was  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill whose determination was promulgated on 18  July
    2017.  However, for the sake of continuity, I shall refer to Mr  Gruber
    as the 'appellant' as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill determined that the certificate that
    the Secretary of State had issued under Section 94B of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was unlawful  and  that  was  the  sole
    conclusion that he reached.  He did so because he  considered  that  by
    his reading of the Supreme Court decision  in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  v
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC  42  the
    imposition of the Section 94B certificate was  unlawful.   He  did  not
    provide any other reasons apart from saying in paragraphs 15 and 16:

         "15. My own reading of the Supreme Court decision  led  me  to  the
             conclusion that the interests of  fairness  and  justice  were
             served by declaring that as matters stood the decision was  an
             unlawful one.  I explained the impact of Kiarie  and  Byndloss
             to the appellant's family.  They were entirely happy  with  my
             decision emphasising that the appellant had wished to be in  a
             position to attend his appeal hearing to give  oral  evidence.
             ...

         16.  I have recognised that the appellant has committed a number of
             offences over a period of years but confining myself  to  this
             certificate I am bound by the Supreme Court decision in Kiarie
             and  Byndloss  concerning  Section  94B.   As  I  see  it  the
             certificate is in the circumstances unlawful."

 3. In my judgement that was  not  a  lawful  approach  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  First, the Supreme  Court  did  not  decide  that  the
    entire system concerning s.94B was  inevitably  unlawful  so  that  any
    s.94B certificate would inevitably be part of an unfair process.

 4. Secondly, it was not the judge's function to deal with s.94B as  if  he
    were dealing with an application for judicial review.  It was  for  him
    to deal with the Article 8 case which was the only matter before him as
    a ground of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  therefore  a
    requirement for him to proceed with the hearing of the Article 8  claim
    but, of course, he had to do so in light of the decision that was  made
    by the Supreme Court in Kiarie and Byndloss.

 5. Since that time we have also had the assistance that has been  provided
    by the Court of Appeal in the case of Nixon and Another v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 3 in  which  Hickinbottom
    LJ gave a comprehensive and detailed reserved judgment in  relation  to
    the grant of permission to appeal in judicial review proceedings.   His
    ultimate conclusion, as I understand it, was that he would adjourn  the
    question of the lawfulness of the  judicial  proceedings  in  order  to
    await the decision by the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. It followed therefore that if the First-tier Tribunal by  adopting  the
    step-by-step approach which is advocated in both of those  cases  comes
    to the conclusion that the appeal cannot lawfully be determined  unless
    the appellant is in the United Kingdom,  the  Tribunal  should  give  a
    direction to that effect and adjourn  the  proceedings  to  enable  the
    respondent to secure the appellant's return.  The step-by-step approach
    involved consideration of a  number  of  issues/questions.   The  first
    issue is that identified by the Supreme Court in paragraph  60  of  its
    judgment and that is whether the appellant  would  be  able  to  secure
    legal representation which might have been available to  the  appellant
    had he remained in the  United  Kingdom.   I  am  uncertain  about  the
    circumstances in which an individual can obtain  legal  advice  in  the
    United Kingdom in such cases.  I do not know the conditions which  have
    to be met until it is granted.  Nor do I know whether the provision  of
    legal aid is available in  an  out-of-country  case.   Hickinbottom  LJ
    noted in the case  before  him  that  advice  had  been  provided.   It
    therefore requires one to consider whether  or  not  the  appellant  is
    adversely affected by his inability to secure legal representation.

 7. The second question was addressed in paragraph 74 of the Supreme  Court
    judgment namely,  whether  the  appellant's  absence  from  the  United
    Kingdom  might  present  difficulties  in  his   obtaining   supporting
    professional evidence.  That type of professional evidence might  cover
    a number of  matters.   It  might  be  material  from  the  appellant's
    probation officer or the OASys report or it may be that it would cover,
    in  an  appropriate  case,  evidence   from   a   consultant   forensic
    psychiatrist or from an independent social worker and that would  be  a
    matter which would have to be determined on a case by case  basis.   It
    has to be noted that in the case of Nixon there had been no efforts  to
    obtain any such professional evidence  and  consequently  the  question
    mark that was placed over this difficulty was one which was  not  found
    to exist in the case of Nixon.

 8. The third question concerned  the  need  for  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant and in certain cases the evidence of the appellant  would  be
    of little or limited effect.  In many cases he will not rely  upon  his
    own good standing to avoid deportation as  a  violation  of  his  human
    rights but instead he will rely upon the evidence of those who  are  in
    the United Kingdom.  In  the  context  of  this  case,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had the benefit of the presence of the appellant's wife,
    the appellant's sister and two of  his  children.   I  too  have  their
    presence in the hearing before me although one  child  is  a  different
    one.  In those circumstances the matter might well be resolved by  what
    they are saying rather than what the appellant has to say.

 9. The third question deals with whether or not  the  appellant  needs  to
    give oral evidence.  That leads onto the fourth question  and  that  is
    whether that oral evidence can be heard by a suitable  means  which  is
    satisfactory and fair.  Lord Wilson was sceptical about such a link  as
    to whether it would be functionally adequate and also as to  its  costs
    and who will bear the costs.  But these are matters which the Secretary
    of State may well have in hand and it will be a matter for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to determine whether live evidence can be given  by
    video-link.

10. Those therefore are the stages which current case law sets out  and  it
    will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to go through  those
    stages and consider whether the process and the hearing will be a  fair
    hearing.  Inevitably that will require a decision to be made not at the
    outset of the hearing but in the course of the  hearing  if  the  judge
    comes to the view that it is simply impossible to reach a  just  result
    without having the appellant's presence in the  United  Kingdom.   Then
    consideration will have to be given to whether he should be the subject
    of a mandatory order for his return but that is a considerable way off,
    until we know what the issues  are  and  until  we  have  examined  the
    advantages and disadvantages of  the  procedure  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge will adopt.

11. In the circumstances of this appeal, the decision I reach is  that  the
    judge made an error of law.  He was obliged to consider Article  8  and
    was not in a position simply  to  find  that  the  certificate  was  an
    unlawful one.  I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal  for  hearing  before  a  differently
    constituted division of the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

      i) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  of
         law and is set aside.

     ii) The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.












                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


                                                         Dated 23 March 2018

