
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22207/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12th November 2019                  |On 15th November 2019               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                           OLUSEGUN AREMU BABALOLA
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani, Counsel instructed by Universe
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  Most recently, he arrived in
       the UK with leave to enter as a visitor valid  until  27th  September
       2013.  He remained in the UK unlawfully when the visit visa  expired.
       On 28th September 2017, the respondent received  an  application  for
       leave to remain on family and private life  grounds.   The  applicant
       relied upon his relationship with Ganiat [F].  He  claimed  that  the
       relationship began in April 2014 and that he had started living  with
       his partner on  30th  August  2014,  at  an  address  shared  by  the
       appellant's partner and her two adult  daughters.   That  application
       was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in  a  decision
       dated 18th October 2018.


    2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Daldry for the reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
       promulgated on 20th June 2019.   It is  that  decision  that  is  the
       subject of the appeal before me.  Permission to appeal was granted by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 2nd September 2019.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Daldry


    3. The judge refers to the appellant's immigration history at paragraphs
       [3] and [4] of her decision.  The background to the appellant's claim
       for leave to remain in the UK is set out at paragraphs [5] to [10] of
       the decision. The  judge  refers  to  the  reasons  provided  by  the
       respondent for refusing the application, at paragraphs [13]  to  [16]
       of her decision. The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out  at
       paragraphs [20] to [45] of the decision.


    4. At the hearing of the appeal,  the  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
       appellant and his partner. The judge  found  the  appellant  and  his
       partner to be credible witnesses with regard to  their  feelings  for
       one another, and their commitment to their  relationship.  She  found
       that the applicant and his partner are in a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship and  that  they  intend  to  live  together.  The  judge
       carefully considered the evidence before her regarding the date  upon
       which the appellant and his partner  began  to  live  together.   She
       noted that there was evidence in the form of a council tax  statement
       that established that the applicant and his partner had  been  living
       together since 1st September 2016.  The judge also noted  that  there
       was evidence regarding an 'electricity account' that established that
       they were living together as at November 2016.  At paragraph [30]  of
       her decision, the judge found  that  whilst  the  appellant  and  his
       partner may well have been in a relationship prior to August 2016, it
       is more likely than not that it was in August 2016, when they started
       living together. The judge noted that the documentary evidence before
       the Tribunal supports that conclusion, as does the  fact  that  their
       marriage was blessed on 18th August 2016.   At  paragraph  [31],  the
       judge referred to the evidence set out in a statement that was before
       the Tribunal from the daughter of the appellant's partner.   Although
       she did not attend to give evidence, her evidence was relied upon  by
       the appellant. In her statement, she stated that the  appellant  used
       to visit the family regularly "but in August 2016 he  started  living
       with us as a family unit...".  The judge considered  the  explanation
       provided by the appellant that the author of that statement had  made
       a mistake, and had intended to say that the appellant had lived  with
       his partner since August 2014. The judge rejected  that  explanation.
       The judge stated, at [31]:


             "...If it had been a simple typographical error, it would have
             been easy enough for those representing the appellant to  have
             had it corrected by Alice prior to the hearing. In my finding,
             the inclusion of the very specific date  set  out  in  Alice's
             statement suggests to me that it is more likely than not, that
             it was then that the appellant started living with Ms  Fadario
             and not at an earlier time."

    5. Having found that the appellant has not established that he had lived
       with his partner for at least two years prior  to  the  date  of  the
       application, the judge concluded that the appellant does not  satisfy
       the relevant relationship requirements set out in Appendix  FM.  That
       is because section GEN.1.2. defines a 'partner' for the  purposes  of
       Appendix FM as, inter alia, a person who  has  been  living  together
       with the applicant in a relationship akin to a marriage  or  a  civil
       partnership for  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the
       application.


    6. The judge was satisfied that the relevant financial requirements  are
       met by the appellant.  At paragraph [27] of her decision,  the  judge
       refers to the earnings of the appellant's partner. The judge accepted
       her evidence with regard to her employment history as being  genuine.
       At paragraph [35] of the decision, the judge stated:


             "It is of note that given that the appellant and Ms  [F]  have
             continued to live together, it is likely  that  the  appellant
             would be able to establish the  entry  clearance  requirements
             for an application based on his relationship with Ms [F]. They
             are in a genuine and subsisting relationship as of the date of
             this hearing and in my finding they do intend to live together
             permanently.  There  are  no   reasons   to   question   their
             suitability and Ms  [F]  is  a  British  citizen.  Both  their
             previous relationships have permanently broken down and I have
             seen the divorce certificate of Ms [F] in  this  respect.  The
             financial  requirements  are  clearly  met.  Ms  [F]'s  income
             greatly exceeds the �18,600 required."

    7.  At  paragraph  [36],  the  judge  refers  to  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant's partner that she would not leave the UK to go to  Nigeria
       with the appellant. The judge accepted that evidence but  found  that
       the appellant could remain in contact with his partner for  a  period
       of time while he prepared an out of country application to join  her.
       At paragraph [37], the judge found  that  there  are  no  exceptional
       provisions with regard to family life. She noted that the appellant's
       partner's two daughters are adults.  At  paragraph  [40],  the  judge
       stated:


             "The case  before  me  was  not  analogous  to  the  Chikwamba
             circumstances. In Chikwamba it was found that it  would  be  a
             violation of Article 8 if the  applicant  in  that  case  were
             removed from the United Kingdom and forced to make an  out  of
             country application for leave to enter which would clearly  be
             successful and in circumstances where  the  interference  with
             family life could not be  said  to  serve  any  good  purpose.
             However, in the case before me, I find that  the  family  life
             such that it does not involve young children  but  rather  two
             adult children both of whom are primarily cared for  by  their
             British citizen mother. There is no  suggestion  that  Ms  [F]
             would go to Nigeria with the appellant and although it  is  in
             my view likely that an out of country application for leave to
             enter would be treated  favourably,  there  is  no  guarantee.
             With regard to Beouku Betts I  find that the family life in Mr
             Babalola's case is not comparable with  that  as  set  out  in
             Beouku Betts and he cannot rely on that  case  to  assist  his
             appeal. I do not find that the impact on the family  would  be
             significant if the appellant were to be required  to  make  an
             out of country application. The children are adults  and  have
             not shown any level of dependency  on  the  appellant.  It  is
             their mother who supports them and her own evidence  was  that
             she would not leave the UK to follow the appellant."2

    8. The judge went on to consider the public interest considerations  set
       out in s117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
       She noted in particular that the appellant  formed  his  relationship
       with his partner at  a  time  when  he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
       unlawfully, and she is  required  to  attach  little  weight  to  the
       relationship in that respect. She noted that both the  appellant  and
       his partner would have known that he was in the  UK  unlawfully  when
       they established their relationship.  At paragraph  [45],  the  judge
       concluded as follows:


             "Weighing it up and looking at it in  the  round,  I  conclude
             that the decision was proportionate. The  appellant  does  not
             meet the rules. I understand that he would prefer to remain in
             the UK and that Ms [F] would also prefer  that.  However,  the
             public interest in this case outweighs the other factors and I
             find for the reasons set out above that the appeal  should  be
             dismissed."

The appeal before me


    9. The appellant claims that the evidence before the Tribunal  from  the
       appellant and his partner was that they had started  living  together
       in August 2014. It is said that the finding made by  the  Judge  that
       they started living together in  August  2016,  is  a  finding  based
       largely, upon the lack of documentary evidence showing the  appellant
       living at the address prior to 1st  September  2016.   The  appellant
       claims that although the judge was right to note  that  the  evidence
       relating to the period prior to September 2016 was lacking, the judge
       failed to have proper regard to the oral evidence  of  the  appellant
       and his partner, whom, the judge found to be  credible  witnesses  in
       other respects.  Ms Bustani submits there is no need for  documentary
       evidence to support the claim that they  have  lived  together  since
       2014, and the judge should have attached  more  weight  to  the  oral
       evidence of the appellant and his partner.


   10. The appellant also claims that having  found  that  the  relationship
       requirement under Appendix FM of the immigration rules was  not  met,
       the judge failed to consider whether the appellant can  benefit  from
       the exception to certain eligibility requirements for leave to remain
       as a partner,  set  out  in  section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
       immigration rules. Ms Bustani submits that the  judge  accepted  that
       the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
       partner who is a British citizen. The  judge  should  therefore  have
       gone on to consider whether there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       family life with the appellant's partner continuing outside  the  UK.
       Ms Bustani submits the judge did not consider this issue at all.  She
       submits the evidence before the Tribunal and accepted by  the  judge,
       was that the appellant's partner would not leave the  United  Kingdom
       to go to Nigeria. The evidence of the appellant's partner is that she
       remains responsible for her younger child who is currently undergoing
       her own nursing training in London. The appellant's partner therefore
       has responsibilities in the United Kingdom that  prevent  her  living
       with the appellant in Nigeria.


   11. Finally, the appellant claims that the judge found, at [35], that  it
       is likely that the appellant would  be  able  to  satisfy  the  entry
       clearance requirements for an application based on  his  relationship
       with Ms [F].  Ms Bustani submits  that  the  requirements  for  entry
       clearance as a partner are met, and although the judge refers to  the
       decision in Chikwamba, the judge has erroneously failed  to  properly
       apply the principle.  She submits the Supreme Court, in  Agyarko  -v-
       SSHD [2017] UKSC 11, held that whether an  applicant  is  in  the  UK
       unlawfully, or is entitled to remain in the UK only  temporarily,  if
       the applicant  is  certain  to  be  granted  leave  to  enter  if  an
       application were made from outside the UK, then  there  might  be  no
       public interest in  his  or  her  removal.   She  submits  the  judge
       erroneously distinguishes the facts  here,  on  the  basis  that  the
       family life here does not  involve  young  children,  but  two  adult
       children.


Discussion


   12. I reject the first ground of appeal. In reaching her finding that the
       appellant and his partner started living together in August 2016, the
       judge carefully considered all  the  evidence  that  was  before  the
       Tribunal.  The judge found, at  [20],  that  the  appellant  and  his
       partner are credible witnesses with regard to their feelings for  one
       another and their commitment  to  their  relationship.  It  does  not
       follow that the judge was bound to find that they are credible as  to
       the date upon which they  began  living  together.  In  reaching  her
       decision, the judge carefully considered all the evidence before  the
       Tribunal.   In  reaching  her  decision,  the  judge  considered  the
       documentary evidence that pointed to the appellant  and  his  partner
       living at the same address from September 2016,  the  fact  that  the
       relationship was blessed according to Islamic custom in August  2016,
       and the evidence set out in the witness statement of Alice [F].   Her
       evidence was that the appellant used to visit the  family  regularly,
       but he started living with them in August 2016.


   13. The Judge here, was not satisfied that the appellant and his  partner
       had been living together in a relationship akin to a marriage for  at
       least two years prior to the date of application.   That  was  in  my
       judgement, a conclusion that  was  open  to  the  FtT  judge  on  the
       evidence before the FtT.   The  finding  reached  by  the  judge  was
       neither irrational nor unreasonable in the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  a
       finding that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   14. Having found that the requirements for limited leave to remain  as  a
       partner set out in Appendix FM cannot be met, the  appellant  had  to
       rely upon Section EX.1.(b) and to establish that he has a genuine and
       subsisting relationship with a partner, and there are  insurmountable
       obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.
        The judge notes at paragraph  [39],  that  she  has  considered  the
       exception set out in EX.1(b) and EX.2 of Appendix FM.  The  appellant
       would  have  to  establish  that  there  would  be  very  significant
       difficulties faced by the applicant and  his  partner  in  continuing
       their family life  together  outside  the  UK,  which  could  not  be
       overcome, or would entail very serious hardship for the appellant  or
       his partner. The judge referred, at [36],  to  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant's partner and accepted that she would not leave the  United
       Kingdom.


   15. Ms Bustani referred me  to  the  evidence  set  out  in  the  witness
       statement of the appellant's  partner  dated  29th  April  2019,  and
       paragraphs [8], [11] and [15] in particular.  The appellant's partner
       claims that her temporary or permanent relocation to Nigeria with the
       appellant would affect her  career  and  her  relationship  with  her
       daughters. Her evidence is that her daughters have made it  known  to
       her that they would not relocate to Nigeria with her, and  that  they
       are still dependent upon her for their accommodation. Her evidence is
       that her partner has no job to return to in Nigeria, to enable him to
       accommodate and care for them. They have no assets  in  Nigeria,  and
       her evidence is that it will be  difficult  to  adapt.   Taking  that
       evidence at its highest, although  living  in  Nigeria  together  may
       cause a degree of hardship for the appellant's partner, there  is  no
       evidence that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  the
       appellant and his  partner  from  continuing  their  relationship  in
       Nigeria.


   16. In R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex parte Khan [1983] QB  790  (at
       page 794) Lord Lane explained that the issues which the  Tribunal  is
       deciding and the basis on which the Tribunal reaches its decision may
       be set out directly or by inference. He noted; "The reason is this. A
       party appearing  before  a  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  know,  either
       expressly stated by it or inferentially stated, what it is  to  which
       the Tribunal is  addressing  its  mind.  In  some  cases  it  may  be
       perfectly  obvious  without  any  express  reference  to  it  by  the
       Tribunal; in other  cases  it  may  not.  Second,  the  Appellant  is
       entitled to know the basis of fact on which the conclusion  has  been
       reached. Once again in many cases it may be quite obvious without the
       necessity of expressly stating it, in others it may not.".


   17. Having carefully considered the decision of the  FtT  judge  and  the
       evidence that was before the Tribunal for myself, I accept  that  the
       judge did, as she expressly states  at  [39],  consider  whether  the
       appellant can benefit from the exception set out in section  EX.1.(b)
       of Appendix FM, but even if she did  not,  that  omission  is  in  my
       judgment, immaterial.  The focus of the evidence relied upon  by  the
       appellant was the connections that the appellant's partner has to the
       UK and responsibilities that the appellant's partner has towards  her
       two adult daughters.  There  was  little  evidence  of  substance  to
       establish that there would be very significant difficulties faced  by
       the appellant or his partner in continuing their family life together
       outside the UK, that could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
       serious hardship for the appellant and his partner.   The  fact  that
       the appellant's partner may not wish to leave the United Kingdom,  is
       entirely a matter of choice.  Although living in Nigeria together may
       cause a degree of hardship for the appellant's partner, there was  no
       evidence before the Tribunal of insurmountable  obstacles  preventing
       the appellant and his partner from continuing their  relationship  in
       Nigeria, either permanently, or temporarily whilst an application for
       entry clearance is made.


   18.  Finally,  Ms  Bustani  submits  that  the  appellant  can  meet  the
       requirements of the immigration rules, if an  application  for  entry
       clearance were to be made by the appellant.  Relying  upon  paragraph
       [51] of the judgement of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017]
       UKSC 11, she submits that although the appellant has been residing in
       the UK unlawfully, the public interest does not require  the  removal
       of the appellant from the  UK,  so  that  an  application  for  entry
       clearance can be made by him.


   19. The only ground of appeal available to the  appellant  was  that  the
       respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
       1998.  The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v-  SSHD  [2017]
       UKSC 11 confirms that the fact that the immigration rules  cannot  be
       met, does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full merits-
       based assessment  outside  the  rules  under  Article  8,  where  the
       ultimate issue is whether a fair balance has been struck between  the
       individual and public interest, giving due weight to  the  provisions
       of the Rules.


   20. In in Hayat -v- SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, the Court of  Appeal  held
       that the effect of Chikwamba is that (a) where  an  applicant  lacked
       lawful entry clearance, the dismissal of his Article 8 claim  on  the
       procedural ground that he should, as a matter of  policy,  have  made
       the application from his own state, might constitute a disruption  of
       family or private life sufficient to  engage  Article  8;  (b)  where
       Article 8 was engaged, it was a  disproportionate  interference  with
       family or private life to enforce such a policy unless  there  was  a
       sensible reason for doing so; (c) whether it was sensible to  enforce
       that policy was fact-sensitive; (d) where Article 8 was  engaged  and
       there was no sensible reason for enforcing the policy, the  decision-
       maker should determine the Article 8 claim on its substantive merits,
       notwithstanding that the applicant had no lawful entry clearance; (e)
       it would be a very rare case where it was appropriate for  the  Court
       of   Appeal,   having   concluded   that   a   lower   tribunal   had
       disproportionately interfered with Article 8 rights in enforcing  the
       policy, to make the substantive Article 8 decision  for  itself;  (f)
       nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter the way the courts  should
       approach substantive Article 8 issues; (g) if the secretary of  state
       had no sensible reason for requiring the application to be made  from
       the home state, her failure to do so should not thereafter carry  any
       weight in the substantive Article 8 balancing exercise.


   21. More recently in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 Lord Reed said:


           "50.   ... As the instruction makes clear,  "precariousness"  is
           not a preliminary hurdle to be overcome. Rather, the  fact  that
           family life has been established by an  applicant  in  the  full
           knowledge that his stay in the UK  was  unlawful  or  precarious
           affects the weight  to  be  attached  to  it  in  the  balancing
           exercise.

           51. Whether the  applicant  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully,  or  is
           entitled to remain in the  UK  only  temporarily,  however,  the
           significance of this consideration depends on what  the  outcome
           of immigration control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an
           applicant would otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign
           criminal, then the weight of the public interest in his  or  her
           removal will generally be very considerable. If,  on  the  other
           hand, an applicant - even if residing in the UK unlawfully - was
           otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at least  if  an
           application were made from outside the UK, then there  might  be
           no  public  interest  in  his  or  her  removal.  The  point  is
           illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v  Secretary  of  State
           for the Home Department."

   22. On the findings made by the judge, the appellant is unable to satisfy
       all the requirements for leave to remain as a partner as set  out  in
       Appendix FM of the immigration rules.  The applicant had remained  in
       the UK unlawfully and the decision that he should,  as  a  matter  of
       policy,  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from   Nigeria
       constituted a disruption of family  or  private  life  sufficient  to
       engage Article 8.


   23. The issue in this appeal, as is  often  the  case,  was  whether  the
       interference with the right to family life is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate public end sought to be achieved. Although the decision of
       the House of Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD and  subsequent  decisions  of
       the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court establish that where  there  is
       evidence that an application  for  entry  clearance  from  abroad  is
       likely to succeed, then the weight to be accorded to the requirements
       of obtaining entry clearance from abroad is reduced, a fact sensitive
       consideration is required.


   24. In reaching her decision,  the  judge  had  regard  to  section  117B
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that  requires  that  in
       considering the public  interest  question,  the  Tribunal  must  (in
       particular) have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B.
         The  judge  considered  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and
       acknowledged that little weight should be  given  to  a  relationship
       that was established by the appellant at a time when he was is in the
       United Kingdom unlawfully.  There was no evidence before the Tribunal
       regarding the disruption that would be caused to the Article 8 rights
       of the appellant and his partner, in  particular.   Here,  the  judge
       concluded that there is a sensible reason for enforcing  the  policy,
       and found that the applicant's relationship with his partner that  is
       relatively recent, could continue whilst the applicant made an out of
       country  application  from  Nigeria.   The   judge   determined   the
       appellant's Article 8 claim on its own  merits,  and  it  was  in  my
       judgement open to the judge, looking  at  all  the  evidence  in  the
       round,  to  conclude  that  the  refusal  of  leave  to   remain   is
       proportionate in all the circumstances.  It  is  necessary  to  guard
       against the temptation to characterise as an error of law what is  in
       truth no more than a disagreement about the weight  to  be  given  to
       different factors, particularly  where  the  judge  who  decided  the
       appeal has had the advantage of hearing oral evidence and considering
       all the evidence in the round.  The  judge  found  that  although  an
       application for entry clearance is likely to  be  treated  favorably,
       there is no guarantee.  It was open to the judge  to  find  that  the
       impact on the family would not be significant if the  appellant  were
       to be required to make an out of country  application.  The  decision
       was in my judgement, a decision that was open to the FtT judge on the
       evidence before the FtT.   The  finding  reached  by  the  judge  was
       neither irrational nor unreasonable in the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  a
       finding that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   25. In my judgment, it was open to the judge to dismiss  the  appeal  for
       the reasons given by her.  It follows that the appeal before  me,  is
       dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   26. The appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Daldry is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date          13th November 2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can in the circumstances,  be  no  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date          13th November 2019

    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




