
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22137/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2019                   |On 07th November 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                  Manoj rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lafne of Counsel, Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1988 is  a  citizen  of  Nepal.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Lafne of Counsel.  The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Singh, a Presenting Officer.  The Appellant had  made
    application for settlement in the United Kingdom as the adult dependent
    child of his mother who was a widow of a late former  Ghurkha  soldier.
    The Appellant's application was refused on 21st  September  2018.   The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Khawar sitting at Taylor House on  4th  June
    2019.  A judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. Application for permission to  appeal  was  made  and  granted  on  6th
    September 2019 on the basis that it was arguable errors of law had been
    made in that the judge had overlooked potentially important  evidential
    points.

 3. The matter came before me to decide firstly whether an error of law had
    been made in this case and in accordance with standard directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. It was submitted the central issue in this case was dependency  of  the
    Appellant upon his mother and the judge had not looked at  evidence  of
    financial dependency properly nor aspects of emotional dependency.   It
    was further said that perhaps it had  not  been  appreciated  that  the
    mother had only been in the UK for a few months prior to the appeal.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Singh noted the judge's decision and accepted the point that I  made
    when looking at the paragraph dealing with financial dependency.

 6. I indicated at the hearing that I found a material  error  of  law  but
    would provide a decision in writing.  I now provide that decision.

Decisions and Reasons

 7. The central issue in this case was whether there was a financial and/or
    emotional dependency between the Appellant and his mother, the widow of
    a former Ghurka  solider.   She  and  the  Appellant  had  been  living
    together in Nepal and had both made an application at the same time for
    entry clearance.  Whilst her application was accepted  the  Appellant's
    was refused.

 8. In examination of any  potential  financial  dependency  the  judge  at
    paragraph 14 stated "in my judgment the most significant lacuna in  the
    evidence in this case is lack of documentary evidence to establish that
    the Appellant had access to the Sponsor's bank  account  and  therefore
    financial dependency is  not  adequately  established".   Although  the
    judge had identified pages 31 to 32 of the Appellant's bundle as  being
    bank statements of the mother's account at Ghurkha Finance  Limited  he
    failed to make reference to the fact that there were five  payments  of
    money, three at least in consecutive months  from  the  mother  to  the
    Appellant in the relatively short time she  had  been  in  the  UK  and
    separated from the Appellant.  The failure to refer to or  provide  any
    assessment of that evidence was a material error of law in the  context
    of this case and the clear significance the judge  placed  on  what  he
    said as being a lacuna in the evidence.

 9. At paragraph 16 the judge referred to there being only  a  "modicum  of
    evidence of contact  between  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor".   That  is
    factually correct but  appears  to  be  almost  the  only  analysis  of
    potential emotional dependency between the Appellant and his mother.  I
    find that with particular respect to the financial matter there  was  a
    failure to refer to relevant evidence  or  arguably  consider  evidence
    available such that it led to a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

10. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and I find the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  needs  to  be  made
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Khawar.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be made afresh  within
    the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House before  a  judge  other
    than Judge Khawar.


 2. A time estimate of one and half hours should be given to this case.

 3. A Nepalese  interpreter  should  be  provided  unless  the  Appellant's
    representatives indicate in advance of the hearing that no  interpreter
    is required.

 4. The parties are at liberty to file any  fresh  evidence  in  compliance
    with the Procedure Rules and to serve  such  evidence  upon  the  other
    party and the Tribunal at least ten days prior to the hearing.


