
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/22201/2016
                                                               HU/22206/2016
                                                               HU/22214/2016
                                                               HU/22220/2016
                                                               HU/22224/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 7th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                 daniel [o]
                                 esther [b]
                                    [l o]
                                    [r o]
                                    [a o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Jaisri (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants appeal against decisions to refuse  their  human  rights
    claims were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas ("the  Judge")
    in a decision  promulgated  on  19th  February  2018.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 25th September 2018, that decision  was  set  aside,  as
    containing a material error of law.  The appeals were then listed,  for
    the purpose of remaking the decision, on 12th December 2018.

2.   There is no dispute between the parties regarding the important  facts.
     The first appellant, Mr [O], is a citizen of Ghana born on  4th  April
    1976.  He entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  working  holidaymaker  in
    November 2004, with leave which was valid  until  16th  November  2006.
    The second appellant, his wife, entered the United Kingdom as a visitor
    earlier than her husband, as a visitor, in December  2003,  with  leave
    valid until June 2004.  The third, fourth  and  fifth  appellants,  the
    couple's children, were born in the United Kingdom on 22nd March  2008,
    23rd May 2011 and 3rd September 2014.  It is apparent, therefore,  that
    the two older children are qualifying children, within the  meaning  of
    section 117D(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act").

3.   The Secretary of State refused the human  rights  claims  made  by  the
    appellant, following applications for leave to remain made by the first
    appellant, on his own behalf and on behalf of his family  members.   In
    the decision letter, dated 12th September 2016, the Secretary of  State
    found that although the oldest child, [LO], had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom continuously for at least the seven years immediately preceding
    the  date  of  application  for  leave  on  10th  December  2015,   the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1.(a) of the rules were not met because it
    would be reasonable to expect her to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    would be able to adapt to life in Ghana with her siblings  and  parents
    as the family would be returned as a single unit.  The other family and
    private life aspects of the  application  for  leave  were  dealt  with
    relatively  briefly,  the  Secretary  of  State  concluding  that   the
    requirements  of  the  rules  in  relation  to  the  partner  route  to
    settlement were not made out, in view of the immigration status of  the
    first and second appellants, that the private life ties established  by
    the two parents and the younger children were insufficient to meet  the
    requirements  of  the  rules  and  that  there  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which might warrant a grant of leave to any of the family
    members.

4.   As at the date of application, [RO], the fourth  appellant,  had  lived
    in the United Kingdom for five years.

5.   The judge took into account  letters  of  support  and  school  reports
    regarding all the children.  Again,  this  evidence  is  not  in  issue
    between the parties.  He recognised  that  the  private  lives  of  the
    children would be disrupted consequence of the family's return to Ghana
    but found that there would be no  especially  deleterious  consequences
    for any of the children or their parents.


Submissions

6.   Mr Jaisri, for the appellants, said  that  there  were  two  qualifying
    children and that the correct approach was  now  to  be  found  in  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).

7.    Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  was  relevant  to  the  third   and   fourth
    appellants, the children [LO] and [RO].  Each had lived continuously in
    the United Kingdom for  at  least  seven  years  and  so  the  critical
    question was whether it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave
    the United Kingdom.  A similar test appeared in section 117B(6) of  the
    2002 Act, save that the statute identified two categories  in  relation
    to "qualifying child", one a British citizen and the other a child  who
    had lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years
    or more.  The family in the present appeals had one in  each  category.
    [LO] was British and [RO] had now  lived  here  continuously  for  some
    eight years.  The judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) clearly
    had the distinction in mind, as was  clear  from  paragraph  9  of  the
    judgment, for example.  The overall focus  in  the  judgment,  and  the
    paragraphs in which the appeal in NS were considered,  was  on  a  non-
    British child.   Paragraph  10  of  the  judgment  considered  guidance
    contained in an IDI, and in  paragraph  11  also,  where  the  versions
    published in August 2015 and February 2018 were considered.   The  most
    recent version of the IDI included an additional paragraph  which  more
    closely reflected the  Secretary  of  State's  submissions  before  the
    Supreme Court.

8.   The third appellant, [LO], being a British child, was  in  a  different
    position from her sister.  The importance  of  the  IDIs  and  guidance
    given to caseworkers was apparent.  As in KO, paragraph 11.2.4  of  the
    guidance was relevant in  considering  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect a non-British child to leave.  In KO and more  particularly  NS,
    the focus was on parents with  no  immigration  status,  or  very  poor
    immigration histories, and children who are  qualifying  by  virtue  of
    having lived here for seven or more years.  The approach of  the  Court
    of Appeal in MA (Pakistan), which suggested that there was room for the
    wider public interest to feature, was rejected.   The  conduct  of  the
    parents did not bear directly on the critical question whether it would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

9.   Even if the  Supreme  Court  judgment  were  properly  to  be  read  as
    suggesting that as the first and second  appellants  had  no  leave  to
    remain, each being an overstayer for many years, it would  follow  that
    it would be reasonable to expect the fourth appellant, [RO] to go  with
    them, the position of the third appellant, [LO] was  different.   There
    was no adverse criticism of the Secretary of  State's  guidance,  which
    the Upper Tribunal held to be material in SF.  Paragraph 11.2.3 of  the
    guidance concerned British citizen children.  Where a parent with leave
    might remain, the other parent might be required to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom but where neither had leave, the question remained  whether  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  go  and  the  best
    interests of the child were plainly material in this  context,  in  the
    light of ZH (Tanzania).  So far as the third appellant  was  concerned,
    taking into account the Secretary of State's own guidance  showing  the
    need for strong reasons to justify removal of a British citizen  child,
    the correct answer in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and  section
    117B(6) was that it would not be reasonable to expect [LO] to leave the
    United Kingdom and in an Article 8 assessment in which all  the  family
    members' circumstances fell to be considered together, it followed that
    the appeals should be allowed.

10.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepted the summary of KO given by Mr Jaisri.   It
    might reasonably be said that the correct approach to  British  citizen
    children was not expressly considered by the  Supreme  Court.   Factors
    such as the age of  the  child,  the  length  of  residence  here,  the
    substance of the ties to the United  Kingdom  would  all  bear  on  the
    reasonableness of return.  Nonetheless, the children of the  family  in
    the present appeals could continue with their education  in  Ghana  and
    gain access to services there.  On its face, the judgment in KO did not
    expressly address nationality of the child and ZH  (Tanzania)  did  not
    suggest that nationality was remotely determinative.  It  was  only  in
    the context of deportation cases that the judgment  in  KO  touched  on
    British citizen children, in confirming the approach of  the  Court  of
    Appeal on this point  in  VM  (Jamaica).   British  children  might  be
    expected to relocate outside the United Kingdom, in some circumstances.
     In the "real world" assessment, if the parents were required to leave,
    the best interests of a child would  be  to  remain  with  his  or  her
    parents.  The children of the family could depart with  their  parents,
    subject to the question of reasonableness.  Many families moved  around
    the globe and British citizen children might accompany  their  parents,
    travelling for work or other reasons.

11.  There was no issue between the parties regarding  the  finding  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, having heard evidence, that the  parents  of
    the family had benefitted from a sizeable inheritance and so they could
    make provision for the children in Ghana.

12.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted  that  the  immigration  history  of  the
    parents, being poor, suggested that they had no right to be here,  that
    the best interests of [LO] and the other children were to  remain  with
    their parents and that, therefore, they should accompany their  parents
    on return to Ghana.  The private life elements of  all  family  members
    could be replicated abroad.  The strong reasons  for  finding  that  it
    would be reasonable  for  [LO]  to  leave  were  to  be  found  in  the
    immigration histories of the parents and their status as overstayers.

13.  In a brief reply, Mr Jaisri said that there was no criminality  in  the
    family circumstances.  These were  not  deportation  cases.   Paragraph
    11.2.3 of  the  guidance  considered  the  reasonableness  question  in
    relation to British citizen children.  Factors such as criminality or a
    poor immigration history consisting of repeated breaches of  the  rules
    might amount to strong or powerful reasons but these were  not  present
    here.  The evidence did not disclose powerful reasons for removing  the
    third appellant.

Findings and Conclusions

14.  In these appeals, the appellants must prove the facts and matters  they
    rely  upon  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  that  of  a  balance  of
    probabilities.  As noted above, there is no issue of any real substance
    between the parties regarding the evidence.  The  family  includes  two
    qualifying children, [LO], a British citizen child who has been  living
    in the United Kingdom continuously for ten years and  nine  months  and
    [RO], not a British citizen but present here for seven years and  eight
    months.

15.  The parents of  the  family,  the  first  and  second  appellants,  are
    overstayers  and  have  been  so  for  some  fourteen   years.    Their
    immigration histories are  manifestly  poor.   There  is,  however,  no
    evidence  showing  any  criminality  or  repeated   breaches   of   the
    Immigration Rules, as was the case with the parents in NS, one  of  the
    appeals heard with KO.  The first and second appellants are not  liable
    to deportation.

16.  The evidence before  the  Tribunal  includes  letters  of  support  and
    school reports which show that all the children of the family are  well
    settled here.  A report from a social worker found that removal of  the
    children to Ghana, a country  they  have  not  visited,  would  have  a
    substantial adverse impact upon them.  There is  no  reason  to  depart
    from the assessment made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that all  the
    appellants have well-established private life ties here  and  that  the
    family members are close and well-integrated into the  community.   The
    evidence strongly suggests that the best interests of all the  children
    are to remain here, with their parents.  As is made  clear  in  KO  the
    proper context, however, is whether their parents will have  to  leave.
    As they are overstayers, it might be said that they have  no  right  to
    remain here and so, as was the case in NS,  on  one  view  the  natural
    expectation would be that the children would return to Ghana with them,
    as explained by Lord Carnwath in paragraph 51 of the  judgment  in  KO.
    He observed that there was nothing in the evidence in  NS  reviewed  by
    the judge in that case to suggest that  leaving  would  be  other  than
    reasonable.

17.  There are, however, several material differences  between  the  present
    appeals  and  NS.   First,  and  perhaps  most  important,  the   third
    appellant, [LO] is a British citizen child.  The current version of the
    IDI,  published  in  February  2018,  distinguishes  between  the   two
    categories of qualifying children.

18.  As noted  above,  there  is  no  criminality  and  nothing  to  suggest
    repeated breaches of the Immigration Rules on the part of the first and
    second appellants, in contrast to the circumstances of the  parents  in
    NS.

19.  It is clear from KO that the test  of  "reasonableness"  under  section
    117B of the 2002 Act is self-contained, with no requirement or room  to
    consider criminality or misconduct of a parent as a  balancing  factor.
    This is also so in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  rules.
    The parents' circumstances may become indirectly material, if it  leads
    to their ceasing to have a right to remain here, and having to leave.

20.  Taking into account the respondent's guidance,  a  material  factor  in
    the light of SF, the evidence does not disclose any strong or  powerful
    reasons requiring [LO]'s removal to Ghana, and, similarly, the evidence
    does  not  disclose  such  reasons  in  relation  to  the   non-British
    qualifying child of the family, [RO].  The immigration history is  poor
    but not unusual.  The children are well-settled and the best  interests
    of [LO] in particular (but also [RO]) are that they should remain here,
    in the country of their birth and development.   The  question  whether
    the parents' status as overstayers leads  to  their  having  to  leave,
    cannot be answered in isolation from the best interests  assessment  of
    the  children,  and  [LO]  and  [RO]  in  particular.   [LO]'s  British
    nationality is, of course, not a trump card and it would be  a  mistake
    to proceed on the basis that there are no circumstances  in  which  she
    might be expected to relocate abroad.  Nonetheless, the clear answer in
    the light of the evidence is that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    her to leave the United Kingdom, for the purposes of the  private  life
    rule under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and  the  same  answer  applies  in
    [RO]'s case.  As section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was intended  to  have
    the same effect (see paragraph 17 of the judgment in KO), it would  not
    be reasonable to expect the British citizen child [LO] or her  Ghanaian
    sister [RO] to leave, for the  purposes  of  the  statutory  provision.
    Neither parent is liable to deportation and  each  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with all their children, including the
    two qualifying children.  The public interest does not  require  either
    parent's removal, taking into account the guidance in the February 2018
    IDI and the absence of any strong  or  powerful  reasons  showing  that
    removal of the children is the proper course.

21.  The evidence shows that the parents have established private life  ties
    in the United Kingdom, albeit  that  as  overstayers  for  many  years,
    section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act provides that little weight  should  be
    given  to  these  ties  as  their  immigration  status  is  precarious.
    Nonetheless, little weight is not the same as no  weight  and  will  be
    sufficient to tip the scales in the first and second appellant's favour
    where the State's case  is  reduced  to  the  extent  that  the  public
    interest does not require their removal, by virtue of section  117B(6).



22.  Overall, therefore, in the light of the best interests  assessment  and
    the finding that it would not be reasonable to expect [LO] or  [RO]  to
    leave the United Kingdom, when striking the overall balance between the
    competing interests, the balance falls in favour of the appellants  and
    their appeals are allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside, it is  remade
as follows: the appeals are allowed.

Anonymity

There has been  no  application  for  anonymity  and  I  make  no  order  or
direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date: 18th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals have been allowed in the light  of  guidance  from  the  Supreme
Court  which  emerged  in  the  course  of  the   proceedings.    In   these
circumstances, I make a fee award of half of the amount  of  any  fee  which
has been paid or is payable.


Signed                                  Date: 18th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell
