
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22390/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2018                            |On 27 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               BHARPOOR SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Sharkey
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He was born on 26 July 1983.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse him  indefinite
    leave to remain dated 12 September 2016.

 3. Judge H Graves (the judge) allowed the appeal under Article  8  because
    she found the decision was disproportionate.

 4. The respondent's grounds claim lack of adequate reasoning on  the  part
    of the judge who failed to correctly assess the burden of proof in line
    with SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  229
    (IAC).  The grounds claim that properly read,  the  witness  statement,
    spreadsheet extract and interview record showed the appellant's English
    language test had been found questionable and then invalidated  because
    of evidence of fraud in the test centre.  Further,  the  appellant  was
    not found credible at interview.  The evidential burden fell  upon  the
    appellant to offer an  innocent  explanation  and  that  had  not  been
    adequately addressed.  It was not  clear  why  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant which the judge relied upon would preclude the use of a proxy
    test taker during the test.

 5. The judge relied upon the appellant's English ability and other English
    qualifications (see [27] of the decision)  but  the  grounds  submitted
    that the test was not whether the appellant spoke English  but  whether
    on the balance of probabilities, he had  employed  deception.   See  MA
    (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450 at [57]:

         "Second, we acknowledge the suggestion that the Appellant had no
         reason to engage in the deception which we have found proven.
         However, this has not deflected us in any way from reaching our
         main findings and conclusions.  In the abstract, of course, there
         is a range of reasons why persons proficient in English may engage
         in TOEIC fraud.  These include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence,
         fear of failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt for the
         immigration system.  These reasons could conceivably overlap in
         individual cases and there is scope for other explanations for
         deceitful conduct in this sphere.  We are not required to make the
         further finding of why the Appellant engaged in deception and to
         this we add that this issue was not explored during the hearing.
         We resist any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter".

 6. The grounds claim  the  judge  materially  erred  by  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for holding that a person who clearly  speaks  English
    would therefore  have  no  reason  to  secure  a  test  certificate  by
    deception.  Further, the judge placed  weight  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was able to recall details of  the  examination  process  but
    that did not mean that he personally took the test.  The  BBC  Panorama
    programme showed students (at Eden College) standing next to  terminals
    while proxy test takers took the test for  them.   The  judge  did  not
    refer to having seen that documentary which  was  provided  on  DVD  to
    every hearing centre such that he might not  have  been  aware  of  the
    methods used which  would  not  preclude  the  candidates  from  having
    travelled to the test centre and having knowledge of the procedures and
    contents of the  test  itself,  even  though  they  had  not  taken  it
    personally.

 7. There were no exceptional circumstances such that the judge  materially
    erred.

 8. Judge Andrew granted permission on 5 June 2018.  She said inter alia:

         "2.  I do not find there is  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  this
             decision.  The respondent appears to have missed  the  finding
             at paragraph 26 of the decision that respondent [sic] had  not
             met the standard required to discharge the initial  evidential
             burden of proof.  In view of this there was no  necessity  for
             the judge to go on to make  further  findings,  of  which  the
             respondent complains".

 9. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  Judge  Kebede  granted
    permission to appeal on 26 September 2018 as follows:

         "1.  The appellant,  a  citizen  of  India,  appealed  against  the
             respondent's decision to refuse his application for indefinite
             leave to remain on long residence  grounds.   His  application
             was refused on the basis that  he  had  not  demonstrated  ten
             years of continuous lawful residence  and  under  the  general
             grounds of refusal in  paragraph  322(2)  of  the  Immigration
             Rules on the  basis  that  he  had  submitted  a  fraudulently
             obtained English language TOEIC certificate in support of  his
             application.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Graves  allowed  the
             appeal.  The respondent seeks to challenge that decision.

         2.   Arguably the judge erred in her findings that  the  respondent
             had failed to discharge the initial evidential burden of proof
             on the evidence produced and, in considering the matter in the
             alternative, in according the  weight  that  she  did  to  the
             appellant's ability in the English language, contrary  to  the
             guidance in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT  450.   Given
             that the judge's findings on deception were intrinsic  to  her
             proportionality assessment under Article 8,  all  the  grounds
             are arguable".

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Mr Clarke relied upon the grounds.  He corrected an error in  that  the
    test had not been "invalidated" but merely made questionable because of
    evidence of fraud.

11. Ms Sharkey submitted that the grounds were in error when they  referred
    to the appellant not being  found  credible  at  interview.   The  only
    reference to credibility on the interview record sheet was as follows:

         "Was the customer credible at interview?  No

         Recommendation Summary

         Applicant could communicate in English answered  all  questions  at
         ease.  However applicant confirmed he sat the ETS  TOIEC  test  one
         the date and at the place on our list therefore not credible."

12. The judge had  identified  to  the  Presenting  Officer,  her  concerns
    regarding the quality  and  nature  of  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent.  See decision at [12].





Conclusion on Error of Law

13. The Secretary of State produced no specific  evidence  of  abuse.   The
    respondent relied upon an interview with the appellant which  in  terms
    of adverse credibility referred only to generic  abuse  at  a  specific
    test centre as a result of which he was found not to be credible.   All
    this despite the fact that the  appellant  answered  all  questions  at
    interview in fluent English.

14. The judge gave her reasons at [22]-[29].  She found that the  Secretary
    of State's evidence did not support a finding that  the  appellant  had
    used a proxy test taker, only that there was evidence of general  abuse
    of the system.  The judge found that the evidence before  her  did  not
    reach the standard required to discharge the initial evidential  burden
    upon the respondent of deception but that even if  that  had  been  the
    case, the respondent's documentation as to generic abuse should not  be
    taken in isolation.  The judge found that the  appellant  was  able  to
    give detailed evidence in English about the test he took.  His evidence
    was given without hesitation,  using  complex  sentence  structure  and
    vocabulary with a minimal accent.

Notice of Decision

The judge was entitled to come to the  decision  she  did  on  the  evidence
before her.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shows  no  material
error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date         9 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

