
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:   HU/22757/2016
                                                               HU/23700/2016
                                                               HU/23705/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 September 2018                 |On 15 November 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                              AKYEMPEMHENE [S]
                                                             First Appellant
                                    [N S]
                                                            Second Appellant
                                    [a s]
                         (No anonymity orders made)
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsey, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of  Ghana  born  in  1972,  2004  and  2006
    respectively.  They are father and his children.  They appeal against a
    decision of the respondent  made  on  24  August  2016  to  refuse  the
    application of the first appellant for  entry  clearance  to  join  his
    spouse who has indefinite leave to remain.

 2. The basis of the refusal was that the respondent was not satisfied that
    the  relationship  is  genuine  and  subsisting.    Also,   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show that he is the biological father  of  the
    children.  His application was refused  under  paragraph  E-ECP.1.1  of
    Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (E-ECP.2.6  and  2.10).   The
    applications of the second and third appellants were refused in line.

 3. They appealed.

    First tier hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 12 September 2017 Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Traynor dismissed the appeals.

 5. He heard oral evidence from the sponsor, Victoria [O]. The crux of  her
    evidence was that she was in a relationship with the appellant  between
    2002 and 2006 during which the two children were born. Soon  after  the
    birth of their second child they broke up and she married  another  man
    in 2009 moving to the UK to join him. Her relationship with  the  first
    appellant continued but only as one of the parents of the children  who
    had remained in Ghana with  him.  She  was  actively  involved  in  the
    parenting during this period. Her marriage to her first  husband  ended
    in 2014. Later that year the  personal  and  romantic  aspects  of  her
    relationship with the first appellant resumed and they married in 2015.

 6. The judge's findings are at paragraph [54]ff of his decision.  He noted
    that following receipt of a DNA report it was conceded that  the  first
    appellant is the biological parent of the children as  is  the  sponsor
    but that it was still not accepted that the  relationship  between  the
    first appellant and the sponsor is genuine and subsisting.

 7. The judge next considered the birth certificates of  the  children.  He
    found them to be "wholly unreliable documents" [56] because the name of
    the first appellant as father was different.  The explanation that  his
    customary name had been used was not believed.

 8. Also, the judge found against the appellant  that  photographs  of  the
    wedding in 2015 did not show the children present.  He did not  believe
    the claim that they had been there before her brother had to take  them
    to school.  He also considered other photographs of the sponsor,  first
    appellant and children to be "staged." [58]

 9. In further criticisms the judge found that there was no  evidence  that
    the parents had been playing  an  active  role  in  the  lives  of  the
    children.  In that regard he gave  no  weight  to  the  sponsor's  oral
    testimony which he noted [59] "was prompted by  her  representative  at
    the commencement of the hearing." Also, while  there  was  evidence  of
    "spasmodic" money transfer payments since  2011  [60]  by  the  sponsor
    there was  no  evidence  that  it  had  benefitted  the  children.   In
    addition, there was "very limited" evidence of  WhatsApp  communication
    between the sponsor and the children [61].  Finally, it  had  not  been
    explained why the relationship having resumed in 2014 and  they  having
    married in 2015 the sponsor did not return to Ghana for  the  next  two
    years.

10. The judge concluded that there was "no credible evidence  of  a  family
    relationship, let alone family life" [62] and even if there is it is of
    such limited quality that refusal of the application  would  not  be  a
    breach of Article 8.

11. They sought permission to appeal which was refused, but was granted  on
    16 August 2018 on reapplication to the Upper Tribunal.

    Error of law hearing

12. At the hearing before me Mr Karim  made  several  points.   First,  the
    judge had erred in giving consideration to how much the  sponsor  plays
    in the upbringing of the children.  This is not a  sole  responsibility
    case but whether there is a genuine and subsisting relationship. In any
    event, there was ample evidence before  the  judge  about  remittances,
    communication and in connection with schooling to  show  the  closeness
    between sponsor and the children. Also, it was wrong to find that there
    was no family life and no credible evidence of family relationship  not
    least because they are biologically related and the children live  with
    their father.

13. The grounds further allege that the judge gave inadequate consideration
    to  evidence  before  him  in  support  of  the  genuineness   of   the
    relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  the   first   appellant,   in
    particular,  the  sponsor's  visit  in  2017,  the  numerous   WhatsApp
    communication and money transfers.  He also made no findings in respect
    of the first  appellant's  evidence  by  his  witness  statement  which
    supported the  sponsor's  evidence.   Finally,  the  judge  engaged  in
    extensive speculation on issues including the photographs being  staged
    and money being sent by the sponsor to salve her conscience  [60].   He
    also did not explain what he meant when he said he did not give  weight
    to the sponsor's evidence  because  she  had  been  "prompted"  by  the
    representative.

14. Mr Lindsey's position was that the judge had reached  proper  findings.
    He disputed that the judge had become side-tracked into considering  an
    issue that was not before him, namely,  sole  responsibility.   It  was
    right to consider the pattern of contact between the  sponsor  and  all
    the appellants as part of the assessment of the relationship looked  at
    in the round.  Any errors on other matters were not material  in  light
    of the careful and detailed consideration of the case.

    Consideration

15. In considering this matter it is clear that the judge in  his  detailed
    decision realised that the issue was whether the  relationship  between
    the sponsor and the first appellant is genuine and subsisting and  that
    sole responsibility was not a separate issue.  However, I agree with Mr
    Karim that at some points he became side-tracked from his consideration
    of the real issue.  For example, he gave considerable attention to  the
    birth certificates [54-56].  It is unclear why he focussed on that when
    the  DNA   evidence   had   conclusively   established   the   parental
    relationship.  Further, (at [61]), he seems  to  have  dealt  with  the
    WhatsApp evidence mainly in the context of whether it showed a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship between the sponsor and the children rather
    than their father.

16. Whilst it is clearly unnecessary for a judge to refer to every piece of
    evidence before him, I consider that he  failed  to  make  findings  on
    relevant evidence such as the  numerous  WhatsApp  messages  which  are
    clearly between husband and wife and which are in loving, and indeed at
    times, intimate terms. These are dated  2014/2015  and  are  consistent
    with the claim that it was from that time that  they  resumed  a  close
    relationship. There is  also  evidence  of  money  transfers  from  the
    sponsor to the first appellant over the period 2012 to 2015. He made no
    findings on the sponsor's  evidence  that  much  of  the  communication
    between her and her husband was done by Viber, Skype and  similar,  for
    which there are no records.

17. Moreover, the judge's  criticisms  relate  entirely  to  the  sponsor's
    evidence.  He did not have regard to the first  appellant's  statement,
    which albeit brief, supports the sponsor's account.

18. In addition, I again agree with Mr Karim that several findings  of  the
    judge rely on speculation.  For example, at [61],  he  speculates  that
    the photographs were "staged".  No reasons are given.  He says it again
    at [58].  At [60] he speculates that the  sponsor  sent  money  to  the
    first appellant to "salve her  conscience".   Again,  no  reasoning  is
    given and it is unclear how on the evidence the judge could reach  this
    conclusion.  At [57] he speculates that it is not beyond the "bounds of
    possibility" that the children were not at the wedding because they had
    been residing with the sponsor's mother.  At [58] he  further  errs  in
    speculating, as he himself states he is speculating about the  children
    living with their grandmother  following  the  sponsor  taking  up  the
    relationship in 2009 with the man who was to become her first  husband.
    He also failed to make  clear  what  he  meant  by  the  representative
    "prompting" the sponsor. If he meant that the sponsor was being led  in
    her evidence he should have put that  to  the  representative.  In  any
    event, I can see nothing  in  the  judge's  record  of  proceedings  to
    indicate any issue in that regard.

19. I  consider  that  these  difficulties  with  the  decision  looked  at
    cumulatively mean that it cannot stand.  It is set aside to be remade.

20.  An additional voluminous bundle (20 September 2018) was  submitted  on
    behalf of the first appellant in the event error of law was  found.  It
    was agreed that no further oral evidence or submissions were required.

21. It contains numerous further items in  support  of  the  claim.   These
    include Money Gram receipts, more WhatsApp messages, phone call records
    between the sponsor and the first appellant with confirmation that  the
    number relied on is the appellant's.   There  are  also  various  items
    including (date  stamped)  photographs  showing  the  children  at  the
    wedding, a letter from their school confirming they  had  attended  the
    wedding in the morning before being required to return  to  school  for
    exams, more photographs of the sponsor  and  first  appellant  and  the
    children together in informal settings on other occasions, and receipts
    for school fees and school uniform.  It is clear that the  sponsor  has
    visited from the UK when able to do so. Her  current  passport  records
    visits in 2014, 2015 and 2017.

22. I see no reason why I cannot place reliance  on  these  various  items.
    They strongly support the claim that the relationship between the first
    appellant and the sponsor is genuine and subsisting. I find there to be
    compelling evidence of mutual devotion and that  they  intend  to  live
    together permanently in the UK.

23. The appeals succeed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material  error
of law.  It is  set  aside  and  remade  as  follows:      The  appeals  are
allowed.

The First tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. No application  for
an anonymity order was made to the Upper Tribunal. I see no need to make  an
anonymity order.



Signed                                  Date 9 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
