
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22970/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th October 2019                 |On 16th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                FUSI MOTSAMAI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah of Counsel, instructed by Vine Court
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Froom promulgated on 19 June  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim dated 26 October 2019 was dismissed.

 2. At the outset of the hearing, I drew to the parties' attention  that  I
    had heard and dismissed a previous appeal by the Appellant in 2014 as a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  No objection was raised by either party  to
    me hearing this appeal and my earlier involvement at one point  in  the
    Appellant's immigration history no impact on the determination of  this
    appeal.

 3. The Appellant is a national of South Africa, born on 22 July  1982  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance as  a  working
    holiday-maker to 1 January 2006, further to which he was granted  leave
    to remain as a student to 31 August 2007.  Thereafter, the  Appellant's
    immigration history becomes more complicated and aspects of  this  will
    be set out in more detail when necessary and relevant to this stage  of
    the appeal.  For present purposes,  the  latest  application  made  for
    leave to remain was on human rights grounds, which was refused  by  the
    Respondent on 26 October 2018.

 4. The Respondent refused the application the basis that Appellant did not
    have a partner or any dependent children in the United Kingdom to  meet
    any of the family life provisions in Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and his claim was considered on private life grounds  only.   The
    Respondent noted that the Appellant had lived in South  Africa  to  the
    age of 21, had  family  there,  spoke  four  local  languages  and  had
    remaining ties which would enable him to reintegrate there.  There  was
    no reason why the Appellant would not be able  to  find  employment  or
    support himself in South Africa.  The Respondent did not consider  that
    there were any exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to
    remain,  nor  any  health  reasons  to  do  so.   There  was   separate
    consideration of compassionate factors which arise in  the  Appellant's
    case, but these were not considered to be sufficient to warrant a grant
    of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. Judge Froom dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  19  June
    2019 on all grounds.  He found that the Appellant could not satisfy the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of  leave  to  remain
    and  further,  that  his  removal  would  not  be  a   disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for private life established  in
    the United Kingdom country to Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  I return below to the detailed reasons  given  for  that
    decision.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to consider adequately  the
    evidence in relation to children whom the Appellant had  some  form  of
    relationship with in the United Kingdom,  either  children  of  friends
    whom he provided some care for, god children, and those he worked  with
    his part of the Boy's Brigade.  In particular, the First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to undertake an assessment of those children's best interests in
    accordance with section 55 of the Borders's citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009.  Secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  the
    proportionality exercise was, in effect, perverse, with too much weight
    being attached to the public interest in the maintenance of immigration
    control and too little weight being attached to what was recognised  as
    a significant private life in the United Kingdom.  Finally, the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider the legality or otherwise of
    the refusal of the Appellant's application for further leave to  remain
    as a student in 2007, which he claims to have never received.

 7. At the oral hearing, Ms Appiah relied on the written grounds of appeal,
    expanding in particular on grounds two and three orally.   In  relation
    to the first ground of appeal, it was accepted by Ms Appiah that  there
    were no specific or written submissions made to the First-tier Tribunal
    about the best interests of the children, however  there  was  evidence
    about them and from them within the Appellant's  bundle  which  was  at
    least in part recognised in paragraph  59  of  the  decision,  but  not
    considered extensively.  There was no real dispute on the facts  as  to
    the Appellant's involvement  with  different  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it was submitted that their lives were clearly enhanced  by
    the role that the Appellant played for each of them.  On this basis  it
    was submitted the error of law in failing to conduct a  best  interests
    assessment was  a  material  one  given  the  nature  of  the  holistic
    balancing exercise required for the purposes of Article 8 and that this
    factor may tip the balance in the Appellant's favour.

 8. As to the second ground, the Appellant's focus is on  paragraph  96  of
    the decision and that in effect,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reached  a
    conclusion that was perverse on the facts where it had been found  that
    the Appellant had a significant private life in the United Kingdom  and
    that the Appellant's value to the  community  should  have  been  given
    greater weight.  Ms Appiah submitted that an example of how the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in the balancing exercise was by reference  to  the
    Appellant's status in the United Kingdom being precarious.  Although it
    was accepted  in  accordance  with  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
    Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  UKSC  58
    the Appellant's status in the United Kingdom was precarious because  he
    did not have indefinite leave to remain  here,  it  was  in  any  event
    submitted  that  there  should  be  a  more  nuanced  approach  to  how
    precarious the Appellant's status was.  Specifically, it was  suggested
    that there should be some recognition of the fact  that  the  Appellant
    had  spent  time  lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  whilst  here
    unlawfully, had made regular and repeated  efforts  to  regularise  his
    stay.  Ms Appiah submitted  that  this  should  put  him  in  a  better
    position for the purposes of assessing precariousness than a person who
    had simply been in the United Kingdom  unlawfully  without  making  any
    attempt to obtain leave to remain.

 9. In relation to the third ground of appeal, it was  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in making  an  adverse  finding  against  the
    Appellant in paragraph  88  of  the  decision,  because  there  was  no
    meaningful assessment of the legality of the refusal of the Appellant's
    application for further leave to remain as a student in 2007, which  he
    never received and which should not  therefore  be  an  adverse  factor
    against him.

10. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Lindsay made three points  in  relation
    to ground one.   First,  it  was  submitted  that  the  point  was  not
    expressly relied upon or raised before the First-tier  Tribunal  either
    in the skeleton argument, oral submissions  or  oral  evidence  and  no
    mention at all was made of section 55.   In  these  circumstances,  the
    point was not Robinson obvious and the Judge was not required  to  deal
    with it.  Secondly, in any event the First-tier Tribunal  properly  and
    fully considered all the evidence before it, including the  Appellant's
    strength of connections in the United Kingdom, with  a  decision  being
    taken in the round on all  of  the  evidence  and  for  which  detailed
    reasons were given.   Finally,  also  in  any  event,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on the basis that the refusal of leave to  remain  would  not
    lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences on  the  Appellant,  following
    the test set out by the Supreme Court in Agyarko v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  Even if an assessment  of  the
    children's best interests had been more expressly undertaken by  First-
    tier  Tribunal  in  this  case,  it  would  still  not,  in   all   the
    circumstances, establish that there would be  any  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences on the Appellant or any of those  persons  in  the  United
    Kingdom who he has undeniably strong ties with.

11. In relation to the second ground of appeal, Mr Lindsay  reiterated  the
    Appellant's acceptance that to succeed on this ground he would have  to
    show that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  perverse,  which
    is a very high threshold which cannot be met on the facts of this case.
     The weight to be attached to evidence is primarily a  matter  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  provided  that  all  of  the  evidence  has  been
    considered and taken into account.

12. The Judge correctly identified the meaning of precarious in  paragraphs
    81 and 82, reminding  himself  that  the  public  interest  factors  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  were
    not a straitjacket and that all of  the  circumstances,  including  the
    particularly  valuable  private  life  ties  which  the  Appellant  has
    established in the United Kingdom were to be taken into account.

13. Further, at paragraph 97, the Judge noted that the case law relied upon
    by the  Appellant  in  relation  to  public  interest  and  a  person's
    contribution to the community, predated  the  introduction  of  section
    117B, which now provides a statutory framework for  the  assessment  of
    public interest and therefore to some extent supersedes cases  such  as
    UE (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 975.

14. Finally, in relation to the  third  ground  of  challenge,  Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that the Judge was entitled to find in paragraph  88  of  the
    decision that it was not possible for him to make a  clear  finding  on
    the merits of the Appellant's application for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student in 2007 and that in any event there has been  no  challenge  to
    the  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not   established   that   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules had been met at this time,  which
    is fatal to this ground of challenge.

Findings and reasons

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is well structured  with  clear
    findings made between paragraphs  34  and  60  as  to  the  Appellant's
    circumstances and immigration history in the United Kingdom,  to  which
    the law is applied in paragraphs 61 and onwards in accordance with  the
    five step approach  in  Razgar  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27.

 2. The first ground of challenge relates to the factual findings  made  in
    relation to the  children  with  whom  the  Appellant  has  established
    relationships, including as a god parent, carer or volunteer within the
    Boys Brigade,  which  are  expressly  recognised  in  the  findings  in
    paragraphs 51, 52 and 59 of the decision.  It is however said that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider the best interests  of
    those children in accordance with section 55 of the Borders Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, which  would  be  a  necessary  part  of  the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

 3. Ms Appiah accepted at the oral hearing before  me  that  there  was  no
    express reliance by the Appellant on section 55 or the  best  interests
    of any of the children involved, either in written or oral  submissions
    before the First-tier Tribunal law or in  any  of  the  oral  evidence.
    That is recognised in paragraph 59 of the  decision,  which  stated  as
    follows:

         "Ms Appiah did not dwell on the interests of the  various  children
         with whom the appellant is involved.  I did not understand has been
         making arguments based on  the  best  interests  of  any  child  or
         children and she did not identify any particular child or  children
         for this purpose.  I accept the appellant  is  a  much-loved  youth
         leader and that he plays a very  positive  role  in  lives  of  his
         godchildren and his friend's children.  However,  as  the  decision
         notice points out, there is no evidence that his presence in the UK
         is necessary to meet those children's essential needs.   They  have
         their  own  parents  and  carers.   The  appellant's  presence   is
         desirable but the children's best interests are  not  significantly
         affected."

 4. I find that in effect, without any express reference to section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the paragraph quoted
    above contains a sufficiently detailed  assessment  of  the  children's
    best interests, commensurate with the submissions made  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the  evidence  before  it  in  relation  to  specific
    children and more generally.  Although it varies between the  different
    groups of children, their relationships with the Appellant can at  best
    be described as peripheral to their best  interests,  given  that  they
    have their own parents and carers, their essential needs are  met,  and
    there is nothing to suggest  that  there  is  any  lack  of  access  to
    education, healthcare or any adverse impact on any of the main areas of
    a  child's  life  which  are  central  to  their  best  interests.   As
    recognised in the final sentence of paragraph 59 of the  decision,  the
    Appellant's presence is undoubtedly desirable for those  children,  but
    his removal would not significantly affect their best interests.  There
    is no challenge to this final finding by the Appellant.

 5. In these circumstances, I do not find any error of law  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in failing  to  go  further  in  an  assessment  of  best
    interests than what is contained  in  paragraph  59  of  the  decision.
    Adequate and reasoned findings are made on the evidence before it which
    are sufficiently detailed in light of the lack of any express  reliance
    on this factor by the Appellant in his appeal.  In any event,  although
    assessments for the  purposes  of  Article  8  in  the  proportionality
    exercise are fact sensitive and a holistic approach is necessary, it is
    difficult to see how any more detailed best interest's assessment could
    have strengthened the weight attached to the Appellant's  private  life
    in the United Kingdom or materially affected the outcome of the appeal.
     Any such assessment could not on the evidence have legitimately led to
    a conclusion, even taking into account all of the other  factors,  that
    there would be unjustifiably harsh consequences on either the Appellant
    any of the other persons in the United Kingdom with whom he has ties.

 6. The second ground of appeal although not phrased initially in this  way
    in the written application for permission, is essentially  a  challenge
    to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal as  perverse,  by  attaching
    too much weight to the public interest and insufficient weight  to  the
    Appellant's established private life in the United  Kingdom.   However,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a detailed and  lawful
    self-direction as to the law to  be  applied,  detailed  findings  with
    detailed and cogent reasons being given for them, which  were  open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to make on the evidence before it.  The  weight
    to be attached to each factor in the balancing exercise is a matter for
    the First-tier Tribunal, who had  the  benefit  of  oral  evidence  and
    submissions as well as the  documentary  evidence  from  both  parties.
    There is nothing to suggest that the Judge failed to take into  account
    relevant evidence, took into account irrelevant matters, nor  that  any
    conclusions were reached which were not legitimately open to him on the
    basis of that evidence.  The high threshold to establish perversity  in
    the decision is nowhere near being met in this case.

 7. The Appellant has more specifically  challenged  paragraph  96  of  the
    decision and the failure by the First-tier Tribunal to  consider  in  a
    more nuanced way the level of precariousness  of  his  status  for  the
    purposes of the balancing exercise.  Paragraph 96 of the decision is as
    follows:

         "As for the good work  the  appellant  has  been  doing  here,  the
         Tribunal has long held that  sympathy  for  and  admiration  of  an
         individual do not enhance or otherwise affect that person's  rights
         (see MG (Assessing  interference  with  private  life)  Serbia  and
         Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00113).  Ms Appiah cited  the  case  of  UE
         (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  EWCA
         Civ 975 is authority for the proposition that a person's  value  to
         the community could be a factor diminishing the public interest  in
         removal.  However, even the judgement of the David Keene, on  which
         Ms Appiah specifically relied, stated that this factor  would  only
         make a difference in relatively few cases because "the main element
         to the public  interest  will  normally  consist  of  the  need  to
         maintain a firm policy of immigration control" see [36])."

 8. Although this paragraph is specifically referred to by the Appellant in
    the grounds of appeal and  oral  submissions,  there  was  in  fact  no
    specific challenge to what is set out therein and more  importantly  no
    challenge to what followed in paragraph 97 that  these  cases  predated
    the introduction of section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, which provide a statutory framework for the assessment
    of the public interest, or the findings at the end of that paragraph.

 9. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  emphasises  throughout  the
    unusually strong private life ties that the Appellant  has  established
    in the United Kingdom, his good character and conduct, as well  as  his
    sense of injustice in relation to treatment  by  the  Respondent  at  a
    number of points throughout his  immigration  history.   All  of  these
    matters are taken  into  account  and  given  appropriate  weight.   In
    conclusion, it was found  in  paragraph  97  that,  "The  appellant  is
    undoubtedly a helpful, hard-working and well-thought of member  of  his
    community.  His departure would leave a large hole in the lives of  his
    friends.   Aspects  of  his  treatment  by  the  respondent  make   for
    uncomfortable reading.  However, even taken cumulatively these are  not
    matters capable, in my judgement, of tipping the scales in his favour."
    That finding does not indicate any perversity or error of law.

10. Ms Appiah's submission that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by not
    applying a more nuanced approach to the level of precariousness of  the
    Appellant's status in the United Kingdom  is  wholly  contrary  to  the
    findings of the Supreme Court in Rhuppiah, that  for  the  purposes  of
    section  117B(5)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,
    precarious means any grant of leave to remain short of indefinite leave
    to remain.  On any view, the Appellant's status throughout his time  in
    the United Kingdom has always been precarious.

11. Finally, the Appellant challenges what he says is  an  adverse  finding
    against him in paragraph 88 of  the  decision  without  any  meaningful
    assessment  of  the  legality  of  the  Respondent's  refusal  of   his
    application  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  in  2007.
    Paragraph 88 states as follows:

         "Looking at the available  evidence  I  note  the  following.   The
         respondent says the student application was refused,  although  the
         reasons  are  not  stated.   The  appellant  denies  receiving  the
         decision.  Ms Appiah says a copy has never  been  provided.   Judge
         Grant said that the removal should not have taken place  while  the
         application was pending.   Judge  Jackson  also  recited  that  the
         application was outstanding.  I have nothing else.   It  is  simply
         not possible to make a clear finding on the likely  merits  of  the
         application given the obscurity over  this  matter.   Even  if  the
         appellant is correct that he did not receive the refusal  decision,
         this does not mean that  one  was  not  made  and,  if  a  negative
         decision was made, it suggests the application  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of the rules."

12. Paragraph 88 must be read in the context of what precedes  and  follows
    it.  As identified in paragraph 87 of the decision, it is dealing  with
    one part of the submission behalf of the Appellant raising a 'but  for'
    argument that  but  for  the  Respondent's  errors  in  the  past,  the
    Appellant may have accrued ten years' lawful residence to  qualify  for
    indefinite leave to  remain  at  some  point  after  July  2014.   That
    argument relied on (1) overlooking a gap in continuous lawful residence
    in 2007, (2) the Appellant not receiving a refusal  decision  in  2007,
    (3) the Appellant being  unlawfully  removed  in  2008  (with  no  such
    finding  being  made  earlier  in  paragraph  42),  and  (4)  that  the
    Appellant's application in 2007 would have or  should  have  succeeded.
    The findings in paragraph 88 refer only to the last of these issues and
    the argument was in any event bound to fail because the  other  matters
    could not be resolved in the Appellant's favour either.

13. As paragraph 89 makes clear, the but for argument was not made  out  on
    the facts and therefore  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest was not reduced because of this.   There  is  no  freestanding
    adverse finding against the Appellant in paragraph 88 of  the  decision
    that is taken into account as part of the  balancing  exercise,  it  is
    simply a rejection of one part  of  the  but  for  argument,  which  if
    successful, may have reduced the weight to be attached  to  the  public
    interest.  In any event, the findings in paragraph 88 were open to  the
    First-tier Tribunal who could not practically go  any  further  in  the
    absence of any further information or evidence  from  either  party  in
    relation to the 2007 application.  For these reasons, there is no error
    of law on the third ground of challenge either.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         14th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

