
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22629/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 April 2019                              |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                          mrs Buthiena Abu Kharoub
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Syria  born  on  1  January  1967.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 4 October 2018 to
    refuse her application for entry clearance to the United Kingdom  under
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Appeal Number: HU/22629/2018 on Rules on
    the basis of her family life with her son Mr Mohammad Ahmed Sharaf  who
    is a recognised refugee in the United Kingdom.

2.   The judge dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  dated  1  March  2019.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge I D Boyes on 26  March  2019,
    finding it is arguable that the judge made serious and profound factual
    errors and arguably reached  irrational  conclusions  and  also  it  is
    alleged ignored healthcare evidence.  Thus the appeal came before me.

3.   At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the decision and whether t  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge fell  into  material  error.  At  paragraph  28  of  the
    decision, the judge sets out the sponsor's profile as a person  who  is
    on no income, is in receipt of child tax credit,  working  tax  credit,
    housing benefit and child benefit.  He is also in  receipt  of  council
    tax benefit.  He also has four children to care for.  For  the  reasons
    given about the sponsor's profile he  found  that  the  sponsor  cannot
    maintain  the  appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  additional
    recourse to public funds.

4.   However that is not the sponsor's profile because he is a  single  male
    who has been recognised as a refugee in this country as has his brother
    and they live together in the same  property.  The  judge  has  made  a
    serious error of fact which amounts to material error of  law.  He  has
    taken into account the wrong evidence for making his decision.

5.   I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  and
    remake it after hearing submissions from both parties as I was  of  the
    view that there  was  sufficient  evidence  before  me  which  I  could
    consider after hearing from the parties.

7.   The Immigration Rule that the appellant has  to  satisfy  is  that  the
    appellant must prove on a balance of probabilities that as a result  of
    age, illness or disability the appellant  requires  long-term  personal
    care and this evidence must  come  from  independent  medical  evidence
    provided. I have to consider whether the appellant's physical or mental
    condition is such that she cannot perform everyday tasks  and  requires
    long-term personal care. I also  have  to  consider  whether  there  is
    independent evidence that  the  appellant  is  unable,  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the sponsor in the United  Kingdom,  to
    obtain the required level of care in the country where  she  is  living
    from any medical agency.

8.   I have been referred to the case of Britcits v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    368 at paragraph 58 to 59 where it was stated that the adult  dependent
    relatives scheme is twofold.  Firstly  to  reduce  the  burden  of  the
    taxpayer for the provision of health and social care services to  those
    adult dependent relatives whose needs can reasonably and adequately  be
    met in their home country and  secondly  to  ensure  that  those  adult
    dependent relatives can only be reasonably and adequately  met  in  the
    United Kingdom and only those should be granted full settlement  status
    and  full  access  to  the  NHS  and  social  care  provided  by  local
    Authorities.

9.   It is also apparent from the immigration rules and  the  guidance  that
    the focus is on whether  the  care  required  by  the  adult  dependent
    relative can be reasonably provided to the required level in their home
    country.  It must be  reasonable  both  from  the  perspective  of  the
    provider and the perspective of the applicant and the standard of  such
    care must be what is required for  that  particular  applicant.   These
    considerations  include  issues  as  to  the  accessibility   and   the
    geographical location of the provision of  care  and  the  standard  of
    care.  They  are  capable  of  embracing  emotional  and  psychological
    requirements verified by expert medical evidence.  It was  stated  that
    what is reasonable of course should be objectively assessed.

10.  I have considered  the  evidence  in  this  appeal  in  the  bundle  of
    documents provided at the hearing, totalling 190 pages.  The  appellant
    is from Syria and I take judicial notice of the fact that Syria  is  at
    war.  She lives on her  own  and  has  various  medical  conditions  as
    evidenced by the medical reports provided.

11.  A letter from a director of Nawa National Hospital at page  53  of  the
    bundle of documents states that the appellant is in a bad psychological
    state as a result of psychological stress.   There  is  another  letter
    from the Syrian Medical Association which states that the appellant has
    been diagnosed with major depressive disorder,  accompanied  with  fear
    and suicidal thoughts  and  she  visits  the  clinic  every  month  for
    treatment and is in need for a long-term medication  and  psychological
    treatment under the care of  her  family  and  also  states  that  such
    medicine has been prescribed.

12.  A further letter from the Medical  Association  of  Syria  states  that
    there is a lack of medicine and lack  of  the  basic  requirements  for
    living given her medical condition and she  has  a  thyroid  and  heart
    failure.  This increases the probability of having  blood  clots.   The
    doctor confirms in  the  letter  that  the  patient  needs  daily  care
    particularly from her children as they are the only people who are able
    to help her medically and mentally.

13.  A letter from Dr Mahmoud Abdul Karim Al Khalili dated 17  January  2019
    also points out that there is a medicine shortage and lack  of  medical
    care and the appellant's conditions would  be  better  managed  abroad.
    Although it is agreed that her condition is not life threatening at the
    moment but  the  letter  states  that  it  might  deteriorate  and  her
    situation is likely to improve with family support.   The  doctor  once
    again states that the appellant has been prescribed medication.

14.  At first blush it appears  that  the  appellant  is  receiving  medical
    attention in Syria but the issue here and what has been highlighted  to
    me by Mr Moran is that the medicine is not always available  and  there
    are shortages of medication in Syria and when the  appellant  does  not
    receive the medication that has been  prescribed  to  her  she  suffers
    medically an emotionally.

15.  For a person to be  able  to  look  after  themselves  two  things  are
    necessary which is their physical health and their  mental  health  and
    both  are  equally  important.   There  is  clear  evidence  that   the
    appellant's mental health and psychological stress are at such a  level
    that she will not be able  to  perform  the  everyday  tasks  that  are
    required of her.

16.  I find there is evidence that she now requires the  long-term  personal
    care from her sons who live in this country.   They  are  refugees  and
    therefore cannot visit the appellant in Syria.

17.  In the circumstances and having considered the evidence  in  the  round
    and the jurisprudence for adult  dependent  relatives  which  has  been
    pointed out to me in the skeleton argument, I find that  the  appellant
    does meet the thresholds to be granted entry clearance.

18.  I also consider the  respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  which
    states that the appellant has not demonstrated that her sponsor in  the
    United Kingdom  is  able  to  support,  maintain  and  accommodate  the
    appellant without recourse to public funds.

19.  Mr Moran very carefully took me through  the  documentary  evidence  to
    demonstrate that the income  of  both  sons  is  above  and  over  that
    required for a family of three to sustain themselves.  There is also an
    accommodation report that the house where the sponsor and  his  brother
    live are adequate for six people.

20.   I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal and substitute my decision and allow the  appeal.



21.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date this 10th day May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date this 10th day of May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
