
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22128/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decisions and Reasons promulgated    |
|on 20 November 2019                  |on 25 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed of A1 Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a Jamaican national born on 19 August  1980.  On  15
       December 2017 at Sheffield Crown Court the appellant was convicted of
       4 counts of non-penetrative sexual activity with a male  child  under
       the age of 16 and sentenced to 4 years imprisonment. The appellant is
       also the subject of a Serious Harm Prevention Order for a  period  of
       10 years and will remain subject to notification requirements of  the
       remainder of his life.
    2. The appellant is also the subject of an  order  for  his  deportation
       from the United Kingdom as a result of his offending.  The  appellant
       brought a claim relying on an exception to deportation based upon his
       private and family life which was refused by  the  respondent  on  18
       January 2018 against which the appellant appealed.
    3. The matter came before a panel of the First-tier Tribunal composed of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
       ('the Panel') who in a decision promulgated on 20 June 2019 dismissed
       the appellant's appeal on all grounds. The Judge's findings  are  set
       out from [28] in the following terms:

           "28.   In respect of his relationship with [VB],  we  find  that
           there was a genuine and subsisting relationship, which has self-
           evidently continued to  this  day,  notwithstanding  either  his
           convictions or his subsequent incarceration.  We  attach  little
           weight to the fact that they were not cohabiting, which may well
           have been attributable to a desire by the appellant not to  lose
           his local authority accommodation.  Regardless  of  the  reason,
           they lived in close proximity and had just had a child together.
           It is also clear  that  the  appellant's  mother  and  [VB]  are
           closely involved in each other's lives.


           29.    However, we are not persuaded  that  the  effect  of  the
           appellant's deportation upon [B] would be unduly harsh. She  has
           managed to maintain her relationship  with  him  throughout  his
           incarceration. While we acknowledged she has suffered  financial
           hardship, she being unable to work during his  imprisonment,  we
           are not persuaded that it is over and above that encountered  by
           many in her situation.


           30.    We have considered with  some  care  the  nature  of  the
           relationship between the appellant and  [C].  Whilst  there  may
           have been periods during which the  appellant  was  absent  from
           [C's] life - for example, because of concerns held by the mother
           of [b] - we have attached considerable weight to the evidence of
           the appellant's mother and to the letter written by [C] himself.


           31.     We  accept  that,  currently,  [C]  is  experiencing   a
           turbulent and unsettled period in his  life.  There  will  be  a
           number of factors underpinning this and,  doubtless,  they  will
           include  the  defendants  convictions,  their  nature  and   the
           defendants imprisonment. Self-evidently, were the  defendant  to
           be deported, that too will cause [C] further distress.  However,
           taking into account his  age  and  the  other  problems  he  has
           encountered,  we  are  not  satisfied   that   the   appellant's
           deportation will have an unduly harsh impact upon him.


           32.    Given the evidence we summarised at paragraphs 11  to  19
           (above), we are not satisfied that the appellant has  a  genuine
           and  subsisting  relationship  with  [b].  Conversely,  we   are
           satisfied that he has such a relationship with [L] and [R].


           33.    However, we are not satisfied that the deportation  would
           be unduly harsh upon either child. [L] was only 4 years old when
           the appellant was imprisoned and [R] a mere 8 months old.


           34.    In considering the position of the appellant's  children,
           we have given due regard to the SSHD's duties under  section  55
           Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. We consider  that
           the children's best interests are clearly  served  by  remaining
           with their respective mothers in the UK. We do not  expect  them
           to relocate to Jamaica but neither do we  consider  it  will  be
           unduly harsh for them to continue family life in Jamaica if this
           is what the family choose. If they choose not to continue family
           life in Jamaica, we do not consider  that  it  would  be  unduly
           harsh for them to be separated. While we recognise it is not the
           ideal, family life can continue  remotely,  i.e.  via  telephone
           calls with the potential of visits, in  the  form  of  trips  to
           Jamaica or third countries.


           35.    In any event, taking the appellant's case at its highest,
           there  has  been  no  evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant   to
           demonstrate that there are very compelling circumstances  so  as
           to override  the  public  interest  in  favour  of  deportation.
           Accordingly, his appeal must fail."

    4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which  was  considered
       by a Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Although  the
       Designated Judge's  order  15  July  2019  specifically  states  that
       permission to appeal is granted the reasons for the decision set  out
       at [3] of that document are the following terms:

           "3.    The Judge  is  examined  the  evidence  meticulously  and
           reached clear and  well-reasoned  conclusions  on  all  relevant
           issues,  including  the  best  interests  of   the   Appellant's
           children. No error of law has been shown."

    5. In her Rule 24  response  dated  19  September  2019  the  respondent
       writes:

           "2.    The respondent opposes  the  appellant's  appeal.  It  is
           clear from Judge Manuell's reasons for decision that he intended
           to refuse permission  to  appeal,  and  that  the  heading  'For
           permission to Appeal is Granted' is a slip of the pen.  This  is
           the only logical conclusion, given that there is  no  indication
           in Judge Manuell's reasons that either the grounds or the First-
           Tier Tribunal's  decision  raise  any  arguable  error  of  law.
           Indeed, they state the opposite  -  that  the  grounds  have  no
           merit, the judge  is  examined  the  evidence  meticulously  and
           reached clear and  well-reasoned  conclusions  on  all  relevant
           issues, and that no error of law has been shown."



Error of law


    6. The appeal was case managed by a judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  who
       noted that permission to appeal  had  been  granted  albeit  that  it
       appeared to be in error. The grant  was  not  referred  back  to  the
       Designated Judge for  clarification  or  amendment,  but  the  matter
       allowed to proceed as an appeal in which permission had been granted.
    7. The appellant in his grounds asserted  the  Panel  erred  in  law  in
       failing to lawfully consider the appellant's article  8  appeal.  The
       appellant asserts the Panel was required to consider the impact  upon
       the children of their father being removed from them and that failure
       to do so amounts to an error of law. The grounds assert  the  Panel's
       failure to consider the subsisting relationship between the  children
       and their father is an error of law and refers in the  grounds  to  a
       number of High Court decisions claimed  to  support  the  appellant's
       challenge. The grounds also assert the Panel failed to  consider  the
       fact the appellant's behaviour had  significantly  improved  with  no
       reference being made to  his  low  risk  of  reoffending,  failed  to
       consider the appellant's immigration history, and failed to  consider
       the best interests  of  the  children.  In  respect  of  this  latter
       complaint it is asserted the Panel failed to consider the impact upon
       the children of their father being removed from them, failing to take
       into account the length of time and connection with the UK that  each
       of the children have, that there is no consideration of the impact of
       deportation upon the children and as to whether such action  will  be
       in their best interests. The grounds assert there has been inadequate
       consideration of the position as identified in the  letter  from  [C]
       which the grounds assert was dismissed without any proper  reasoning.
       The grounds assert there has been  inadequate  consideration  of  the
       children's article 8 rights.
    8. The grounds are without arguable merit  and  fail  to  establish  any
       principled basis for interfering with the Panel's findings  of  fact.
       This is a detailed decision in  which  the  Panel  engaged  with  the
       evidence and factual matrix. The fact the appellant had not  offended
       further is hardly surprising as he is in prison, but  Parliament  has
       legislated that whether a person is  liable  to  deportation  depends
       upon the criminal sentence they  have  received.  In  this  case  the
       appellant was sentenced to a period of 4 years imprisonment.
    9. The Panel clearly considered the evidence with the required degree of
       anxious scrutiny paying particular regard to the letter from [C]. The
       assertion the Panel failed to consider the position  in  relation  to
       the children is not made out. The Panel conclude the appellant has  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with [C], [L] and [R] which is  a
       finding in the appellant's favour and one that he invited  the  Panel
       to make. In relation to  [b]  the  Panel  give  adequate  reasons  in
       support of their  finding  that  it  had  not  been  established  the
       appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with this  child.
       At [13] the Panel write:

           13.    In respect of [b], the appellant stated that he  saw  her
                every day. However, he then stated that he had not seen  her
                for two years prior to his  conviction.  He  explained  that
                this was because the mother of [C] and  the  mother  of  [b]
                were very good friends and  that  [b's]  mother  had  stated
                that, as the appellant was not having contact, he could  not
                have contact with  [b].  The  email  from  Claire  Bullivant
                indicated that, as of 2007, the appellant was allowed weekly
                supervised  contact  with  [b],  due  to  domestic  violence
                issues.

   10. The evidence before the Panel did not establish the appellant had the
       type of relationship with [b] sufficient to enable  it  to  be  found
       that he had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her.
   11. The Panel assessed the question of undue harshness in  light  of  the
       decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and  the
       appellant's representative failed to establish on what basis  it  can
       be said the quoted  decisions  of  the  High  Court,  which  are  not
       binding, made any material difference. It was not made out the  Panel
       did not consider the evidence in a proper manner or failed to  assess
       relevant issues in accordance  with  the  binding  decisions  of  the
       Senior Courts.
   12. The thread that evolved throughout the  appellant's  representative's
       submissions as clarification was sought from the Bench of  the  basis
       of challenge was that the appellant disagrees with  the  decision  of
       the Panel based on a differing view of the weight to be  attached  to
       the various pieces of evidence. The Panel  make  sufficient  findings
       which are supported by adequate reasoning. As such the weight  to  be
       given to the evidence was a matter for the Panel.  It  has  not  been
       established that the weight given was in any way arguably  irrational
       or unreasonable.
   13. The Panel clearly took into account section 55 and the best interests
       of the children which are to remain with their mothers in the  United
       Kingdom.
   14. Mr Ahmed was  asked  to  specifically  refer  to  the  evidence  made
       available to the Panel which it is said they had not considered,  and
       which established the appellants claim that his deportation  will  be
       unduly harsh, such  as  to  establish  legal  error  in  the  Panel's
       decision. The reference to the letter from [C]  and  claims  made  in
       relation thereto have no merit as the Panel clearly  considered  this
       evidence and in fact attached considerable weight to that  letter  as
       reflecting [C's] view.  Mr  Ahmed  was  unable  to  refer  the  Upper
       Tribunal to evidence that supported the claim the impact of  removing
       the appellant from the children's life would  be  unduly  harsh  upon
       them. The appellant committed a very serious  offence  for  which  he
       received  a  substantial  custodial  sentence.  The   Panel   clearly
       undertook the required detailed examination of the facts of the  case
       based upon the evidence made available. It is not made out the  Panel
       misunderstood or failed  to  apply  relevant  legal  principles.  The
       difficulty for the appellant in this challenge is the finding at [35]
       of the decision under challenge in which the Panel  state  that  even
       taken the appellant's case at its highest the appeal must fail.
   15. The Designated Judge  was  correct  in  the  body  of  the  grant  of
       permission  to  record  that  the   Panel   examined   the   evidence
       meticulously and reached clear and well-reasoned conclusions  on  all
       relevant issues in relation to which no error of law has been shown.
   16. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the Panel's decision the  grounds
       fail to establish arguable legal error material to  the  decision  to
       dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the   Upper   Tribunal
       interfering any further in this appeal.

Decision

   17. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


  Anonymity.


   18. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to protect the identity of the children.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21 November 2019
