
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22888/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 19 July 2019                      |on 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                              MR MOSHIN ASHRAF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Dulay, Counsel, instructed by AWS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
        Gurung-Thapa  ('the  judge'),  promulgated  on   19   March   2019,
        dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
        to refuse his human rights application on the basis of  family  and
        private life.





     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  On  8  November  2018,  he
        appealed against the decision of the respondent to refuse him leave
        to remain  based  upon  his  relationship  with  his  partner  (and
        sponsor) who is a British  national,  settled  in  the  UK;  and  a
        further refusal under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.


     3. Relevant to this onward appeal is the respondent's contention  that
        the marriage between the appellant and his wife is not genuine  and
        subsisting and the judge's finding that she could 'not be satisfied
        from the appellant's side that  his  marriage  to  the  sponsor  is
        genuine' (para 47 of the decision).

     4. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith
        indicated that the challenge to the judge's  conclusion  about  the
        relationship being genuine and subsisting was 'just arguable':

             'Some of the factors relied  on  (such  as  the  fact  of  two
             marriages) are very weak. The judge was unarguably entitled to
             rely on the appellant's  non-declaration  of  status  and  the
             timing of the relationship  and  marriage,  particularly  when
             coupled with the basis of his earlier  asylum  claim.  Further
             consideration of the reasons for rejection may ultimately lead
             to the conclusion that there  is  no  error  of  law  in  this
             regard. However, in circumstances  where  the  judge  accepted
             that the  appellant's  wife  considered  the  marriage  to  be
             genuine and subsisting, it is  arguable  that  the  judge  has
             failed to give that factor weight when considering whether  it
             is so'.

     5. Judge Smith added, 'the crux of this challenge is  to  the  finding
        that the marriage is not genuine and, if this is upheld, all  other
        grounds fall away'.


     6. It is against this background that the appeal is listed before me.

     7. Ms Dulay asserts that  the  judge,  in  determining  the  issue  of
        genuine  and  subsisting  marriage,  failed  to  conduct  a  proper
        assessment of all the evidence available, choosing instead to focus
        on the appellant's migration history (he  had  previously  made  an
        asylum application maintaining he was gay).

     8. In particular,  Ms  Dulay  focussed  on  the  medical  evidence  in
        relation to fertility treatment.  This,  it  was  advanced,  was  a
        relevant factor and ingredient that should  have  been  taken  into
        account in the overall assessment of whether their marriage  should
        be considered genuine and subsisting, particularly in a case  where
        some of the other findings were evenly balanced.

     9. Further, it was advanced that by not making any mention of it,  the
        appellant was left in the position of not knowing  whether  it  had
        been taken  into  account  in  conducting  the  relevant  balancing
        exercise; and even if it had been, the  appellant  was  without  an
        explanation for why the judge had rejected it as a  factor  in  her
        overall assessment of whether the marriage was genuine.

    10. In this regard, I was referred to medical evidence provided to  the
        First-tier Tribunal that showed the appellant and his wife had been
        trying for a baby, that they had hoped for a pregnancy  soon  (page
        99),  that  they  had  had  difficulties  in  this  regard  due  to
        gynaecological issues (page 101), and therefore had  been  referred
        to the Joint Reproductive Medicine Clinic in February  2018,  where
        clinicians had been trying to assist them, including a referral  to
        the Assisted Conception Unit (page 106), and reference  to  hormone
        replacement therapy.

    11. There was evidence of gynaecological treatment  from  as  early  as
        July 2017, (page 93), when the appellant's wife  started  attending
        the Birmingham Women's Hospital.

    12. The position was confirmed  in  the  sponsor's  witness  statement,
        dated 18 January 2019, at paragraph 17, where she states  they  had
        been trying for a baby  since  getting  married,  but  due  to  her
        medical conditions, had been unable to conceive. She was now taking
        medication for hormone therapy and was awaiting a further  referral
        to the fertility department.

    13. While Mr Jarvis advanced that this complaint  amounted  to  a  mere
        disagreement with the judge's findings of fact,  I  take  the  view
        that it goes beyond that. It appears to me that the  appellant  and
        sponsor are entitled to an explanation as to why this evidence  did
        not feature in the overall assessment of  the  genuineness  of  the
        marriage.

    14. Mr Jarvis further contended that this treatment may  be  viewed  as
        part of an ongoing attempt to deceptively obtain status in the  UK,
        following  the  judges  detailed   and   rational   findings   that
        demonstrated 'the appellant's desperation for remaining in  the  UK
        by whatever means  possible  including  using  his  marriage  to  a
        British citizen'.

    15. I understand the point, but it is to a degree  speculative.  In  my
        judgement, the First-tier Tribunal's assessment must  not  only  be
        rational, but also reasoned  and  those  reasons  must  be  clearly
        expressed. At present there is no proper indication what weight, if
        any, was given to this tranche of  evidence,  which  on  one  view,
        might have gone to the potential lifelong commitment  of  having  a
        child together.

    16. The judge had already  found  there  was  documentary  evidence  of
        cohabitation, and that she had no  reason  to  doubt  the  sponsors
        evidence  that  she  believed  the  marriage  to  be  genuine   and
        subsisting. Therefore, whatever one makes of this evidence, it does
        appear to me that it was in  part  central  to  the  appellant  and
        sponsors claim that their marriage was genuine and subsisting.

    17. While the judge does refer to the medical treatment the sponsor was
        receiving, including for hormone replacement therapy and  fertility
        issues,  this  is  in  regard  to  whether  or   not   there   were
        insurmountable obstacles to continuing their family  life  together
        outside of the UK. It is not addressed in terms of the  genuineness
        of the marriage,  where  it  was,  in  my  view,  also  a  relevant
        consideration.

    18. As a result, I find there has been an error of law. I remind myself
        of South Bucks District Council v Porter  (No  2)  [2004]  UKHL  33
        [2004] 1 WLR 1953 at 36:

             "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they must
             be adequate. They must enable the reader to understand why the
             matter was decided as it was and what conclusions were reached
             on the 'principal important controversial  issues'  disclosing
             how any issue of law or fact was resolved."

    19. I am satisfied that  the  tribunal  has  failed  to  give  adequate
        reasons and/or weight to a material factor in the appeal.  This  is
        not simply a case of the Upper Tribunal being pernickety or  taking
        a different view about the evidence (about which I  have  expressed
        no final view in terms of the test being applied). This is  a  case
        where a central part of the appellant's claim appears to have  been
        overlooked in the context of the issue of  genuine  and  subsisting
        marriage. The appellant was entitled to have that  element  of  his
        case addressed, if only for it to be dismissed.

What should happen next

    20. First, I have considered  whether  I  should  deem  this  to  be  a
        material error of  law.  I  say  that  because  the  judge,  in  an
        otherwise comprehensive decision, goes on to state that even if she
        had found that the marriage was genuine and subsisting,  i.e.  even
        if she were wrong about her findings in regard to  the  genuineness
        of the relationship, she nevertheless was of the  view  that  there
        were not insurmountable obstacles to family life with  the  sponsor
        continuing  in  Pakistan,  and  as  a  result  Article  8  was  not
        satisfied.


    21. Secondly, I could find that there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship, as Judge Smith indicated in her grant  of  permission
        to appeal, essentially setting aside the  decision  and  making  my
        own.

    22. Alternatively, I could follow the representations from Ms Dulay who
        asked me to remit this matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
        basis that these  were  matters  of  evidence  that  needed  to  be
        considered and that the whole decision was tainted by  the  failure
        to make findings in relation to the fertility treatment.

    23. Mr Jarvis, correctly in my view, acknowledged that another  hearing
        was an option for justice to be done, although it was also open  to
        the tribunal to look to maintain the decision in another way.

    24. Having considered  once  again  the  evidence,  subsequent  to  the
        hearing, I have taken the view that this matter should be  remitted
        to the First-tier Tribunal. Four of the further grounds  relate  to
        insurmountable obstacles, and it appears to me Upper Tribunal Judge
        Smith was entitled to observe that it was arguable the judge failed
        to fully factor in the circumstances  surrounding  the  appellant's
        spouses previous marriage and her vulnerability  (which  the  judge
        accepted) when dealing with the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles
        to family life continuing in Pakistan.

    25. I do not need to say more about those  points  because  I  do  find
        there to be a material error of law in relation to the first ground
        of appeal - genuine and subsisting relationship.

    26. This matter therefore is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
        begin again.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Nottingham on 30  January
2019 under reference HU/22888/2019 is set aside.

AND I DIRECT:

   1.   This matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  in
      Nottingham for a fresh hearing, not to be listed before Judge  Gurang-
      Thapa.


No application was made for anonymity in this appeal. The  general  rule  is
that hearings are held in public and judicial decisions are published  (A  v
BBC [2014] UKSC 25) and I saw no reason to depart from the general  rule  in
this case.


Signed                                                                 [pic]
                  Date 1 August 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams

