
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/23717/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                                |                                 |
|On 10 July 2019                       |On 22 July 2019                  |
|                                      |                                 |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                              HABIB-UR -REHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Aziz for Maidstone Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Tan

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Anthony promulgated on 5 April 2019, which dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a UK citizen and  father  of  a  UK  citizen  child  on  all
    grounds.

 3. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 21 May 2019  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Scott Baker gave permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge
    had failed to make any relevant findings in respect of s 117B 6 of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Discussion

 4. Mr Tan conceded that there was a material error of law in respect of  s
    117B 6 because while he recognised at paragraph 38 that the  Appellants
    child was a qualifying child the Judge failed to make any  findings  as
    to whether it was reasonable to require the child to leave the UK.

 5. Mr Tan conceded that the Respondent would not seek to argue that it was
    reasonable for a British citizen child to leave the UK.

 6. He accepted that the decision  did  not  engage  with  JG  (s  117B(6):
    "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) Rev 1.

 7. He accepted that the as a  consequence  the  Appellants  appeal  should
    succeed.

Finding on Material Error

 8. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

 9. The Appellant was the father of a British citizen child. It was not  in
    dispute that the Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  Appendix
    FM. In considering Article 8 outside the Rules the Judge was obliged to
    take into account the public  interest  considerations  set  out  in  s
    117B6. He recognised that the Appellants child was a  qualifying  child
    for the purpose of s 117B6 and was  required  to  make  findings  about
    whether, taking into account all of  the  circumstances  including  the
    child's best interests, it was reasonable for the child to  be  removed
    with his parents particularly given  that  he  records  that  the  HOPO
    confirmed that 'the respondent did not expect British Citizens to leave
    the UK.'. The Judge failed to  make  any  findings  on  this  issue  of
    reasonableness. Indeed where he touches upon  it  at  paragraph  45  he
    fails to take into account what was said in JG approaching  the  matter
    in a way that was clearly  rejected  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  that
    decision.

10. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine whether
    it was reasonable for the child to be removed constitutes a clear error
    of law. This error I consider to be material  since  had  the  Tribunal
    conducted this exercise the outcome could have been different. That  in
    my view is the correct test to apply.

11. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot stand in respect of Article 8 and must  be
    set aside and remade by me.

Re Making the Decision

12. I start by reminding myself  of  the  wording  of  the  provision  that
    applies in this case. S 117B 6 provides

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, and

         (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
         the United Kingdom."

13. It has never been in dispute that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a British citizen child and that it is  in
    the best interests of the child to be brought up by both  parents.   Mr
    Tan made clear that the position of the Respondent in a case  involving
    a British citizen child was that it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    that child to leave the UK and therefore in my view  properly  conceded
    that the plain meaning of the provision was that  the  public  interest
    did not require his removal. Mr Tan was also implicitly accepting  that
    the Respondent would not seek to argue that it would be  reasonable  to
    require the Appellant to return to Pakistan  and  re  apply  for  entry
    clearance as such an  application  would  be  unlikely  to  succeed  on
    suitability grounds given the unchallenged finding that he had obtained
    a language certificate by deception. While the Judge may well have been
    concerned about the merits of the Appellants case having found that  he
    obtained a language certificate by deception the court in JG were faced
    with a similarly unmeritorious applicant but concluded at paragraph  41
    of JG

         "We accept that this interpretation may result in  an  underserving
         individual or family remaining in the United Kingdom.  However, the
         fact that Parliament has mandated  such  an  outcome  merely  means
         that, in such cases, Parliament has decided  to  be  more  generous
         than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998.  It can  be
         regarded as a necessary consequence  of  the  aim  of  Part  5A  of
         imposing greater consistency in decision-making  in  this  area  by
         courts and tribunals.  The fact that section 117B(6)  has  such  an
         aim was expressly recognised by Elias LJ  at  paragraph  44  of  MA
         (Pakistan)."

14. I therefore conclude that, on the facts of this case, it would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom,
    in the event  of  his  removal.   This  means  the  Appellant's  appeal
    succeeds.  It does so because Parliament has stated, in terms, that the
    public interest does not require his removal, in  these  circumstances.
    It  does  so  despite  the  fact  that,  absent  section  117B(6),  the
    Appellant's removal would be proportionate in terms of Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

Decision

15. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision is set aside

16. I remake the appeal.

17. I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Signed                                                              Date
15.7.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

