
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23868/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 December 2020                   |On 4 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                            OSAZUWA ELDGER EHIGIE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Applicant:     Mr J. Gajjar, instructed directly, for the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Watson)  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds against the decision of the respondent refusing  him  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.   Permission  was  granted  by  the  Vice
    President following the  quashing  by  the  High  Court  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's previous refusal of permission.  We will consider first  the
    substantive matters before us and then the procedural history.

 2. The appellant, a national of Nigeria, came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2011 as a student.  He met B in 2013 and was granted leave as a  spouse
    following their marriage on 9 August of that year. On 12 August 2016 he
    applied for that leave to be extended, but his application was  refused
    on 4 October 2016, his wife having written to the Home  Office  to  say
    that the relationship had broken down.  Two further  applications  were
    refused.  The appellant appealed.  He made a further application on  21
    February 2017, before that appeal was  decided:   the  application  was
    invalid by operation of s 3C(4) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   On  1
    March 2017, before receiving the Secretary of State's  notice  to  that
    effect he withdrew his appeal, which was accordingly never decided; and
    as he no longer had an appeal pending, his leave expired on that  date.
    He made a further application on 19 May 2017, which was refused with no
    right of appeal on 10 April 2018.  He made a  further  claim  based  on
    human rights grounds on  15  August  2018.   That  claim  was  refused:
    despite what is said  in  one  of  the  covering  letters  it  was  not
    certified as clearly without merit.  The appellant's appeal against the
    refusal decision is the subject of these proceedings.

 3. The claim had been made on the basis of  B's  health.   The  solicitors
    acting for the appellant asserted that B "suffers from multiple  health
    problems ... anxiety and depression and is currently on medication  and
    undergoing therapy. It has been  reported  that  she  occasionally  has
    thoughts of self-harm".  She would "undoubtedly be at  great  risk/harm
    if she lived in Nigeria  because  of  the  "substandard  medical  care"
    there: it is "a foreign country without the medical support in the UK".
     Further, if the appellant or both of them went to  Nigeria,  it  would
    interrupt  current  IVF  treatment.   The  claim  was  based   on   the
    Immigration Rules to the following extent: (a) the marriage had "lasted
    five years which is the probationary period under the 2012  Immigration
    Rules"; (b) "it is arguable that if our client's application for  leave
    was successful he would be settled by this date"; (c) the appellant did
    not meet the eligibility requirements  of  the  Rules  because  of  his
    current immigration status, but (d) EX.1 applied to him because:

          "(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen ...  and  there
         are insurmountable obstacles [as defined in EX.2]  to  family  life
         with that partner continuing outside the UK."

 4. The solicitors'  letter  ended  specifically  by  indicating  that  the
    appellant was eligible for leave under the rules for  the  reasons  set
    out.  The grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the
    history and repeated this claim.

 5. The hearing before Judge Watson was on 6 February 2019.  There was oral
    evidence from the appellant  and  from  B.   The  medical  claims  were
    supported by a letter from Guy's hospital confirming the IVF  treatment
    and that there were embryos which could remain in storage until October
    2025, and some material showing that B had self-reported in  2017  with
    severe levels of anxiety and depression, had  attended  some  workshops
    but had cancelled several appointments and that  further  referral  had
    been cancelled with her agreement as she did not attend sessions.   The
    most recent letter from her GP, described by the judge as dated 11 July
    2018, said that she found her job stressful  at  times,  suffered  from
    fatigue and low self-motivation, had no current suicidal ideation,  had
    mechanical low back pain with no sinister features, and  was  currently
    prescribed a standard dose of the antidepressant Citalopram.

 6. The judge considered  the  evidence  and  arguments  before  him.   The
    appellant's immigration status prevented him from  complying  with  the
    family life provisions of the Immigration Rules unless by way of  EX.1;
    he did not have, nor was he said to have, any private life claim  under
    the Rules.  Analysis of the oral evidence led to  the  judge's  finding
    that  although  there  was  no  basis  for  doubting  the  respondent's
    acceptance that the relationship of husband and wife  was  genuine  and
    subsisting, the appellant was not substantially involved in the support
    of his wife on a day-to-day basis or in running a household  with  her.
    B had documented mental health problems, but they had not led to  self-
    harming, nor had they prevented her from maintaining her record of full-
    time working.  In Nigeria there was a functioning health service and no
    basis in the evidence for supposing that B's antidepressant  medication
    would not be available there.  The arguments based on the IVF treatment
    were speculative in the absence of any evidence about the  availability
    of treatment or the use of the stored embryos.

 7. In the circumstances the judge found that although B might not wish  to
    move to Nigeria and might have some inconvenience in adapting to family
    life there, there were not insurmountable obstacles (within the meaning
    of the Rules) to her doing so.  The appellant had not shown that proper
    application of the Rules would have led to a grant of leave.

 8. The judge went on to consider whether the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    remain in the United Kingdom despite not meeting  the  requirements  of
    the Rules.  She noted that family life began when the appellant was  in
    the  United  Kingdom  lawfully,  and  she  over-generously   took   the
    appellant's income and ability to speak English as points positively in
    favour of his claim.  She noted  the  appellant's  claim  that  it  was
    disproportionate to make him return  to  Nigeria  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse but concluded that B  would  be  able  to  manage
    without him (because his support of her was not as intense  as  he  had
    claimed) and that the appellant's unsupported assertions about the cost
    of going to and being in Nigeria  for  the  relevant  period  were  not
    sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.  Finally,  the  IVF  treatment  did  not  tip  the
    balance: there was plenty of time for the appellant and B  to  consider
    what they wanted to do and to investigate the options in Nigeria or  in
    the United Kingdom.

 9. For all these reasons the judge concluded that there was no  breach  of
    Convention rights in the refusal of the appellant's claim.

10. There was an application to the First-tier tribunal for  permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal.  The grounds were that the judge had erred  in
    considering that the relationship between the appellant and B  was  not
    genuine and subsisting and had erred in failing to  take  into  account
    the most recent medical evidence, a GP's letter dated 25 January  2019,
    which was in the appellant's bundle of evidence  before  the  Tribunal.
    Permission was refused.

11. There was then an application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  supported  by
    grounds drafted  by  a  barrister,  X.   These  grounds  expressly  (in
    paragraph 52) adopt  the  previous  grounds  and  raise  the  following
    additional grounds.  First, in relation to the Immigration  Rules,  the
    judge had failed  properly  to  assess  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and B: the fact that they could not agree about  the  routine
    of daily life did not mean that he was  incapable  of  supporting  her.
    The IVF treatment would be "almost impossible" for her to  continue  if
    the appellant was not  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  "physically
    impossible" to transport her eggs [sic] to Nigeria.

12. Secondly, also in relation to the Immigration Rules, the appellant  had
    previously had leave to remain as a spouse; the Home Office  had  erred
    in continuing to consider B's letter of 2016 as justifying the decision
    to refuse further leave  as  a  spouse;  and  the  sequence  of  events
    following that refusal, and including the withdrawal of the appeal were
    the result of  bad  advice  from  his  then  solicitors,  Y,  that  the
    appellant was unaware of the consequences of his actions and if he  had
    withdrawn his appeal and made a new application shortly thereafter  the
    overstaying would have been condoned under paragraph 39A:  a  complaint
    about Y was "currently pending with the Legal Ombudsman as a result  of
    Y's incorrect actions  in  respect  of  withdrawing  the  appeal  after
    advising the  Appellant  to  put  in  the  application  in  2017"  (X's
    emphasis).  These  circumstances  should  have  been  regarded  by  the
    Secretary of State as "exceptional" and should therefore have  operated
    to condone the delay (of some 6 weeks) before the May 2017  application
    was made.   In setting out this ground  X  slips  into  describing  the
    appellant as having lost his leave  on  "1  March  2019",  which  is  a
    mistake for 2017: it is important to draw attention to that because  of
    the risk that it deflects attention from what  is  being  argued  here.
    The argument is not directed specifically to the decision under appeal,
    but instead to the refusal of leave on 10 April  2018,  which  had  not
    previously been challenged.

13. Finally, still in relation to the Immigration Rules, X's grounds submit
    that "in any event ... the personal circumstances of the Appellant  and
    his  Sponsor  clearly  fall  into  the  compassionate  and  exceptional
    circumstances category and properly consideration was not given to this
    by the FTJ".

14. Under a further head "Article 8" X  argues  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to appreciate that it was "manifestly  unlawful"  to  seek  the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom; the  only  specific  point
    raised is that "the determination fails to engage  with  the  Sponsor's
    suicidal ideation".

15. Before us, Mr Gajjar restricted his oral submissions to the matters set
    out under the heading "Secondly" above.  His argument was that but  for
    the errors of others the appellant would have received  earlier  grants
    of leave.  First, B's letter to the Secretary  of  State  in  2016  was
    written at a time of differences between herself and the  appellant  of
    brief duration and was not intended to have lasting effect.   Secondly,
    she had withdrawn that letter by a further letter to the  Secretary  of
    State on 23 September 2016, so the latter should not have refused leave
    on 4 October of that year but instead should have granted leave.  Then,
    Y should have given advice that if the appeal against that refusal  was
    to be withdrawn, the withdrawal should precede any new application,  so
    that the application would not be invalidated by s 3C but would benefit
    from the condonation provisions of paragraph 39A.  It followed,  in  Mr
    Gajjar's submission that the reason that the Appellant  was  unable  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules  (in  that  he  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom without leave) was that he had been  let  down  by  others,  in
    particular by the Secretary of State and by his solicitors.  This was a
    powerful factor, which ought to have been considered by the judge,  and
    which demonstrated that the balance  should  be  struck  in  favour  of
    allowing the appellant's appeal.

16. There are at least three formidable difficulties  with  that  argument:
    (1) it was not part of the claim made to the Secretary of State; (2) it
    was  not  raised  before   the   First-tier   Tribunal;   (3)   it   is
    unsubstantiated and of no merit.

17. The first of those difficulties would not in general terms be by itself
    fatal to the argument now made, but in context it is important.  It  is
    an inherent part of the argument that  the  Secretary  of  State  erred
    first  by  not  taking  into  account  B's  23  September  2016  letter
    retracting her previous statement and secondly  by  not  treating  that
    previous error as relevant in dealing with the 2017  application.   The
    truth of the matter is that although  the  appellant  began  an  appeal
    against the 2016 refusal, in which he would have had an opportunity  to
    demonstrate the genuineness of the relationship with his  wife  despite
    the latter's first letter, he withdrew the  appeal  before  awaiting  a
    decision on it; and although there was no right of appeal  against  the
    2018 decision, he had every  opportunity  to  explain,  in  making  his
    application, why the fact that he was in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    leave should be condoned in accordance with the Guidance,  as  well  as
    every opportunity to challenge the decision by Judicial  Review  if  he
    considered that it had been reached  without  taking  relevant  factors
    into consideration.  He did neither.  In this context it is not easy to
    see why the present appeal could properly offer an opportunity for  the
    substantive challenge of either of the previous refusals of leave.

18. The second difficulty we need say no more about, but it is crucial:  an
    appeal to this Tribunal can only succeed on the basis of  an  error  of
    law by the First-tier Tribunal  and,  in  this  case,  the  appellant's
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal did not  include  the  assertions  of
    fact or the arguments now made or evidence supporting them.   In  order
    to deal with these issues, Judge Watson would have had to make up a new
    argument in the appellant's favour on which the appellant did not rely,
    and would then have had to decide the relevant factual  issues  in  the
    appellant's favour on a speculative basis.  Judge Watson made no  error
    in not pursuing what would  have  been  a  wholly  improper  course  of
    consideration.

19. Even if those matters had been raised before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    however, we cannot see that they could  have  been  determined  in  the
    appellant's favour.  Although the appellant's case now is that his wife
    wrote to the Home Office on 23 September 2016, as  Mr  Lindsay  pointed
    out, there is little evidence of that (the appellant asserts  that  the
    letter was sent; B's witness statement does not mention it)  and  there
    is no evidence at  all  that  any  such  letter  was  received  by  the
    respondent either at the time it was sent or at any  later  stage  (for
    example in connexion  with  the  appeal  against  the  2016  decision).
    Further, although that decision was based on B's earlier letter,  there
    is no proper ground for saying that if the  second  letter  had  indeed
    been written, sent and received, the decision would have been to  grant
    leave: there might well have been further enquiries into the  substance
    of the relationship.  So far  as  concerns  the  Secretary  of  State's
    dealings with the appellant, those factors also remove any  possibility
    of complaint about the recital of the circumstances of the 2016 refusal
    in subsequent decisions.

20. Further, the complaint now being made  by  the  appellant  against  his
    previous solicitors is something to which the Secretary of State is not
    privy.  The Secretary of State is not  obliged  to  take  into  account
    unsupported allegations of others' failures even if they are made  part
    of an applicant's or appellant's case.   In  any  event,  it  does  not
    follow that an application made after  the  withdrawal  of  the  appeal
    would have been granted.  It would have been an application made in the
    immediate aftermath of the  appellant's  decision  not  to  attempt  to
    establish  at  appeal  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  of  the
    relationship between him and his wife was wrong: indeed, as it  appears
    to us, there is ample reason to suppose that the  decision  would  have
    been exactly the same as it was.

21. The other grounds of appeal  raised  by  X  were  not  the  subject  of
    submissions by Mr Gajjar.  He was right  to  spend  no  time  on  them,
    although he did not formally withdraw them.  There is no merit in them.
     They appear to display a rather casual attitude to the  evidence,  the
    law, and the Judge's decision.

22. So far as concerns the grounds supporting the application to the First-
    tier Tribunal, the first is obviously without merit: it complains about
    a finding that the judge specifically did  not  make.   The  second  is
    without substance because the later letter is although a little  fuller
    otherwise in almost the same terms as the one to which the  judge  does
    refer.  In particular, the slight worsening of condition appears to  be
    from a position between the two: the prescription  of  anti-depressants
    is recorded in July and again in January, although the  January  letter
    says that there was a period when B thought she did not need them.  The
    only substantive difference is that her dose is now two-thirds of  what
    it was in July.  That is no basis for saying that the  judge  erred  in
    failing to take into account evidence showing a worsening of condition.
     These grounds should not have been submitted, and should not have been
    repeated by X.

23. Turning to X's new grounds as summarised above,  the  first  is  simply
    disagreement about the facts: nothing in it begins  to  show  that  the
    Judge was not entitled to reach the findings recorded in the  decision,
    and in any event the question was not whether the appellant was capable
    of looking after B but whether  her  actual  reliance  on  him  was  as
    alleged.   There  is  no  evidence  supporting  X's  assertions   about
    fertility treatment or about the impossibility of B taking her own eggs
    to Nigeria if she travelled there; nor is there any evidence supporting
    the unlikely assertion that B could not continue IVF treatment  if  the
    appellant was out of the United Kingdom  temporarily  (for  example  in
    order to obtain entry clearance for settlement as a spouse).  X's final
    submission under the head of the Immigration Rules is wholly mysterious
    as the considered argument  of  a  member  of  the  Bar  practising  in
    Immigration  Law:  there   is   no   "compassionate   and   exceptional
    circumstances category" in  the  Immigration  Rules  relevant  to  this
    appeal; the appellant could not "clearly" fall into  such  a  category,
    and it should not have been said that he (or he and B) did.

24. Despite the way in which X's grounds are structured, there was no right
    of appeal directly on the basis that the Secretary  of  State  had  not
    complied with the Immigration Rules  or  with  relevant  guidance:  the
    appeal lay on human rights  grounds  only.   It  is  therefore  perhaps
    surprising that the grounds deal with  "Article  8"  only  in  a  short
    supplement to the arguments erected on other matters.  In this part  of
    the grounds X asserts that the Judge erred in failing  to  engage  with
    the "Sponsor's suicidal ideation".  The true position  is  as  follows.
    The GP's letter in July 2018 specifically says that B had  no  suicidal
    ideation.  The later letter (January 2019) does  not  mention  suicidal
    ideation.  The judge records what is said in the July letter  and  that
    she has not self-harmed (which, rather than risk of  suicide,  was  the
    matter raised in the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal).
    The position appears to be that it is X, not the judge, who has  failed
    to consider the evidence on this point.

25. For the forgoing reasons the grounds of appeal do not begin to show any
    error of law by the First-tier Tribunal: this appeal is dismissed.

26. We need to look now at some features of the procedural history of  this
    appeal.  The  Upper  Tribunal  refused  permission  to  appeal  by  its
    decision signed on 22 May 2019 but for some reason not sent  out  until
    23 July.  On 9 August the appellant began Judicial  Review  proceedings
    challenging  that  decision.   The  grounds  of   review   repeat   the
    disagreement with the factual conclusions, the  unsupported  assertions
    about the IVF treatment, and the argument based on the failure  of  the
    previous solicitors, saying that the UTJ "failed  to  properly  grapple
    with the factual  matrix"  of  the  "exceptional  circumstances".   The
    conclusion in X's words is that "there  is  and  only  always  was  one
    lawful outcome in respect of his case and that was that it should  have
    been allowed.  There has been a fundamental breakdown in  the  exercise
    of justice in this case.  ...  There is  no  reason  why  the  Claimant
    should suffer as the result of such a simple mistake."

27. Permission was granted by Cavanagh J in the following terms:

         "There is only one reason why I have decided to  grant  permission.
         This is that the notice of appeal to the Upper Tribunal focused  on
         an argument that the FTT had failed to  take  any  account  of  the
         alleged fact that the only reason that the Claimant  lost  his  LTR
         was because of an error on the part of his solicitor.  The Claimant
         relied on the Mansur case [2018] UKUT 00274.

         The decision on PTA by the UT does not refer to or deal  with  this
         issue at all.

         I do not express a view on the strength of this argument, but in my
         judgment it is arguable that it is a point  that  should  at  least
         have been addressed by the UT judge at  the  permission  to  appeal
         stage.

         The other grounds, relating to the FTT judge's  evaluation  of  the
         exceptional circumstances, relating in particular to the Claimant's
         wife's mental health and the IVF treatment, are not arguable.  They
         are just challenges to the findings of fact and conclusions reached
         by the FTT judge, having directed himself correctly on the law.

         However, it is arguable that the UT should have  granted  leave  to
         explore the question whether the FTT judge erred by failing to take
         into  account  the  alleged  solicitors'  error,  when  considering
         exceptionality."

28. When we first began to consider this appeal in the light of its history
    we were primarily concerned with whether the complaint about Y had been
    properly initiated at all: without  a  complaint  the  Mansur  argument
    could not have  got  off  the  ground.   It  appears  that  X  did  not
    understand the way in which a complaint should be made,  but  following
    extensive submissions by  him  it  looks  as  though  although  he  was
    factually wrong to assert that the matter was pending before the  Legal
    Ombudsman, he may have  thought  that  was  right.   Having  heard  and
    considered the arguments  in  the  appeal  in  full,  however,  we  are
    troubled by other aspects of the grounds for review  submitted  to  the
    High Court.  We have already drawn attention to a number of areas (some
    of them repeated in the grounds  for  review,  others  incorporated  by
    implication because of the  complaint  of  failure  to  deal  with  the
    earlier  grounds)  where  X's  submissions  were  based  on  assertions
    unsupported by evidence or were simply wrong.  What  is  now  clear  is
    that the particular ground upon which most reliance was placed, and  on
    the basis of which the judge granted permission  for  judicial  review,
    was never put to the First-tier Tribunal at all.  Cavanagh J's grant of
    permission, particularly in the second sentence and the  last  sentence
    of his reasons, makes clear that he was in fact  misled  into  thinking
    that the argument had been put to the First-tier Tribunal.

29. It is the duty of any barrister not to mislead the Court; and there  is
    a particular duty of candour in Judicial Review proceedings.  It may be
    that the latter duty has special importance in Cart proceedings,  which
    are to all intents and purposes ex parte: all practitioners  know  that
    the application for permission  will  almost  certainly  be  considered
    without any input from either  the  defendant  (the  Tribunal)  or  the
    Interested Party (the Secretary of State) and  that  if  permission  is
    granted there will almost certainly be no further process other than an
    order quashing the decision under challenge.  It seems to us  that  X's
    failure to draw  attention  to  the  deficiencies  in  his  grounds  in
    general, and specifically to the fact that his grounds raise  a  matter
    not put to the First-tier Tribunal either in  evidence  or  by  way  of
    argument, may have  been  professionally  reprehensible;  and  in  that
    context his conclusion to his grounds of review cannot be  regarded  as
    mere puff but as a clearly untrue statement.  We can make  no  decision
    on this; but we shall send a copy of this decision to Cavanagh  J,  who
    may wish to take appropriate action.

30. What is clear to us is that, for the reasons we have  given,  when  the
    evidence and the procedural history are properly considered apart  from
    the assertions in the grounds, this  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge  Watson  could  not  have  succeeded.   Insofar  as  any   action
    subsequent to the Tribunal's original refusal of  permission  has  cost
    the appellant any money, he may wish  to  consider  his  position  with
    relation to his present legal advisers.

31. As recorded above, the appeal is dismissed.


                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 25 February 2021


