
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/23085/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 18 January 2019                      |on 13 February 2019              |
|                                        |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  ALI RAZA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal against a decision by FtT  Judge
    Doyle, promulgated on 17 January 2018.

 2. The grounds before the UT are as stated by way of an amendment dated  4
    August 2018.  Their gist is that the  question  for  the  FtT  was  not
    whether this was a marriage of convenience.   The  relevant  provision,
    mentioned in the respondent's refusal  letter  but  not  in  the  FtT's
    decision, was paragraph 287 of the rules, which required a decision  on
    whether the marriage was subsisting and each of the parties intended to
    live permanently with the other as a spouse.  The grounds  develop  the
    point by reference to case law, which should not be overlooked  in  the
    remaking of the decision.

 3. The respondent conceded error of law.  The further outcome was  agreed,
    as follows.

 4. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is such  that  it
    is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.   The
    member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Doyle.

 5. The  respondent  is  directed  by  22  February  2018  to  provide  the
    appellant's representatives and the FtT with full  transcripts  of  the
    interviews of the appellant and the sponsor.  (This is as suggested  by
    paragraph 10 of the grounds.)

 6.  The  appellant's  representatives  have  arranged   for   a   suitable
    independent female solicitor to take  a  statement  from  the  sponsor,
    which is expected to form her evidence-in-chief before the  FtT.   That
    statement is to be provided to the respondent and the FtT not less than
    14 days before the hearing.  (It is hoped  that  this  will  cover  the
    point that the sponsor is a vulnerable person, mentioned  at  paragraph
    11 of the grounds.)

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      21 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




