
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23492/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2019                  |On 9 January 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     YK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mair instructed by Prolegis Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Arullendran promulgated on 8 February 2019 in  which
        the Judge dismissed the appeal.




Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2 November 1989. The
        appellant is married to a British citizen.  They have two  children
        who, at the date of the hearing  before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,
        were aged approximately 3 and 1 year of age  and  who  are  British
        citizens.
     3. The appellant applied for leave to remain as the spouse of his wife
        which was refused on 14 November 2018.
     4. One of the  issues  that  arose  in  the  appeal  was  whether  the
        appellant had practice deception when  taking  an  earlier  English
        language test. At [39] and [44] the Judge records the following:


             39.  Mr Ahmed accepts that the Respondent  has  discharge  the
                  initial burden in Abbas however the Appellant has provided
                  an explanation for why he chose the particular test centre
                  and he  was  startled  at  the  interview  and  could  not
                  remember all the details due to the passage of  time.  The
                  Appellant also submits that he speaks  very  good  English
                  and that appropriate weight should be given  to  this  and
                  the fact that his wife says the Appellant does not lie  to
                  her. He also  submits  that  he  did  not  use  the  TOEIC
                  certificate in the 2015  application  as  it  was  due  to
                  expire and received very good results  in  the  subsequent
                  tests at Trinity College.


             ...


             44.   Given  the  concession  made  by  Mr  Ahmed  in  closing
                  submissions that the Respondent had proved the first stage
                  of the relevant test, as set out in the case of  Abbas,  I
                  am satisfied that the Respondent  has  adduced  sufficient
                  evidence in this case that the Appellant used a proxy test
                  taker in the English language test which took place at the
                  Innovative Learning Centre on 23 January 2013.


     5. It is not disputed that in ETS cases a threefold test  is  required
        the first of which is consideration of whether the  respondent  has
        discharged the evidential burden upon  her  to  adduced  sufficient
        evidence to raise the issue of fraud.
     6. In this appeal what appears to have been a concession made  by  the
        appellant's barrister that the classification  of  the  appellant's
        English test results  as  'questionable'  was  sufficient  for  the
        respondent to meet the initial evidential burden is clearly  wrong.
        ETS  test  results  will  ordinarily  fall  within  one  of   three
        classifications being 'valid/pass', 'invalid' or 'questionable'. It
        is only those  classed  as  invalid,  with  appropriate  supporting
        material, that can be found to have established  the  existence  of
        fraud. A result found to be 'questionable' indicates that it is not
        'invalid' and the test taker should be offered  an  opportunity  to
        enable  the  person  to  demonstrate  their  ability  to  meet  the
        requirements in  light  of  issues  that  have  arisen,  which  are
        insufficient to warrant the more damning result.
     7. In relation to the Innovative Learning  Centre  in  Manchester  the
        evidence provided by the respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  [23]
        showed that 55% of the  tests  at  the  relevant  period  had  been
        cancelled on the basis of being 'questionable' because 45%  of  the
        results at the centre had been declared 'invalid'  and  that  those
        deemed questionable could not be relied upon  due  to  the  general
        practice of fraud at that test centre.
     8. It does not appear  from  the  determination  that  the  Judge  did
        anything  other  than  accept  the   appellant's   representative's
        acceptance that the initial  burden  had  been  discharged  without
        more. I find in doing so  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to this  aspect  of  the  appeal.  A  concession  that  an
        individual's test results have been found to be  questionable  does
        not, without more, discharge the initial evidential burden upon the
        Secretary of  State.  Indeed  in  light  of  the  respondent's  own
        evidence it is clear that there was nothing  before  the  Judge  to
        allow such a finding to be made. The concession was both  wrong  in
        fact and in law.
     9. As there was no arguable basis for concluding on the evidence  that
        the respondent had discharged the  initial  evidential  burden  the
        Judge's findings  in  relation  to  that  aspect  are  affected  by
        material error and cannot stand. Similarly any  findings  that  the
        appellant could not satisfy the  suitability  requirements  of  the
        Immigration Rules based upon the ETS findings are also infected  by
        similar legal error.
    10. The second element of the appeal related to the  Judge's  treatment
        of the appellant's children both of whom are British  citizens.  At
        [51] the Judge writes:


             51.  For the  purposes  of  GEN.3.2  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
                  Immigration Rules, I am  required  to  consider  the  best
                  interests of the  children  as  a  primary  consideration.
                  Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
                  2009 also requires that the best interests of the child or
                  children are a primary consideration.  Therefore,  I  have
                  considered the best interests of the children in isolation
                  from other factors and I find that  their  best  interests
                  are to remain with their mother on a day-to-day basis  and
                  this extends  to  them  being  with  both  parents,  where
                  possible, given their  young  age.  Neither  child  is  in
                  school and, therefore, they are young enough to  adapt  to
                  life in Pakistan and start school in Pakistan  along  with
                  other children of their age. The children would  have  the
                  assistance of the Appellant and his  family  in  order  to
                  integrate into life in Pakistan and no evidence  has  been
                  presented that the children cannot speak or understand the
                  language. In the circumstances, I  am  satisfied  that  it
                  would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK
                  with their parents. Alternatively, as no evidence has been
                  presented  that  it   will   cause   unjustifiably   harsh
                  consequences, the children  can  remain  in  the  UK  with
                  [their mother]  and  keep  in  touch  with  the  Appellant
                  through the use  of  modern  communication  and  there  is
                  nothing  to  prevent  the  children  from   visiting   the
                  Appellant in Pakistan from time to time.


    11. The children are qualifying children. The respondent's policy to be
        found in Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b -  Family  Life
        (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes'. Version
        2.0, 19.12.18, was that in force at the date of  the  hearing.  The
        respondent's  policy  is  that  the  starting  point  is  that  the
        respondent would not normally expect a qualifying  child  to  leave
        the UK and that if the child is not expected to leave  neither  the
        parent or parents or primary carer of the child will be expected to
        leave the UK.
    12. The Judge is criticised for failing to  approach  the  question  of
        whether it was reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  UK
        from the starting point that  the  respondent  would  not  normally
        expect  a  qualifying  child  to  leave.  There  is  merit  in  the
        submission  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  apply  the
        respondent's  policy.  Even  if,  as  indicated  in  the  grant  of
        permission to appeal, the policy may not have been brought  to  the
        Judge's attention, the Judge is expected to have knowledge of  such
        an  important  policy  which  is  commonly  referred  to  in  cases
        involving qualifying children.
    13. The children were born on 7 May 2015 and 28 August 2017  after  the
        applicant had been granted further leave to remain on  family  life
        grounds in August 2015.
    14. Having considered the evidence before the Judge and in light of the
        allegation regarding use of fraud, which is not made  out,  I  find
        the Judge erred in law in concluding that it was reasonable for the
        children to leave the United Kingdom as set  out  at  [51]  of  the
        decision under challenge. It is not made out it is  reasonable  for
        his British national children to leave the United Kingdom to return
        to Pakistan. The best interests are to be with both  their  parents
        in the United Kingdom.
    15. In light of the above I set aside the  decision  of  the  Judge.  I
        substitute a decision to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds.
        There was no challenge to the indication I intended to do so by  Mr
        McVeety following detailed discussion of relevant issues  as  noted
        above.

Decision

    16. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 December 2019












