
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/23630/2016
                                                               HU/23631/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2017                  |On 27 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                WASEED SAJID
                               NADIA TABBASUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   The respondents did not appear and were not
represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  of  the  respondents,
         hereinafter "the claimants", against a decision of the Secretary of
         State by an Entry Clearance Officer refusing them  leave  to  enter
         the United Kingdom as a visitor.  The First-tier  Tribunal  allowed
         the appeals "on Article 8 grounds".

      2. The claimants did not appear before us.  That is unsurprising.  The
         case in the First-tier Tribunal was decided "on the papers" and the
         claimants sent nothing to  indicate  any  intention  to  appear  or
         arrange representation in the Upper Tribunal.  There is  a  printed
         copy of an email printout  on  the  file  showing  that  the  first
         claimant contacted the Tribunal by email on 24 October 2017  asking
         about his appeal and there was a  reply  dated  the  next  day,  27
         October 2017 saying in terms that the "case has  been  set  for  21
         November, 2017,".  Notice of the hearing was sent by airmail on  25
         October 2017.  Clearly this  would  not  have  been  in  the  first
         claimant's possession when he made enquiries but  given  the  email
         correspondence this is not important.

      3. The claimants are married to each other.  We are satisfied that  on
         this occasion it can be assumed that the husband was acting for his
         wife as well as on his own behalf.  Theirs is essentially  a  joint
         application and decision.

      4. In the circumstances we were satisfied  that  there  was  effective
         notice and we continued in the absence of the claimants.

      5. Mr  Bramble  based  his  case  closely  on  the  grounds  on  which
         permission was given. Essentially it was his case that this was not
         a human rights appeal and the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  hear
         it.

      6. It was  his  first  submission  that  there  was  no  human  rights
         application in this case. We disagree.

      7. He explained, correctly, that applications such as  this  one  made
         after 6 April 2016 could only be  challenged  before  the  Tribunal
         when there had been a decision to refuse a protection claim (or  to
         revoke a person's protection status) or to refuse  a  human  rights
         claim.  Mr Bramble, again  correctly,  drew  attention  to  Section
         82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which
         provides for a right of appeal where the  Secretary  of  State  has
         decided to "refuse a human rights claim".  His point was  that  for
         there to be a right of appeal against the  decision  complained  of
         the claim that was refused had to be a human rights  claim.   There
         is no question of relying on a ground of appeal alleging breach  of
         human rights if the claim itself did not assert a human right.

      8. It was his contention that there was no such claim in this case.

      9. Unlike the phrase  "protection  claim"  the  phrase  "human  rights
         claim" is not defined in the 2002 Act.  In the case  of  the  first
         claimant, in answer to the question "Is there any other information
         you wish to be considered as part of your application?"  he  stated
         on his application form:

             "My wife brother passed away and buried in UK in  an  accident
             as his death certificate is attached inside.   My  grandmother
             is also gravely ill in  UK  and  admitted  to  hospital  as  a
             hospital letter is also  attached  inside.   Kindly  grant  us
             entry clearance on humanitarian basis."

     10. In the case of the second claimant essentially the same answer  was
         given, altered appropriately to reflect that it is her brother  who
         had died and her husband's grandmother who was gravely ill.

     11. The reference to a request for  entry  clearance  "on  humanitarian
         basis" in this context is enough, we find, to  alert  a  reasonably
         attentive decision-maker to the fact that the claimants  said  that
         they had a particular compelling reason to visit the United Kingdom
         and we are satisfied that this was enough to require the  Secretary
         of State to consider the possibility that the claimants might  have
         been entitled to enter the United Kingdom as a human right  subject
         to qualification.  We are satisfied that it  did  not  need  to  be
         particularised in more detail to be a human rights  claim.  It  was
         recognisable as a human rights claim and should have  been  treated
         as such.

     12. The Secretary of State was aware of this  possibility  and  reached
         the conclusion that the application was not a "human rights  claim"
         and decided  that  there  was  no  right  of  appeal  against  that
         decision.

     13. Such a ruling is, obviously, amenable to  judicial  review  but  is
         also, we find, a matter that should be determined by the First-tier
         Tribunal.  It is for the Tribunal, not the parties, to decide if it
         has jurisdiction.

     14. The second ground  of  appeal  is  entitled  "Misinterpretation  of
         Private Life".   That  may  not  be  entirely  apt  but  it  is  an
         introduction to criticism of  the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in
         Abassi (visits - bereavement) [2015] UKUT 463 (IAC).  According  to
         the Secretary of State this decision "found an interference in  the
         private life of those concerned and then said that the Secretary of
         State does not accept that "private life  is  capable  of  engaging
         Article 8 in the context of a family visit."  The argument for this
         is that the proposed visitor is outside the United Kingdom but  the
         scope of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  European
         Convention  on  Human  Rights  is  limited  to  those  within   its
         jurisdiction.

     15. It is helpful to consider exactly  what  the  Tribunal  decided  in
         Abassi.

     16. We respectfully agree with, and emphatically endorse, the  reminder
         given in Abassi that a  person's  right  under  Article  8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights cannot always be dealt with  by
         the convenient simplification of considering "family life"  or,  as
         if it was an alternative, "private life".  Such  an  approach  does
         not give effect to  the  plain  meaning  of  the  Convention  which
         protects  a  person's  "private  and   family   life,   home,   and
         correspondence".  The word "and" between "private" and "family"  is
         clearly conjunctive. The Article is not about people visiting their
         relatives but about the state not  interfering  unnecessarily  with
         people going about their intended business.  It  used  to  be  said
         that it protected "physical and moral integrity".

     17. The point that impressed the Tribunal in Abassi is that it was  the
         appellants' case that they had wished to visit their grandfather at
         the last stages of his life and, as that  was  no  longer  possible
         because he had died, they wished to visit his grave and mourn  with
         family members.  Clearly they could only mourn at the graveside  if
         they were in the United Kingdom. For reasons that are not explained
         in any great detail the Tribunal was satisfied that such  a  strong
         deep human desire could be within the scope of a  person's  private
         and family life that the Article was intended to  protect  and,  on
         the evidence in that case, was within it. The  decision  in  Abassi
         establishes that making family visits after bereavement might be  a
         qualified human right. It  does  not  mean  that  all  such  visits
         necessarily involve a human right.

     18. The first twelve paragraphs or so in  the  decision  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal in Abassi are concerned  with  the  proper  operation  and
         understanding of Article 8.  At paragraph 6 the Tribunal said:

             "The decisions summarised above illustrate the versatility  of
             Article 8 ECHR, together with  the  difficulty  of  drawing  a
             clear boundary between its private and family life  dimensions
             in certain  factual  contexts.   While  each  belongs  to  its
             discrete  factual   context,   these   decisions   nonetheless
             illustrate  that  the  matters  relating  to  death,   burial,
             mourning and associated rights have been held to  fall  within
             the ambit of Article 8.  Three further decisions of  the  ECHR
             have a factual  matrix  closely  comparable  to  that  in  the
             present appeals."

     19. The  point  being  made  there,  plainly,  is  that  Article  8  is
         misunderstood if it is confined only to "private life"  or  "family
         life".

     20. Although the appellants in Abassi were outside the  United  Kingdom
         the jurisprudence relied upon by the Tribunal  in  determining  the
         case of Abassi, as far as we can see,  concerned  people  who  were
         within their country that had adopted the  European  Convention  on
         Human Rights when they complained  that  their  human  rights  were
         being breached.  Beyond being an example of an  application  of  an
         out of country application  that  came  within  the  scope  of  the
         Convention it did not help us very much when we had  to  decide  if
         the relationships and wishes relied upon here came within the scope
         of Article 8(1).

     21. At paragraph 13 of the decision in Abassi the Tribunal  decided  to
         remake the decision complained of and said that "the factual matrix
         is uncontentious".  There is very little detail  about  the  nature
         and extent  of  the  factual  matrix.   All  we  are  told  is  the
         appellants wished to visit their grandfather's grave and mourn with
         family members.  We cannot ascertain from first principles or  from
         a careful reading of the decision in Abassi why it should  be  said
         that visiting the grave of  a  grandfather,  or,  in  this  case  a
         brother, is a human right.  It may be that in  some  circumstances,
         where there is a full explanation of a cultural  tradition  or  the
         nature of a relationship, it would become clear that such  a  right
         existed but it is not clear to us from Abassi, and we  do  not  see
         that Abassi requires us to find, that on facts  such  as  this  the
         desire to visit a grave and mourn with family members  is  a  human
         right that the convention facilitates.  The First-tier Tribunal has
         not wrestled with this but has purported to follow Abassi  just  by
         identifying analogous facts, which we find, indicates that  it  has
         misunderstood the reasons for the decision.

     22. We are not persuaded that there is any general  right  to  visit  a
         grave  and  mourn  with  family  members  or  that  there  are  any
         particular facts, such  as  strong  personal  relationships  and/or
         powerful cultural norms, that create the right in  this  case.   If
         there are they were not supported by the evidence presented to  the
         Secretary of State in support of the application or the Tribunal in
         support of the appeal.

     23. Once this possible route under the  versatility  of  Article  8  is
         discarded we have to consider if a more traditional exploration  of
         "private and family life" could produce a similar result.   We  are
         quite satisfied that where the element relied on really is  reduced
         to mere "private life", or, as we would prefer to put  it,  at  the
         "private life" end of the "private and family life" spectrum,  then
         it is  not  something  that  is  relevant  in  an  out  of  country
         application.

     24. This approach was confirmed by the Court of Appeal in the  case  of
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v Abbas [2017] EWCA  Civ
         1393 (not to be confused with Abassi).  It is now quite clear  that
         relying on Article 8 in an entry clearance case purely for elements
         of private life is not permissible.  In  the  decision  of  SSHD  v
         Onuorah [2017] EWCA Civ 1757 the Court  of  Appeal  emphasised  the
         importance of the approach approved in Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA
         Civ 31 which required  there  to  be  "something  more"  than  mere
         emotional ties to establish family life between  adults  and  other
         siblings.  Without being in any way dismissive of the  relationship
         between the second appellant and her grandmother this is not such a
         case and there is nothing in Kugathas that necessarily extends  the
         protection of the Convention to the desire to be with relatives for
         the purposes of mourning.

     25. We have to conclude that the First-tier Tribunal did not understand
         the decision in Abassi and applied it wrongly.  If it  had  applied
         it rightly it would have found that the evidence relied  upon  here
         did not support a finding that the desire to mourn at  a  graveside
         was a right, albeit a qualified right,  within  the  protection  of
         article 8. If there are circumstances here that establish  a  human
         right to enter the United Kingdom they have not been identified and
         proved by evidence.

     26. It follows that the appeal cannot succeed on human rights grounds.

     27. We have reminded  ourselves  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
         claimants did in fact satisfy the requirements of the rules has not
         been challenged. This is something that will need to be  considered
         if the claimants do make a further application for entry  clearance
         but it will not determine any future application.

     28. The claimants asserted that they had made a human rights claim  but
         failed to make good that assertion and the First-tier Tribunal  was
         wrong to find otherwise.

     29. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  We set  aside  its  decision
         and substitute a decision that the claimants have  not  established
         that the interference relied on comes within the scope of Article 8
         and therefore has not established a  human  rights  claim  and  the
         claimant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
         dismissed.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 23 February 2018              |
|Judge                                |                                     |









