
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/23073/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              mr Akikur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ECO - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Ward, Solicitor of James & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant a national of Bangladesh, date of  birth  1  March  1980,
    appealed against the ECO-New Delhi's decision of 28 September  2016  to
    refuse entry clearance.  The matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rhys-Davies who on 22 September  2017  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds as well as under the Immigration Rules against the
    refusal of entry clearance.  Permission to appeal was given  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 1 November 2017.

2.   The material argued before the Judge, it is accepted, showed that on  a
    strict  technical  point  with  reference  to  Appendix  FM-SE  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended the relevant payment of funds  into
    the Sponsor's account were paid in fact  to  her  sister,  Miss  Rabina
    Begum, who, as the evidence showed, transferred the monies directly  to
    the Sponsor.  The matter was put  to  the  Judge  that  this  financial
    arrangement was the direct decision  by  the  DWP  arising  from  their
    assessment of the Sponsor's abilities being unable to communicate.

3.   Evidence was provided to the Judge of the clear position  the  DWP  had
    taken and there was evidence also provided to  the  Judge  that  showed
    that the PIP payments for the Sponsor were paid to Mrs Rabina Begum who
    then transferred them the same day to the Sponsor.

4.   The Judge followed the line that the evidence did not show  the  direct
    payment or PIP to the Sponsor and therefore the funds did not meet  the
    Appendix FM-SE requirements.

5.   As Mr Tufan rightly pointed out as Mr Ward had, the position  was  that
    there was no option for direct payment to the  Sponsor  by  the  system
    because that is how the DWP wish to process the matter.   The  position
    therefore is that it was not open to the Sponsor to alter the nature of
    the paperwork she had which demonstrated the receipt of the  PIP  funds
    provided to the Sponsor by the DWP  as  required  by  the  Rules.   The
    Sponsor for that reason alone could not comply with the requirements of
    the Rules and not only had not but was unable to  avail  themselves  of
    any way in reality of forcing the payment was made direct to her.

6.   I conclude that the Judge simply did not  address  that  difficulty  in
    the proportionality exercise that was  undertaken  thereafter.   Rather
    the Judge seems to have misled himself into the view  that  because  he
    could not resolve the issue of how the Sponsor was being  treated  that
    that therefore was irrelevant to the proportionality  assessment  which
    was essentially to be made.   The  case  has  many  of  the  contextual
    bearing that comes from that of Mostafa [2015] UKUT 146.  In that it is
    not for this Tribunal nor indeed the First-tier to resolve the issue of
    the requirements of the Rules.  Simply it is clear that in  looking  at
    the proportionality assessment it is appropriate to take  into  account
    the extent to which  there  was  compliance  with  the  Rules  and  the
    propensity for someone to comply further  if  so  required.   In  these
    circumstances I find the Original Tribunal made  an  error  of  law  in
    failing to properly address the proportionality assessment.

7.   The matter was not put to the Judge on the basis that there  was  as  a
    fact a matter which he could resolve in relation to  a  breach  of  the
    Equality Act 2010 but rather  the  fact  that  the  Sponsor's  personal
    condition had the direct consequences on how the DWP treated her and it
    followed from that  therefore  that  that  was  a  material  matter  in
    assessing proportionality.  Mr Tufan points quite properly to the  case
    law  and  ultimately  the  issue  of  whether   or   not   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles in one sense is not ultimately to be resolved.
     Clearly it is open to this Tribunal to take into  account  whether  or
    not difficulties can or cannot be  remedied  and  in  that  respect  SS
    (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 (reference to be added)  is  material
    because quite simply the position is that the Sponsor's position  could
    not be remedied.  There  are  therefore  compelling  circumstances  why
    Article 8 ECHR may be engaged [50-56].

8.    In  considering  the  issue  of  Article  8  ECHR  the  guidance   and
    explanation of it now is perhaps best illustrated through the  case  of
    Agyarko [2017] EWCA Civ 11 and I apply that  approach  being  satisfied
    that this is a case where there are exceptional circumstances  to  look
    outside of the Rules because quite simply  the  difficulties  have  all
    arisen beyond the control of the Sponsor or indeed  the  Appellant  and
    the Rules do not accommodate that  position.   I  therefore  apply  the
    cases of Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  in  assessing
    the issue of the steps and the question of  proportionality.   To  that
    end it seems to me that the ECO's decision is an  interference  in  the
    establishment of family and private life between the  Sponsor  and  her
    husband the Appellant.  It is  a  significant  interference  so  as  to
    engage Article 8(1) ECHR.  I find that  the  Respondent's  decision  is
    lawful and properly served through the maintenance of  the  Immigration
    Rules for the purposes and intention of them.

9.   Looking at the matter therefore with regard to the context of  Sections
    117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  it
    seems to me that there is nothing to suggest that the  Appellant  would
    be a burden upon the tax payer in the  United  Kingdom.   He  would  at
    least on arrival be supported  by  the  Sponsor.   The  Sponsor  is  in
    employment and she has a degree of independence and education which she
    has developed in the UK.  Her circumstances in terms of her health  and
    physical condition are unlikely to be changed and I note that there  is
    no direct criticism of her  as  a  potential  burden  upon  the  United
    Kingdom tax payers.

10.  As to the Appellant's  English  language  abilities  he  satisfied  the
    requirements of the Rules and  therefore  I  turn  to  whether  or  not
    looking at this matter in the round bearing in mind the Sponsor  has  a
    basis to remain in the United Kingdom it seems to  me  looking  at  the
    public interest which is an important matter  which  I  obviously  take
    into account that this is a case where the circumstances of the Sponsor
    are material to the consideration of proportionality.

11.  I  conclude  having  weighed  the  evidence  and  have  regard  to  the
    statements of Rabina Begum and the Sponsor's father Mr  Abdul  Khalique
    as well as the supporting evidence from the Appellant in his  statement
    that this is a case  where  the  documentation  and  evidence  shows  a
    genuine relationships that the parties to the marriage would wish to be
    together and that their continued separation is disproportionate.   The
    public interest in this case which is  one  of  those  few  that  truly
    exists, is outweighed by the  circumstances  of  the  Sponsor  and  her
    husband the Appellant.  For these reasons therefore I conclude  in  the
    light of the evidence that the appropriate outcome is that  the  appeal
    should be allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No request was made for anonymity nor is one required.


Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


A fee award was paid but it seems to me  that  this  is  a  case  where  the
Respondent was correct in the decision that was made with reference  to  the
Rules even though the outcome is disproportionate and this  is  not  a  case
where a fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
