








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/23273/2016



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th December 2018              |On 19th February 2019              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                   M D F O

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fletcher of Counsel, instructed by Nathan Aaron
                    Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence promulgated on  the  21st  February  2018
    whereby the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the respondent to refuse the appellant's claims based on  Article  8
    of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Storey on 29th October 2018. Thus the case appeared before me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         "It is arguable that in  concluding  that  there  were  not  strong
         reasons for expecting the child in the UK for eight years to  leave
         the UK, the judge failed to carry forward or weigh in  the  balance
         the finding made in para 28 that the parent appellant was likely to
         find difficulties in finding employment and a home in Nigeria."

 5. The grounds of appeal are lengthy and do not  seem  to  categorise  the
    grounds. In substance the grounds seek to highlight the position of the
    appellant's child, the child's right to remain in the  UK  and  whether
    there is any right to remain  stemming  from  that  that  benefits  the
    appellant.

    The Factual background

 6. The appellant is a national  of  Nigeria  born  on  2  July  1985.  The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student on  7  October  2004.
    The appellant did not  complete  her  studies  in  the  United  Kingdom
    because the college, which she was  attending,  closed.  The  appellant
    remained in the UK.

 7.  In 2009 the appellant gave birth to a child, who has been resident  in
    the United  Kingdom throughout. The child has  started  school  and  is
    doing well in the education system in the United Kingdom. There were no
    concerns as to  the  welfare  of  the  child  under  the  care  of  the
    appellant. The child had no health concerns. As noted by the judge  the
    primary concern of the appellant in the appeal was the education of the
    appellant's daughter and her  health  and  security  in  Nigeria.  (see
    paragraph 21).

 8. The father of the child was noted to be a fellow Nigerian, who also did
    not have leave to be in the United Kingdom. The appellant claims not to
    know where father of the child is and to have had no contact  with  him
    for some time.

 9. The judge noted that it was only after the child was seven years of age
    that the appellant submitted an application to the respondent. At  that
    stage the child having been in the United Kingdom for seven  years  was
    entitled  to  rely  upon  various  statutory,  immigration  and  policy
    provisions whereby as a  qualifying  child  she  was  giving  potential
    protection against being removed from the UK.

10. The appellant's evidence otherwise was that her parents in Nigeria  had
    passed away. The appellant claimed never to have worked in Nigeria.  It
    was claimed that there would be significant obstacles into  integrating
    in Nigeria with the young daughter to look after without any  prospects
    and no home.

11. The appeal was based upon the parent relationship to the child in  that
    the  appellant  was  claiming  to  have  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with the child who had lived continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least seven years and it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

12. The 2002 Act has been amended to take account  of  the  position  of  a
    child. The provisions are also  set  out  in  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which provides: -

         '6 In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

               b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom'

13. In the context of the provision qualifying child includes a child  that
    has been resident in the United Kingdom for seven years.

14. Further provisions is made in the  Immigration  Rules  in  Appendix  FM
    paragraph EX1. The paragraph provides:-

         'Section EX Exceptions  to  certain  eligibility  requirements  for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent

         Ex .1 This paragraph applies if:

          a) (i) the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with the child who

                  (aa) is under the age of 18 or was under  the  age  of  18
                  when the applicant was first granted leave  on  the  basis
                  that this paragraph applied;

                  (bb) is in the UK;

                  (cc)  is  a  British  citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                  continuously for at  least  the  seven  years  immediately
                  preceding the date of the application; and

             (ii)      it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
             leave the UK;'

15. I note that EX1 is not a free standing right,  see  Shazia  Sabir  2014
    UKUT 63(IAC).

16. It was not challenged that the appellant's daughter  was  a  qualifying
    child and that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with the child. The issues thereafter to be considered  were  the  best
    interests of the child in accordance with section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the provisions of  Section  117B,
    the Immigration Rules as set out and Home Policy  and  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the child to accompany the mother to Nigeria.

17. A number of cases were referred to in argument. Specific  reliance  was
    placed by the appellant's representative on the cases of MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and MT & ET [2018] UKUT 88. In the case of MT & ET,
    relying upon the case and principles set down in MA,  Mr  Justice  Lane
    having reviewed the Home Office policy  and  the  statutory  provisions
    states in paragraph 33 and 34:-

         "33      On the present state of the law, as set out in MA, we need
         to look for powerful reasons why a child who has been in the United
         Kingdom for over 10 years should be removed notwithstanding that of
         best interests lie in remaining.

         34 In the present case there  are  no  such  powerful  reasons.  Of
         course, the public interest lies in removing a person, such as  MT,
         who has abuse the immigration laws of the  United  Kingdom.....  We
         take account of the fact  that...MT  had...  Received  a  community
         order for using a false document to obtain employment.  But,  given
         the strength of ET's case, MT's conduct in our view  comes  nowhere
         near close to requiring the respondent to  succeed  and  Mr  Deller
         [the respondent representative] did not  strongly  urge  us  to  so
         fine. Mr Nicholson submitted that, even on the  findings  of  Judge
         Martin, MT was what might be described as somewhat  run-of-the-mill
         immigration offender who came to the  United  Kingdom  on  a  visit
         Visa, overstayed, made a claim for asylum  that  was  found  to  be
         false in who has pursued various legal means of  remaining  in  the
         United Kingdom. None of this to be taken in any way as excusing  or
         downplaying  MT's  unlawful  behaviour.  The  point  is  that   her
         immigration history is not so bad as  to  constitute  the  kind  of
         'powerful' reason that would render reasonable the removal of ET to
         Nigeria."

18. The decision indicates that there have to be powerful reasons rendering
    removal reasonable.

19. In considering the issues an assessment was made  of  the  Home  Office
    policy- Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b. That gives specific
    guidance's as to how to approach the rights of children that have  been
    in the United Kingdom for seven years or more. The guidance sets down a
    series of criteria to be considered including: -

          a) whether the child would be accompanying its parents, where the
             best interests would be to remain with the parents

          b) the degree of support by wider family members

          c) the ability of the child to  integrate  into  the  country  to
             which it was going

          d) the degree of cultural ties

          e) on the ability of  the  child  to  read  write  or  speak  the
             language of the country

          f) whether the child would be able  to  attend  or  has  attended
             school in the country.

20. The authorities and the law  has  been  reviewed  in  the  case  of  KO
    (Nigeria)  & Ors v SSHD 2018 UKSC  53. The case of KO 2018 UKSC 53  was
    raised during the hearing. The appellant's representative was given the
    opportunity of dealing with the issues raised in the case. The case  is
    specifically relevant with regard to how one deals  with  children  and
    their best interests, where otherwise a parent would not have the right
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

21.  I  draw  attention  to  paragraphs  18-19  of  the  judgment.   Having
    acknowledged that there was nothing in section 117B of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which referred to the  conduct  of  the
    parents in the context of whether or not  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    child to leave the UK, the judgment continues:-

         "18.     On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it
         seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where
         the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of the parents may become indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain. The point was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

             "22.      In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.      He noted (para 21) that Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar
         point in considering  the  "best  interests"  of  children  in  the
         context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

             "58.      In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the
             best interests of the children must be made on the basis  that
             the facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has
             no right to remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."

22. I also draw attention to paragraphs 46-51 in which the factual basis of
    NS and AR,  two  of  the  appellants  before  the  Supreme  Court,  was
    considered. [NS and AR were the 3rd and 4th appellants in the  case  of
    MA v SSHD 2016 EWCA Civ 705 see paragraphs 76-89]. NS & AR had  entered
    as students in 2004 and  2003.  The  appellants  and  their  respective
    spouses, who had also entered the UK at the same time, had children who
    had been in the UK over 10 years, including a child or children born in
    the UK. The appellants had been  involved  in  applications  to  extend
    their leave, which involved fraudulent or false documents, claiming  to
    have  studied  at  Cambridge  College  of  Learning  for   postgraduate
    qualifications.

23.  In paragraph 51 having found that the  judge  had  correctly  directed
    himself as to the wording of section 117 Lord Carnwarth continues:-

         "51. ... The parents' conduct was relevant in that  it  meant  that
         they had to leave the country. As I have explained (para 18 above),
         it was in that context that it had to be considered whether it  was
         reasonable  for  the  children  to  leave  with  them.  Their  best
         interests would have been for the whole family to remain here.  But
         in  a  context  where  the  parents  had  to  leave,  the   natural
         expectation would be that the children  would  go  with  them,  and
         there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by the judge to  suggest
         that that would be other than reasonable."

24. The cases of NS & AS in KO were not deportation  cases  but  a  removal
    cases. Whilst the children had been in the UK a significant  period  of
    time, in excess of ten years, the fact that the parents were  to  leave
    the UK was material in assessing whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    children to accompany them.

25.  The judge in paragraph 17 has identified that the issue is whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. In
    paragraph 19 the judge identifies that he is concerned with  the  child
    leaving with the appellant, her mother, and settling in Nigeria.

26. In paragraph 21 the judge identifies  the  principal  concerns  of  the
    appellant with regard to the education,  health  and  security  of  the
    child. With regard to education he satisfied that there was no evidence
    that the child would do any less well in Nigeria  than  in  the  United
    Kingdom. With regard to healthcare the judge concludes that there is  a
    functioning healthcare system in Nigeria which the  appellant  and  the
    child would be able to access.

27. The judge repeats in paragraph 25 that the test is whether  or  not  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    effectively with the parent. The judge identifies factors  which  would
    render such unreasonable.

28. However in the middle of paragraph 28 the  judge  seems  to  turn  test
    around and seems to be requiring strong reasons for granting  leave  to
    the child. That having been said the  judge  continues  by  identifying
    that there is no evidence of any adverse consequences to the  child  if
    the child were to accompany the parents to Nigeria.  Included  in  that
    exercise carried out from paragraph 29 to 33 is an assessment that  the
    starting point for the best interests of children is for the  child  to
    remain with the mother.

29. As set out in the case of KO considering position of the child one  has
    to consider it in the context of what will happen to the parent. In the
    present circumstances were it not but for the child  the  parent  would
    have no right to remain in the United Kingdom and would be expected  to
    return to Nigeria. The judge in making the findings of fact has  looked
    at whether or not the child would be adversely affected so as to render
    the decision unreasonable. It is arguable from the conclusions  reached
    the judge finds that there is no reason  that  would  render  the  same
    unreasonable and that would be no adverse consequences to the child.

30. Whilst the judge has in various paragraphs said it  whether  there  are
    strong reasons for granting leave apparently placed the burden  on  the
    appellant to show reasons why the child should be  allowed  to  remain,
    when one looks at the decision overall is clear that the judge  had  in
    mind the relevant factors in assessing whether or not it was reasonable
    with the child to accompany the parents. The judge has  concluded  that
    there are no circumstances would render the welfare education or health
    child at risk and as such it was reasonable for the child to  accompany
    the parents. The conclusion being that as the parent was to be  removed
    from the United Kingdom it was reasonable for the  child  to  accompany
    the parent, the appellant.

31. Even if the judge within the  paragraphs  identified  has  applied  the
    wrong test, given the findings of fact made  otherwise  the  judge  has
    clearly given reasons as to why  the  child  would  suffer  no  adverse
    consequence of being returned to Nigeria with the  mother.  Whilst  the
    grounds of appeal have identified that the mother would have no support
    and would have to establish itself, the judge was well aware  of  those
    facts and did take such into account  in  concluding  that  no  adverse
    consequence would come to the child.

32. In the circumstances even if the judge has made an error of law, on the
    basis of the findings fact I do not find that the error is material and
    in any event I would on the facts  as  found  have  come  to  the  same
    conclusion that is that it is reasonable for the child to accompany the
    mother.

33. In the circumstances there is no material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

34. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 20th December 2018





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 20th December 2018

