
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23297/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 September 2017                     |On 2 October 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TEMITAYO AKINOLA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Haque, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    it is convenient to continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in August 1994.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 15 March 1999 with another sibling, to join his father.

 3. On 28 August 2015 in the Crown Court  sitting  at  Chelmsford,  he  was
    convicted of an offence of inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent,
    and received a sentence of six years' imprisonment.  That resulted in a
    decision by the respondent to make a deportation order against him.  On
    5 September 2016 a decision was made to refuse a  human  rights  claim,
    that claim having been  in  effect  the  appellant's  response  to  the
    deportation decision.

 4. His appeal against the respondent's  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert ("the FtJ") on 12 June 2017.   The  FtJ  allowed
    the appeal, purportedly under the Immigration  Rules,  but  also  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

    The grounds and submissions

 5. The grounds upon which permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted contain a number of criticisms of the  FtJ's  decision.   Those
    were supplemented by amended grounds of appeal, in respect of  which  I
    granted  permission  for  them  to  be  relied  on  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

 6. I do not propose to set out each and every  ground  of  complaint,  but
    summarise the main issues relied on on behalf of the respondent.

 7. By way of introduction, it is to be noted that the appellant is single,
    is not in a relationship with a British  citizen  partner  and  has  no
    children.  Given the length of sentence, he needs to  demonstrate  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A of the  Rules  (parental  relationship  with  a  child  or
    partner,   and    residence/integration/obstacles    to    integration,
    respectively), and similarly in relation to s.117C of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

 8. It is contended that the FtJ failed to give reasons for concluding that
    the appellant was ill-equipped to deal with return to Nigeria.  The FtJ
    had said at [81] that  Nigeria  must  be  one  of  the  most  difficult
    countries in Africa simply to relocate to if  one  does  not  have  the
    benefit of language, culture and custom in relation  to  that  country.
    However,  that  assertion  is  inadequately  reasoned,  it  is  argued.
    Further, the FtJ had failed to  acknowledge  the  assistance  that  the
    appellant could obtain from his family in the UK.   The  fact  that  he
    does not speak Yoruba would only be relevant if the  appellant  had  to
    live in a part of Nigeria  where  that  was  the  only  language.   The
    appellant speaks English.

 9. At [100]-[102], the FtJ had made reference to the longer  sentences  of
    imprisonment passed  on  defendants  of  African  Caribbean  origin  as
    compared to their white counterparts, although  acknowledging  that  in
    this appellant's case a shorter sentence, even if  in  excess  of  four
    years, would not have affected the considerations  that  needed  to  be
    applied.  However, it was not clear therefore,  why  the  FtJ  included
    reference to that issue in his decision.

10. The OASys report referred to the appellant  as  representing  a  medium
    risk to others, yet the FtJ had found that when released he would  only
    pose a low risk.  It is argued that the FtJ had failed to give  reasons
    for departing from the view in the OASys report.  Furthermore, the  FtJ
    had not reflected  in  his  decision  the  strong  public  interest  in
    deportation, regardless of the risk of reoffending.  The FtJ  had  also
    erred in his assessment of the principle of deterrence.

11. In the amended grounds, some of the same arguments are advanced, albeit
    in expanded form.  One of the factors that the FtJ failed to take  into
    account, it is argued, is that the appellant had  in  fact  denied  the
    index offence and had been convicted.

12. In terms of the risk of reoffending, the  FtJ  had  overemphasised  the
    relevance of that issue, without having  regard  to  authorities  which
    reveal that the risk of reoffending was not the most significant  issue
    in the case of serious offences.

13. Furthermore, it is argued that the FtJ erred in finding that there  was
    a further proportionality test outside the confines of  s.117C  of  the
    2002 Act, which approach is inconsistent with the decision of the Court
    of Appeal  in  NE-A  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239 which makes it clear  that  ss.117A-117D
    of the 2002 Act are intended to provide for a  structured  approach  to
    the application of Article 8 which produces in all cases a final result
    which is compatible with Article 8.

14. In submissions on behalf of the respondent, Mr  Jarvis  relied  on  the
    grounds and amended  grounds.   Other  aspects  of  the  decision  were
    referred to, and to which I shall make reference in due course.

15. On behalf of the appellant a skeleton argument was also relied on.   It
    was, in effect, submitted in  the  skeleton  argument  that  the  FtJ's
    decision is free from any material error of law.  Reference is made  in
    it to the appellant's  background  and  his  offending  behaviour.   It
    indicates that the appellant became involved in gang culture  (although
    that does not seem to have been part of the respondent's case in  terms
    of deportation).  Arguments are advanced in terms of the extent of  the
    appellant's integration in the UK, with reference to the  age  that  he
    was when he arrived, being four years.  It is  argued  that  the  FtJ's
    decision was made in line with relevant  authority,  as  cited  in  the
    skeleton argument.

16.  In  submissions,  Mr  Haque  relied  on  the  skeleton  argument.   He
    reiterated the features of the appeal which the FtJ found in favour  of
    the appellant, submitting that the  FtJ  had  taken  into  account  the
    seriousness  of  the  offence  and  the  extent  of   the   appellant's
    integration in the UK, as well as the hardships that he would  face  on
    return to Nigeria if deported.

    Conclusions

17. I have no hesitation in concluding that  the  FtJ's  decision  contains
    significant errors of law such as to require it to be set  aside.   The
    respondent's arguments make good her case for material errors of law in
    many  respects,  although  I  only  need  to  highlight  some  of   the
    deficiencies in the FtJ's decision.  All of the matters I refer to were
    canvassed, to a greater or lesser extent, at the hearing before me.

18. The OASys report at pages 26 and 34 refers to the appellant's  risk  of
    reoffending as being medium.  The risk of serious harm to the public in
    the community is also assessed as being medium (page 31).  At [55]  the
    FtJ referred to that risk assessment but stated that it appeared to  be
    an  assessment  largely  because  of  the  conviction,  and  not  being
    necessarily a comment on his lack of insight now, or his willingness to
    undertake "remedial and introspective courses" within detention, should
    they become available.

19. The OASys report, and the  risk  assessment  within  it,  is  dated  11
    November 2016.  The appeal before the FtJ took place on 12  June  2017.
    At [77] the FtJ said that the appellant  had  displayed  a  significant
    degree of remorse for his actions and that "he now only poses a  medium
    risk to the general public as of November 2016", but on his view a very
    low risk to the general public by the time of his release in  2018,  by
    which time he should have completed the Thinking First  programmes  and
    other courses.  At [78] he said that the  appellant  had  already  made
    significant progress in addressing his offending behaviour on  his  own
    and with his family, and concluded that there was a very low risk  that
    anything of the like would occur again.

20. However, I cannot see there, a properly reasoned conclusion in terms of
    the risk of reoffending that the appellant would pose by  the  time  of
    his release in 2018.  The FtJ, on the face of  it  at  least,  accepted
    that the appellant "now" poses a medium risk to the general public, yet
    concluded that that would become a very low risk by  the  time  of  his
    release in 2018.  There is very little in the FtJ's reasons to  support
    that speculative conclusion.

21. On behalf of the appellant reference is made to the FtJ's quotation  at
    [12] from the sentencing remarks.  Those sentencing remarks are to  the
    following effect in this context:

         "I'm not persuaded that there is a significant risk of serious harm
         to the public through the future commission, by you,  of  specified
         offences such as to require the imposition of a life sentence or an
         extended sentence."

22. That is taken on behalf of the appellant as an indication that there is
    no significant risk of serious harm to the public by  future  offending
    by  the  appellant.   However,  that  is  to  misunderstand  what   the
    sentencing judge was saying.  He was referring to the process by  which
    a life sentence or an extended sentence may be imposed in  relation  to
    the risk of the commission of a specified offence.   That  is  a  quite
    different consideration from what needs to be assessed  in  considering
    the public interest in a deportation appeal.

23. Although the FtJ referred to the seriousness of  the  offence,  and  at
    [97] referred to society's abhorrence of such offending, as well as the
    principle of deterrence,  he  referred  at  [96]  to  the  decision  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v HK  (Turkey)  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 583, and purported to quote from it.  However, the  quotation  does
    not come from the case cited.   Apart  from  that,  whatever  case  the
    quotation comes from, it is misquoted, for example using the expression
    "public propulsion".  The FtJ has plainly not taken care to ensure that
    the citation of cases is accurate as to their content.

24. Furthermore, at [98] the FtJ quotes, without citation, what are said to
    be "the words of Blake  J",  what  is  in  fact  a  quotation  from  RG
    (Automatic deport - Section 33(2)(a) exception) Nepal [2010]  UKUT  273
    (IAC), a decision which was overturned on appeal by the Court of Appeal
    in Gurung v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
    62.

25. At [99] the FtJ said that the appellant was under the age of 18 when he
    committed the offence of grievous bodily harm  with  intent.   However,
    the appellant was in fact 19 years of age  at  the  time.   It  appears
    therefore, that the FtJ considered the appeal on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was a juvenile when he committed the offence,  which  he  was
    not.  Youth plainly is a factor to be taken into account,  but  it  was
    incumbent on the FtJ to determine  the  appeal  on  a  correct  factual
    basis.

26. In terms of the sentence that was imposed, at [100]-[103] The FtJ  said
    as follows:

         "100.    Notwithstanding the Appellant's relatively young age  when
             he committed this offence I have also had regard in passing to
             the substantial evidence under  Section  95  of  the  Criminal
             Justice  Act  1991  as  published  on  a  regular  basis   and
             underlined by the review by the right Honourable  David  Lammy
             MP that defendants of African Caribbean origin are  habitually
             sentenced to a longer  sentence  of  imprisonment  than  their
             white counterparts.

         101. Whilst there is no clear evidence before me  that  this  would
             have impacted upon the length of  sentence  received  by  this
             Appellant there is no evidence that it did not.  This  is  not
             to suggest that this would have made a substantial  difference
             to the issues before me.

         102. It is in all likelihood even if the sentence had been somewhat
             shorter by even a year it is almost inevitable that  it  would
             [have] been a sentence of four years imprisonment or more  and
             therefore this factor would have had  a  very  minimal  impact
             upon the issues before me.  It is  nevertheless  important  to
             note as the level of deterrence may be directly related to the
             length of the criminal sentence that has been  passed  on  any
             individual.

         103. It is also correct to say that this sentence was  not  subject
             to an appeal although the reason  for  it  appeared  to  be  a
             reluctance on behalf of the solicitors and  the  cost  to  the
             family of having to pursue  this  as  [a]  matter  of  private
             litigation."

27. Although the FtJ suggested that the appellant  might  have  received  a
    sentence of over four years in any event, and therefore his remarks  in
    this context would not have made a difference to his assessment, it  is
    plain that the FtJ, if not expressly, then by clear implication, formed
    the view that the sentence  that  was  imposed  on  the  appellant  was
    excessive.  Firstly, he referred to  "substantial  evidence"  that  the
    sentence  imposed  on  defendants  of  African  Caribbean  origin   are
    habitually longer than those imposed on white individuals.  He referred
    also to the fact that the sentence was not the subject  of  an  appeal,
    but that that appeared to be as a result of reluctance on the  part  of
    the solicitors and the cost to the family.

28. I am satisfied that the FtJ in that context took  into  account  wholly
    irrelevant  considerations  when  assessing  the  public  interest   in
    deportation.  It is not for the FtJ in determining a deportation appeal
    to seek to undermine the sentencing  process,  not  least  because  the
    sentencing judge will have been in a far better position to assess  the
    appropriate sentence in  the  context  of  a  criminal  trial  than  an
    Immigration Judge who is undertaking an entirely different task.

29. I am further satisfied that the  FtJ  made  unsupported  assertions  in
    relation to the appellant's circumstances on  return  to  Nigeria.   At
    [81] he said as follows:

         "...Nigeria must be one of the most difficult countries  in  Africa
         simply to relocate to if one has no benefit from language,  culture
         and custom which clearly this Appellant does not."

30. The FtJ does not refer to any background evidence or other material  to
    support the contention that Nigeria is a particularly difficult country
    in Africa to be returned to.

31. Furthermore, at [83] the FtJ said that:

         "It is inconceivable that without family or other means of  support
         to turn to on the ground in Nigeria he would himself  be  extremely
         vulnerable to all forms of abuse upon return."

32. Again, there is no indication of the basis upon which the FtJ  came  to
    that conclusion.

33. Lastly, in my judgement there is merit  in  the  respondent's  argument
    that the FtJ appears to have concluded  that  beyond  the  confines  of
    s.117A-D of the 2002 Act, there is a proportionality  assessment  which
    can be carried out outside that regime. Such a conclusion  is  contrary
    to the decision in NE-A (Nigeria), in particular at [14].

34. As I have indicated, I have not rehearsed every  aspect  of  the  FtJ's
    decision about which complaint is made on  behalf  of  the  respondent.
    The matters I have referred  to  are  sufficient  to  reveal  that  his
    decision must be set aside for error of law.

35. Given that I consider that there needs to be a wholesale reappraisal of
    the appellant's appeal, the appropriate course, taking into account the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at  paragraph  7.2,  is  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

36. Accordingly, this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    hearing de novo with no findings of  fact  preserved,  before  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Herbert.







    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision  is  set  aside,  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert,  with  no  findings
    preserved.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            29/09/17




