
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/23541/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 October 2018                        |On 18 October 2018                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                               Sundas Mehmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, counsel instructed by AH Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 25 November 1993.   She
    arrived in the UK on 6 February 2012 as a student and sought to  extend
    her leave.  This was curtailed to expire on 15 September 2013.   On  16
    October 2013 she was granted leave to remain as a spouse valid until 16
    April 2016.  On 29 March 2016 the Appellant  sought  further  leave  to
    remain as a spouse.  This application was refused in a  decision  dated
    30 September 2016 on the basis that she failed to meet the  suitability
    requirements at S-LTR.1.6 due to the assertion by the  Respondent  that
    she submitted a TOEIC certificate taken at Biettec on 3 July  2013  and
    that certificate had been fraudulently obtained.

 2. The Appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fowell  for  hearing  on  12  February
    2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 28 February  2018,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal both in respect of the  Appellant's  ability
    to meet the suitability requirements of the Rules and in respect of the
    proportionality of  the  decision,  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had at that time two children both of  whom  are  British  by
    virtue of the fact that her husband Abid  Hussain  has  been  born  and
    brought up in the UK.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had materially erred in law both in relation to the assessment  of  the
    Appellant's ability to meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM
    of the Rules in light of the jurisprudence cf. SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT
    229, Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615, and in that there  were
    no adverse credibility findings.  Both the Appellant  and  her  husband
    gave strong oral  evidence  at  interview  with  the  Respondent,  such
    interview having taken place on an unknown date.  On 22 June  2016  the
    Appellant had been found by the interviewing officer to be credible and
    the  recommendation  summary  was  "very  credible  and  genuine   when
    answering all the questions" the Appellant having answered in a  fluent
    manner and answered the questions in basic  English.   It  was  further
    asserted that the judge had erred in his approach to the Article 8 limb
    of the appeal, in that there is no reference to the evidence  given  by
    the Appellant's husband nor to a credibility finding or  assessment  of
    the significant disruption it would cause to him and  the  children  if
    the Appellant  were  to  be  removed  and  that  there  was  no  proper
    assessment of the best interests of the children.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    in a decision dated 7 June 2018 on the basis that "it is arguable  that
    the judge has made  a  material  error  of  law  by  making  irrational
    findings on matters material to the outcome and having failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for findings on material matters".

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Bellara sought to rely on the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He submitted that the Appellant had discharged the  evidential
    burden.  She had been found to be very credible and genuine however the
    judge has played this down at [30] of his decision  and  he  fell  into
    error in this respect, bearing in mind the interview  took  place  some
    three years after the test.  Mr Bellara submitted  that  the  Appellant
    had no real reason  to  cheat,  that  her  evidence  was  set  out  and
    summarised at [27], she had passed her IELTS test  before  arriving  in
    the UK. At [29] the judge acknowledged that the Appellant gave quite  a
    detailed account of her activities on the day in question, her evidence
    is recorded at [9] to [11] of the  decision  and  acknowledged  by  the
    judge at [27] to [29].

 6. Mr Bellara submitted that the judge's findings do not  sit  comfortably
    with the evidence before him.  He submitted the judge may have confused
    himself by relying unduly heavily on the decision in MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC
    testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) which was entirely distinguishable  on
    its facts, as in that case there were significant gaps in  the  witness
    statement of that Appellant, who had failed to provide  a  satisfactory
    explanation, which was not the case here.  Mr  Bellara  submitted  that
    there were only two issues in respect of which the judge had decided to
    dismiss the appeal on the basis that the Appellant could not  meet  the
    suitability requirements.  The first  of  these  was  at  [31]  of  the
    decision and that was the number of people taking the test according to
    the look-up tool was seven.  Mr Bellara submitted that in light of  the
    Appellant's roughly consistent evidence at interview and in her witness
    statement and in her oral evidence that there were between  17  and  25
    people, this was likely to be a typo and should have read 17  and  that
    it would be unusual to only have seven people taking a test,  as  these
    are normally quite busy.  Secondly, he submitted that the judge's undue
    reliance on the case of MA (op cit) led him into error.

 7. In relation to Article 8, Mr Bellara pointed out that  the  Appellant's
    partner gave evidence orally at the hearing and that that was the  case
    is recorded by the judge at [13] however there is no detailed record of
    his evidence and at [47] the judge's findings  essentially  ignore  the
    evidence given by Mr Hussain both in his witness statement and  orally.
    He submitted there were multiple errors of law and  that  the  decision
    was unsafe and unsustainable.

 8. In his submissions, Mr Tufan submitted that in respect of the interview
    questions at the interview with  the  Respondent  the  judge  had  been
    correct to say  that  these  are  very  simple.   In  relation  to  the
    discrepancy as to the number of people attending the hearing, Mr  Tufan
    pointed out the look-up tool gives six invalid  test  results  and  one
    questionable.  In relation to the decision in MA (op. cit.) this was  a
    presidential decision which postdates SM and Qadir and  the  judge  was
    entitled to rely on it.  At [51] it is clear that overall the judge was
    satisfied that he should treat the invalid assessment as reliable.  The
    fact that the Appellant did not need to cheat as she had taken an IELTS
    test earlier was irrelevant (see [57] of MA).  Mr Tufan submitted  that
    the judge had considered the case law in some detail and there were  no
    errors of law in his decision.  In relation  to  Article  8,  Mr  Tufan
    pointed out at [36] that the matter was argued by  both  sides  on  the
    basis that the judge's conclusions on the TOEIC issue are decisive  and
    there was no submission by Mr Bellara that he might  nevertheless  find
    in  the  Appellant's  favour  under  Article  8  despite  raising  this
    expressly with him.

 9. In reply, Mr Bellara submitted that there was no real assessment of the
    best interests of the British children and  that  in  relation  to  the
    TOEIC issue in MA he could not emphasise enough that  this  Appellant's
    case comes nowhere near  the  MA  situation  and  there  was  a  marked
    difference in the quality of the evidence.

10. I reserved my decision which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings

11.  I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Fowell in the    following material respects:

11.1.    It is striking that when  interviewed  by  the  Respondent,  it  is
recorded at the end  of      the  interview  that  in  the  opinion  of  the
interviewing officer, the Appellant was: "very   credible and  genuine  when
answering all the questions".  Whilst  the  opinion  of  the    interviewing
officer is not, of course, binding on the Judge , I consider  that  he  fell
into     error at [30] in that, whilst acknowledging that this was  true  at
the hearing too, but   went on to find: "those facts have limited  value  as
evidence, since the interview  was  mainly      to  establish  fluency.  The
other  questions,  which  after  introductions  amounted  to  about  20   in
total, were all simple, open ones, asking  her  to  describe  the  test.  It
cannot therefore shed any  more light on the  truthfulness  of  her  account
than her cross-examination at the hearing."

11.2.    I further find that the Judge erred in finding that  the  interview
was mainly to     establish the Appellant's fluency,  when  it  is  entitled
"Permanent migration credibility    interview  template"  and  it  is  clear
from the content that the questions concerned the     TOEIC test

11.3.    I find that, given that the Appellant  clearly  impressed  both  in
interview and at the   hearing and whilst acknowledging that the  weight  to
be attached to evidence is a    matter for the Judge   hearing  the  appeal,
in this case I find that the Judge failed to     give adequate  reasons  for
dismissing  the  Appellant's   evidence   so   readily,    particularly   in
circumstances  where  her  credibility  was  very  much  in  issue  yet  her
ability to answer  questions  was      credible.  I  make  this  finding  in
particular in light of     the fact that there is no  adverse    credibility
finding made against the Appellant.

 12. As to the assertion  that  the  Judge  placed  undue  reliance  on  the
decision in MA (ETS-   TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT  450  (IAC)  I  find  that
this is made out in light of the    principle  set  out  therein  that  each
case is  fact  sensitive  and  the  facts  in  that  particular    case  are
distinguishable  in  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  Appellant   to
be"surprisingly  hesistant"  in  his  oral  evidence  [54]  and  there  were
"significant  gaps  in    the  Appellant's  witness  statement  and  notably
discrepancies between these statements and his   evidence to  the  Tribunal"
[48](i), in contrast to the credibility of this Appellant's    responses  in
interview and in her oral evidence.

13.  Whilst as Mr Tufan correctly identified, it appears  that  Mr  Bellara,
who appeared for  the Appellant at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, did  not
seek to argue that the appeal   could succeed in respect of  Article  8  [36
and [46] refer] the Judge nevertheless went  on to deal with that aspect  of
the appeal. Mr Bellara submitted and I accept that there  is  no  assessment
of the credibility of Mr Hussain, the Appellants husband, despite  the  fact
that he gave oral evidence. Contrary to the grounds  of  appeal,  the  Judge
does     consider the best interests  of  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Hussain's
biological children at     [42]-[45] but found himself unable to assess  the
best interests of Mr Hussain's  eldest    daughter  due  to  an  absence  of
information. It  is  unclear  at  best  whether  Mr  Hussain      gave  oral
evidence about the level of contact he has  with  his  eldest  daughter,  in
order    to assist the Judge in assessing the impact upon her if he were  to
leave the United  Kingdom, however, I have decided to apply the  benefit  of
the doubt and to find that      the failure by the Judge to make  a  finding
as to the oral evidence of Mr Jussain is a   material error of law.

Notice of Decision

14.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is  remitted  back  to  the
First-tier Tribunal    for a hearing de novo.

     No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 15 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

