
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23127/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           suhayb abdirizak osman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel instructed by Reiss
                    Edwards Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal brought on human rights grounds by the  appellant
    against the decision of the Secretary of State (by an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer) refusing him entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    child of a person whose solely responsible parent lived in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant was born in August 2001.  It follows that he  is  now  18
    years old.  In August 2018, when he was still 17 years old, he  applied
    to join his father in the United Kingdom.  In outline, it was his  case
    that he is his mother's first child and he was born at a time when  his
    mother and father were married but that  marriage  did  not  last  very
    long.  After  his  parents  parted  and  divorced  they  made  sensible
    arrangements for the appellant. The appellant lived with his mother but
    his father made financial provision for him and  was  involved  in  his
    life.  His father was always a responsible parent and it was  his  case
    that he was now the sole responsible parent.  Whether  the  father  was
    the sole responsible parent for a long period of  time  is  immaterial.
    It was his case that his mother disappeared  on  2  December  2017  and
    since then  his  father  in  the  United  Kingdom  has  been  the  sole
    responsible parent.  The appellant's paternal grandmother is an elderly
    and not particularly fit woman who provided  day-to-day  care  but  the
    appellant's father made all the decisions that had to be made that were
    important in the son's life.  In particular he was  involved  with  the
    son's school and wanted him to come to the United Kingdom.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer was doubtful and disbelieved parts  of  the
    claim particularly because it was the appellant's case that he was from
    a family of eight children and no proper explanation had been given for
    their whereabouts. An explanation was given at the appeal hearing.  The
    appellant explained that he was the  oldest  child  and  the  remaining
    children were from another relationship.  His half  siblings  were  not
    the concern of his paternal grandmother  but  appropriate  arrangements
    had been made for  them.   This  clearly  could  be  true  and  clearly
    undermines the main reason given by the Entry Clearance Officer for not
    believing the evidence.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal gave several reasons for disbelieving the claim
    that the appellant's father was the solely responsible parent but  none
    of them are reasons that individually are clearly compelling.

 5. A particular difficulty in the decision is that the appellant  produced
    evidence tending  to  show  that  his  mother  had  disappeared.   This
    evidence was regarded as unpersuasive by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    and a major reason for it being unpersuasive is that the judge did  not
    accept that the original evidence had ever been disclosed.  There  were
    translations in an apparently appropriate form  but  they  referred  to
    accompanying documents in which  Latin  script  was  used.   The  judge
    decided on his own and for no discernible reason that the Latin  script
    would  not  have  been  used  and  the  documents  were  in  his  words
    "transliterations" of a different document. As  the  original  document
    had  not  been  produced  for  inspection  the  judge  found  that  the
    translations of the transliteration were of little value.

 6. This point had never been taken by the Entry Clearance Officer  and  on
    it seems to be plainly wrong.  Evidence was produced with  the  grounds
    of appeal to show that the Latin script is commonly used in Somalia.  I
    was not able to find that evidence in the hearing  room  although  that
    just might be attributable to my inability to see things that are there
    to be seen but Mr Tufan saved a lot of time by conceding formally  that
    the Latin script is commonly used in Somaliland and the point taken  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge was just wrong.  It was clearly an  error
    of law.  It was a finding  of  fact  based  on  no  disclosed  evidence
    whatsoever contrary to the appellant's interests on a point that he did
    not realise was in issue.

 7. I cannot say that the findings on the  other  points  would  have  been
    resolved in the way they were if this evidence had been accepted and it
    has not been rejected for any proper reason.

 8. It follows that I have to conclude that the Decision and Reasons  as  a
    whole is unsatisfactory.

 9. I have considered very carefully if there is a way  forward  that  does
    not involve a further hearing.  I have concluded that there is not.

10. A possible (I put it no higher than that) explanation here is that  the
    appellant's mother's alleged departure is a convenient deception rather
    than a description of something that  has  actually  happened  and  the
    appellant is not to be believed when he maintains that his  mother  has
    disappeared.  This is something which  will  be  difficult  to  resolve
    because the appellant is unlikely to give  evidence  and  his  father's
    knowledge  of  exactly  what  happened  might  genuinely  be   limited.
    However, I have to be fair to both parties and I  find  that  the  Home
    Office must be given an opportunity of testing the evidence  by  cross-
    examination and allowing submissions  to  be  made  that  will  not  be
    tainted by a wholly erroneous approach.

11. The first ground of appeal complains that the judge's approach  to  the
    test of sole responsibility is erroneous.  There is some merit in  this
    but the point has to be considered against the unsatisfactory  findings
    of fact and it is not helpful to say any more about it.

12. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

13. This is not a case where everything is in issue.  It is suggested  that
    the appeal could succeed on an alternative basis of  it  being  in  the
    child's best interests to come to the United Kingdom outside the Rules.
     However,  if  the  appellant  can  establish  that  he  satisfies  the
    requirements of the Rules then  on  human  rights  grounds  the  appeal
    should probably be allowed because there would be no reason to find the
    obvious interference in his private and family  life  proportionate  to
    any proper purpose.  It  has  been  established  that  the  appellant's
    father has made visits to Somaliland and on occasions has  visited  the
    appellant.  That finding clearly stands it has also been accepted  that
    he pays or has  paid  for  the  appellant's  education.   That  finding
    stands.

14. Nevertheless, I have concluded that there is sufficient  work  here  to
    warrant a rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  It  may  be  that  the
    appellant will want to serve further evidence to deal with points taken
    in the decision and reasons. Mr Chakmakjian indicated to  me  that  the
    appellant may be able to give good evidence to explain the  appellant's
    absence in Ethiopia and that is not properly indicative of some furtive
    act that was inconsistent with his mother having disappeared. That is a
    matter for the appellant to sort out  with  a  proper  application  for
    permission to rely on further evidence.

    Notice of Decision

15. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I allow the appeal to the extent
    that I set  aside  its  decision  and  I  have  decided  after  careful
    reflection the better approach is for it to be determined again in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and that is my decision.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 January 2020                |



