
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23534/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House UT                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th May 2019                       |On 03 June 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                               Mrs oksana bas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bustani of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ukraine (date of birth  2nd  January  1956)
    appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chohan dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's decision of
    6th November 2018 refusing her application for leave  to  remain.   The
    Respondent was not satisfied that the  Appellant  met  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appeal is  brought  under  Article  8  family/private  life
    grounds.

 2. In summary the Appellant made her application for leave  to  remain  on
    the basis that she first entered the UK in 1995 and has  remained  here
    continuously ever since. The Secretary of  State  considered  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  to
    (iv) because she failed to meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) as she had not
    shown that she had resided continuously in the UK for at  least  twenty
    years.  Also she did  not  meet  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  because  the
    Secretary of State did not find that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration in Ukraine, the country to which she would
    have to go if required to leave the UK.

 3. The Secretary of  State  considered  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances in this case which would  render  refusal  in  breach  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR because it would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences  for  the  Appellant.   The  Secretary  of  State  further
    considered that the Appellant did not fall for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  of  compassionate
    factors.

The Appellant's Case

 4. It is not disputed that the Appellant entered the UK on  17th  November
    1995 in possession of a valid visit visa with leave until  April  1996.
    Thereafter, she claims, she has remained in the  UK  continuously.   In
    November 2001, she met her husband, the Sponsor, in a chance meeting at
    Kentish Town train station.  She and he stayed in  touch  but  did  not
    start a relationship until June 2006. She moved in with the sponsor  in
    November 2013 and they married in June 2017.   The  Sponsor's  date  of
    birth is 2nd September 1950.

 5. The Appellant has claimed that there would be insurmountable  obstacles
    for her in any return to Ukraine.  This is because of her physical  and
    emotional health, the fact that she looks  after  her  husband  who  is
    dependent on her physically  and  emotionally  and  who  is  a  British
    citizen.  She claims that she would struggle to reintegrate in  Ukraine
    and would become  destitute.   Finally  she  claims  that  she  is  the
    registered carer for her  94-year-old  mother-in-law  and  her  removal
    would cause her mother-in-law emotional distress and hardship.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 6. When the Appellant's appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    FtTJ heard evidence from both the Appellant and the Sponsor.   He  took
    into  account  documentary  evidence  which  included  a  copy  of  the
    Appellant's Ukrainian divorce certificate, her marriage certificate  to
    the Sponsor, and a short letter from her mother-in-law  simply  stating
    that she had known the Appellant for 5 years prior to  the  wedding  to
    her son.

 7. The FtTJ noted that the Respondent's case was that he accepted that the
    Appellant entered the UK in November 1995 but did not accept that there
    was credible evidence to show that she had remained  here  continuously
    since that time. The FtTJ then set out in [2] that  the  Appellant  met
    her husband, Michael Roberts, in 2001 but that  the  relationship  only
    commenced in 2006 and they moved in together in 2013.   Ultimately  the
    FtTJ was not satisfied that there was evidence sufficient  to  show  on
    balance that she had resided continuously within the UK for at least 20
    years.

 8. He then looked at whether there were any insurmountable obstacles which
    would prevent the Appellant from returning to Ukraine.  He  noted  that
    she had lived most of her  life  in  Ukraine.   She  has  family  there
    including a daughter and grandchildren, and there was evidence  of  her
    owning a property there.

 9. So far as her family life was concerned, the FtTJ accepted that she and
    the Sponsor are married and there may be hardship for  the  Sponsor  in
    accompanying the Appellant  to  Ukraine  but  he  found  there  was  no
    justifiable  evidence  that  any  such   hardship   would   amount   to
    insurmountable obstacles.  So far as the Appellant's 94-year-old mother-
    in law is concerned, the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's  evidence
    relating to this lady, but concluded that as  a  British  citizen,  her
    mother-in-law would be entitled to public/social services care  if  the
    need arose.  He dismissed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds:

          i. the FtTJ did not deal fully with the  Article  8  Family  Life
             claim which arose between the Appellant, her husband  and  his
             mother, in a Kugathas sense (more than normal emotional ties);

         ii. the FtTJ failed to properly consider whether  his  finding  at
             [14] that the Appellant could return to Ukraine and  make  the
             appropriate entry clearance application, would  of  itself  be
             proportionate; and

        iii. the FtTJ made a material error of  fact.  At  [17]  the  judge
             misinterpreted the Sponsor's  evidence  in  that  the  Sponsor
             confirmed at the hearing that  he  had  personally  known  the
             Appellant to be present in the UK since 2001,  when  they  had
             first met.  Additionally he failed to take proper  account  of
             the Appellant's explanation for the lack of documentation  for
             the period 1995-2001.

11. Permission having been granted, the matter comes before me to decide if
    the decision of the FtTJ contains such error of law that  the  decision
    must be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

12. Before me Ms Bustani appeared for the Appellant and Miss  Pal  for  the
    Respondent.  Ms Bustani began her submissions saying that the judge was
    wrong in his assessment of the Sponsor's evidence concerning the length
    of time that the Appellant had been in the UK (ground 3).   There  were
    two strands to her submission on this point.

13. Firstly it was accepted by the FtTJ that the Appellant entered  the  UK
    on 17th November 1995.  Her passport shows entry.   There  is  no  exit
    stamp shown. The lack of an exit stamp supports  the  Appellant's  case
    that she has remained here since the time  of  her  entry.   When  this
    evidence was coupled with  the  Appellant's  evidence  of  the  chaotic
    lifestyle she was leading then, these factors should  have  been  given
    greater consideration. Secondly and following from this  the  FtTJ  had
    also erred in his assessment of the Sponsor's evidence of  having  been
    in regular contact with the Appellant from 2001.

14. Additionally the FtTJ had not given adequate consideration to a  number
    of factors (ground 1).  This was especially with regard to the evidence
    of the care that the  Appellant  provided  for  the  Sponsor's  elderly
    mother, the fact that the Sponsor worked in the UK,  his  age  and  the
    length of their relationship.

15. Finally Ms Bustani submitted that the judge had found at [14] that  the
    Sponsor appeared to be "in a position to support"  an  application  for
    entry  clearance.   In  these  circumstances,  she  said  it  would  be
    disproportionate to expect  the  Appellant  to  leave.   These  factors
    cumulatively meant that the decision was unsustainable.  It  should  be
    set aside and returned to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

16. Miss Pal on behalf of the Respondent replied.  A Rule 24  response  had
    been served by the Respondent but this did  not  appear  in  my  papers
    until it was brought to me at the end of the  hearing.   In  any  event
    Miss Pal's submissions followed the lines of the Rule 24 response.

17. She said firstly that she would respond to ground 3  which  deals  with
    the submission that the FtTJ had made an error of fact.  She  submitted
    that even if the judge had erred in his factual assessment  of  whether
    the Sponsor's evidence was sufficient to support the Appellant's  claim
    that she was present in the UK in 2001, that would  not  of  itself  be
    enough to show continuous residence for at least  twenty  years.  There
    would still be an evidential shortfall.  The FtTJ gave adequate reasons
    for discounting the Appellant's explanation that her chaotic  lifestyle
    being responsible for the lack of evidence in those early  years  1995-
    2001 [17].

18. Miss Pal submitted that the FtTJ's decision was  correct  in  that  the
    Appellant could not fulfil the Immigration Rules under  either  EX1  or
    276ADE(1)(iii).  The judge's findings were more than adequate  to  show
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to a return to Ukraine  for
    her.  The judge clearly kept all factors in mind including the position
    of the Sponsor and her mother-in-law and decided that this was  a  case
    where there  was  nothing  to  show  that  the  Appellant,  who  is  an
    overstayer, could not return to Ukraine and  make  an  application  for
    entry through the proper channels.  The grounds amount to no more  than
    a disagreement with the judge's findings.  Those findings were open  to
    the judge to make and the appeal should therefore be dismissed.

19. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

20. In setting out my consideration, it appears to me that the challenge in
    this case to the  judge's  findings  is  essentially  a  reasons  based
    challenge in that it is said that the judge gave inadequate reasons for
    his findings and/or placed insufficient weight on other evidence  given
    by supporting witnesses.

21. It is apparent from a fair reading of the decision that  the  FtTJ  was
    fully aware of the approach to be taken in cases such as this.  He sets
    out and identifies the correct Immigration Rule and shows an  awareness
    that the only ground of appeal open to the Appellant is  an  Article  8
    private/family life one.

22. The first issue that he had to resolve was whether or not the Appellant
    had shown that she had resided in the UK continuously for at  least  20
    years.  Therein lies the tension in this appeal.  The judge found  that
    the Appellant's evidence did not  satisfactorily  resolve  this  and  I
    agree with that assessment.  The available evidence  can  be  distilled
    into four different time periods:

          i. 1995 - 2001: this covers  the  time  between  the  Appellant's
             entry to the UK and her first meeting with the Sponsor.

         ii. 2001 - 2006:  during  this  time  the  Sponsor  and  Appellant
             "stayed in contact"

        iii. 2006 - 2013: the Sponsor and Appellant were  in  a  continuing
             relationship

         iv. 2013 - present: the Sponsor and  Appellant  have  been  living
             together, latterly as husband and wife

23. In documenting my findings, I must first point out that I consider that
    some of the FtTJ's reasoning in  [17]  and  [18]  may  be  regarded  as
    unclear.  In [17] he has stated that, "The appellant has not been  able
    to provide any evidence of residence in the  United  Kingdom  prior  to
    2012.  That is a significant period of 17 years."  Later  in  the  same
    paragraph  he  has  stated,  "From  1995  to  2012/2013,  which  is   a
    significant period of  time,  not  to  have  any  evidence  to  support
    residence in the United  Kingdom,  simply  does  not  make  sense"  (my
    italics).  It may be  that  the  FtTJ  considered  that  the  Sponsor's
    evidence, in which he  said  that  he  saw  the  Appellant's  regularly
    between 2001 and 2013, merely demonstrated that she was present in  the
    UK  at  unspecified  intervals  but  was  insufficient   to   establish
    continuous residence here.  If such is the case,  it  would  have  been
    preferable if he had stated this overtly.

24.  I  agree  with  the  FtTJ  that  the   Sponsor's   evidence   provides
    corroboration of the Appellant's continuous residence in the UK for the
    fourth period outlined above in paragraph 22,  i.e.  since  2013.   The
    second and third periods are more problematic  in  that  the  Sponsor's
    evidence is vague and it is not clear how robustly he can attest to the
    Appellant's residence in the UK (especially during the second  period).
    Nonetheless, even taken at its highest  value  the  Sponsor's  evidence
    could  only  provide  corroboration  of  the   Appellant's   continuous
    residence from November 2001, which remains insufficient to meet the 20-
    year requirement.  There is still an evidential gap from the entry date
    in November 1995 to 2001.

25. Turning to the first period, Ms Bustani submitted that  the  judge  had
    not given proper consideration to the lack of  an  exit  stamp  in  the
    Appellant's passport.  The lack of an exit stamp together with evidence
    of the Appellant's chaotic lifestyle should  have  prompted  the  judge
    into making a  different  interpretation  to  that  which  he  did.   I
    disagree. The burden of proof is on the Appellant to show that she  was
    residing in the UK continuously during  this  period.  The  conspicuous
    lack of any evidence whatsoever beyond a passport entry stamp  to  show
    residence from 1995 to 2001 is sufficient in my view to allow the  FtTJ
    to draw  the  conclusion  that  he  did  and  which  encompasses  these
    particular years, namely that "I find it incredible that the  appellant
    does not have any evidence of her presence in the United Kingdom" [17].

26. So far as the remaining issues are concerned, I find that the FtTJ  was
    correct to look at the evidence before him  through  the  lens  of  the
    immigration rules. I find he has considered  the  question  of  whether
    there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life with the Sponsor
    continuing together outside the UK.  He  has  looked  at  the  evidence
    before him including  the  age  and  health  of  the  parties  and  the
    surrounding circumstances and given  adequate  reasons  for  concluding
    that there are no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
    outside the UK. The assessment  of  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    evidence is a matter for the trial judge; he is the  one  who  saw  and
    heard from the witnesses. I find that the findings made on the question
    of insurmountable obstacles were ones that were open to him to make.

27. Following on from this, the FtTJ has turned his mind to whether or  not
    removal would entail hardship pending an  entry  clearance  application
    and found it would not.  The Appellant is an overstayer  and  both  she
    and the Sponsor must have been aware of her lack of status at the  time
    they entered into their marriage.

28. So far as the Sponsor's  elderly  mother  is  concerned  he  noted  the
    Appellant and Sponsor's evidence that social services did  not  provide
    help but equally said it was unclear why not.  There is no  reason  put
    forward as to why, as a British citizen, she would not be  entitled  to
    the care that the public services would provide.  The  judge  correctly
    directed himself on this point.  He was entitled to assess the evidence
    on the basis that Social Services would perform their duties under  the
    law.

29. Overall I find that the grounds of onward appeal in this matter  amount
    to no more than a disagreement with the decision.  It follows that I do
    not find that there any material error of law in this decision and  the
    decision therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                         Date         28 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                         Date         28 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts



