
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23570/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 August 2019                             |On 18 September 2019          |
|Extempore decision                            |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                         The Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       mrs manal abdullah omar haithm
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Alhwich, volunteer, British and Muslim


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Veloso promulgated on 11 June 2019, which allowed the appellant's
    appeal against a refusal of entry clearance by  the  respondent  on  11
    October 2018.  For the sake of convenience, I will refer to the parties
    using the terminology applicable before Judge Veloso.

 2. The appellant before Judge Veloso was Manal  Abdullah  Omar  Haithm,  a
    citizen of Yemen born on 1 January 1986.  She is married  to  Mr  Iqbal
    Ahmed Valli, a British citizen resident in this country.  His  date  of
    birth is 24 May 1961.  He is the sponsor in these proceedings.

 3. Judge Veloso allowed the appellant's appeal after considering it on the
    papers.  In her decision, Judge Veloso featured an extensive chronology
    spanning five pages outlining the visits, travel  history  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor and, to the extent  it  was  relevant,  their
    immigration history in relation to previous attempts to apply for entry
    clearance and their meetings in third countries.

 4. The basis of the application made by the appellant was that  there  are
    exceptional circumstances in the form of the situation in  Yemen.   She
    accepted  that  the  language  and  maintenance  requirements  in   the
    Immigration Rules were not met.  The judge considered the situation  in
    Yemen to amount to exceptional circumstances, meaning that a  continued
    refusal of entry clearance would be unduly harsh.  As  such  the  judge
    allowed the appeal by reference to Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The assumption which underpins the refusal of entry clearance  and  the
    judge's decision is the existence of a serious  humanitarian  situation
    in Yemen.  In the grounds of appeal, the respondent before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal contended that there is no evidence that the  appellant's
    own home had been bombed  in  Yemen,  which  had  been  suggested,  and
    pointed out that she had voluntarily returned from Djibouti, where  she
    had previously fled seeking refuge, to Yemen, of her own  accord.   The
    judge noted that there was "a considerable  amount  of  disruption"  in
    Yemen, basing that conclusion primarily on the fact that the Tribunal's
    directions, which had been posted to the appellant's address  in  Yemen
    had been returned, bearing a Royal Mail stamp  stating  that  the  mail
    service in Yemen had been suspended.

 6. The Secretary of State appeals with the permission of Judge Parkes.  In
    granting permission Judge Parkes wrote this, "It is  clear  that  where
    the Rules are not met  then  compelling  circumstances  are  needed  to
    justify a grant of leave.  The grounds are clearly arguable."

Procedure

 7. At the hearing the sponsor was unable to attend  and  was  not  legally
    represented.  He and the appellant are assisted in these proceedings by
    a community advocacy support group called British and Muslim.   British
    and Muslim sent a volunteer trainee, Nejah Alhwich, in  order  to  read
    out an email which had been provided to the Tribunal in  advance.   The
    contents of that email essentially implored the Tribunal to uphold  the
    allowed appeal of Judge Veloso  outlining  the  financial  difficulties
    that British and Muslim as well as the appellant and  the  sponsor  had
    experienced in  seeking  to  obtain  formal  legal  representation.   I
    indicated at the outset of the  hearing  that  I  was  content  for  Ms
    Alhwich to address me in these terms, especially given she confirmed to
    me that she is a volunteer with the organisation and  neither  she  nor
    the organisation are  receiving  any  payment  for  their  services  or
    assistance to the appellant and sponsor as part of  these  proceedings.
    Under  the  circumstances,  I  considered  there  to  be  no  statutory
    objection to the Tribunal being addressed in this way and, having given
    him the opportunity to comment, it  appears  that  Mr  Tarlow  did  not
    either.

Discussion

 8. This is essentially a rationality based challenge to  the  decision  of
    Judge Veloso.  Although the permission granting  judge  said  that  the
    grounds of appeal were "clearly arguable" it is difficult to  know  the
    precise basis upon which this generous grant of  permission  was  made.
    In order to ascertain in further  depth  what  the  issues  before  the
    Tribunal are, it is necessary to address the grounds  of  appeal  which
    were considered by the permission judge in more depth.

 9. Distilled down,  the  grounds  of  appeal  essentially  amount  to  two
    propositions.  First, that the judge below failed  to  provide  reasons
    based on the country situation in Yemen as to  how  the  appellant  was
    affected by the "general situation there", bearing  in  mind  that  she
    lives with family members in  Yemen,  appears  to  have  some  form  of
    employment and has maintained contact with the sponsor including  on  a
    face-to-face basis in third countries.  Secondly, the  grounds  contend
    that the judge placed insufficient weight on  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control.

10. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal and left  the  matter  in  my
    hands.

11. Although I had permitted Ms Alhwich to address me,  understandably  her
    observations were not legal submissions, and nor did they  address  the
    essential question I had to consider, namely whether Judge  Veloso  had
    reached an irrational decision.  I permitted Ms Alhwich to  address  me
    in order to further the overriding objective and to facilitate the best
    possible participation of the  appellant  and  sponsor.   Although  she
    implored me to uphold Judge Veloso's decision, it is the  analysis  set
    out below which has led me to find that her decision did not feature an
    error of law, rather than her remarks to the Tribunal.

12. I consider that the judge's observations as paragraph 23 that there  is
    a "considerable amount of disruption"  in  the  country  to  amount  to
    judicial understatement.  Understandably the judge did not want  to  do
    her own research into the situation in Yemen, especially given this was
    dealt with as a paper case, and she was unable  to  seek  the  parties'
    agreement as to the situation there.  She did refer in broad  terms  at
    paragraph 31 to the situation which "reigns" in Yemen, which I take  to
    be  a  reference  to  the  well-documented  conflict  and  humanitarian
    situation.

13. At the hearing I sought Mr Tarlow's views  on  referring  to  the  Home
    Office's own Country Policy and Information Note concerning Yemen.   Mr
    Tarlow had no objections to  me  doing  so.   Paragraph  2.3.5  of  the
    Country Policy and Information Note, Yemen: Security  and  humanitarian
    situation, version 4.0, January 2019, states :

         "Yemen is experiencing a severe humanitarian crisis as  the  result
         of ongoing conflict and the UN has declared a level three emergency
         response  (activated  in   the   most   complex   and   challenging
         humanitarian emergencies when the highest level of mobilisation  is
         required).  Areas in which people are in severest needs are in  the
         north and west of the country  controlled  by  the  Houthi  rebels,
         which sees open fighting, including Saudi led aerial bombardment."

    It is not necessary to outline the humanitarian  situation  in  further
    depth.

14. Turning to the decision itself, I  consider  that  the  judge  provided
    sufficient reasons as to why the appeal  could  be  allowed.   She  was
    aware  of  the  fact  there  was  extreme  conflict  and  a  very  poor
    humanitarian situation, as I have demonstrated is confirmed by the Home
    Office's own guidance on Yemen.

15. In relation to the contention in the grounds of appeal that there is no
    evidence that the appellant's own home had been bombed, I consider that
    the watermark of  whether  there  exist  exceptional  circumstances  or
    whether it would be unjustifiably harsh  to  maintain  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance is not whether or not an  appellant's  house  has  been
    bombed.  It was plain from the judge's general knowledge,  as  accepted
    by the Country Policy and Information Note, of the situation  in  Yemen
    was such that the circumstances there meant that  the  appellant  could
    not be expected to maintain face-to-face contact with  the  sponsor  in
    Yemen.  The effect of continued refusal of  entry  clearance  in  these
    circumstances would be potentially permanent separation.  I accept that
    the Home Office may take a different view as to  whether  or  not  such
    circumstances amount to it being unjustifiably harsh for  the  purposes
    of whether or not entry clearance should be granted.   The  sponsor  at
    the time of the application  had  been  unable  to  establish  a  clear
    employment history making sufficient money  in  order  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the minimum income requirement.   This  is  because  he
    previously had extensive care and responsibilities for his  own  mother
    who has since died.

16. I consider there to have been nothing irrational or perverse about  the
    judge's approach.  She outlined the general situation  in  Yemen,  gave
    sustainable reasons as to why it would be unjustifiably harsh to expect
    the sponsor to establish an employment history sufficient to  meet  the
    minimum income requirement, in view of the fact that  matters  were  of
    such severity in Yemen.  She reached a conclusion that was open to  her
    on the facts of the case to reach.  Not all judges would  have  reached
    that generous conclusion, but to the  extent  the  Secretary  of  State
    contends that the judge fell into error in doing so, her submission  is
    one of disagreement, rather than one highlighting an error of law.

17. In relation to the second ground of appeal, namely that the  judge  had
    ascribed insufficient evidence to the public  interest  in  immigration
    control, the judge noted at paragraph 31  that  circumstances  such  as
    those at play in  the  present  matter  would  not  usually  amount  to
    something getting close to the exceptional circumstances threshold.  In
    articulating matters in this way, it is plain that  the  judge  had  in
    mind  the  high  threshold  required  in  order  to  depart  from   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules on  the  grounds  of  exceptional
    circumstances.  When the judge drew her analysis together at  paragraph
    32, she  specifically  noted  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and again underlined her emphasis
    on the public interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

18. I also consider the judge to have underlined her understanding  of  the
    importance she ascribed to the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls through  the  repeated  references  in  the  decision  to  the
    potential that the sponsor has, in due course, to work at a level which
    is likely to meet  the  minimum  income  requirement,  for  example  at
    paragraph 32.  She also noted the employment history of  the  appellant
    herself and the transferable skills that she has which could be of  use
    in the labour market in this country: see paragraph 30.  The judge  was
    therefore clearly mindful of the importance in due course  of  economic
    independence and gave sufficient reasons to find that the appellant and
    sponsor were likely to be economically independent in due course.

19. As such given the underlying conflict which exists  in  Yemen  at  this
    time, and given the reasons provided by the judge, I  do  not  consider
    that the judge erred in her weight to  the  importance  of  maintaining
    effective immigration controls.  Weight is a matter for the judge.  She
    had regard to the substance considerations contained in see Part 5A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The  Secretary  of
    State may disagree with the findings of the judge, but nothing  in  the
    grounds of appeal reveals the presence of irrationality  necessary  for
    this Tribunal to interfere with this very  fact-specific  decision  and
    exercise of judicial discretion.

20. This appeal is dismissed.

Postscript

21. As I conclude, I note the observations of the Court  of  Appeal  in  UT
    (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 1095.  At paragraph 19, the Court of Appeal observed that the right
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is on any point of law arising  from  a
    decision made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  an  excluded
    decision.  The court also noted that, although error of law  is  widely
    defined, it is not the case that the  Upper  Tribunal  is  entitled  to
    remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal simply because  it  does
    not agree with it or because it thinks it can  produce  a  better  one.
    Therefore, the reasons given for considering there to be  an  error  of
    law "really matter", said the Court of Appeal.  The court  then  quoted
    Baroness Hale  in  AH  (Sudan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department where she stated at paragraph 30,

         "Appellate courts should not  rush  to  find  misdirections  simply
         because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts
         or have expressed themselves differently."

    I also consider the concluding remarks of the Court  of  Appeal  in  UT
    (Sri Lanka) to be of particular relevance to the present matter,  given
    the overly generous grant of permission, which did not articulate  with
    the required specificity how it considered Judge Veloso to have reached
    an irrational decision (as to which see, for example, Durueke (PTA:  AZ
    applied, proper approach) [2019] UKUT 00197 (IAC), Headnote at (ii) and
    (iii)).

22. At paragraph 38, Lord Justice Coulson referred to what he considered to
    be an  "unsatisfactory  practice"  in  this  jurisdiction,  namely  the
    "erroneous belief that every decision, no matter its provenance, nature
    or form is always capable of being appealed or at least reviewed,  such
    that neither side ever regards any decision as final."  I consider this
    is one such matter where permission to  appeal  should  not  have  been
    sought, still less should it have been granted.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Veloso stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date 5 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of Judge Veloso not  to  make  a  fee  award  stands,  for  the
reasons she gave.


Signed   [pic]         Date 5 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

