
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/23473/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 February 2018                      |On 11 May 2018                     |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                           JOHNSON BABATUNDE AKILO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Al-Rashid Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is Mr Akilo's appeal against the refusal  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Devittie  to  allow  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 4 October 2016 not to revoke a deportation  order
    under Section 5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971. Mr Akilo is a Nigerian
    citizen. He is now 49. He has a long immigration history. He arrived in
    the  UK  in  1995  and  originally  claimed  asylum.  That  claim   was
    unsuccessful, ultimately being refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 30
    July 1998.

 2. Subsequent to that decision, Mr Akilo has been removed or  deported  on
    no fewer than four occasions. He was removed on 31 July  1998.  He  was
    deported on 5 August 2004. He was deported again on  14  November  2008
    and then finally deported on 1 October 2010. In relation to that  last
    deportation, Mr Akilo returned to the UK in December 2010, i.e.  within
    two months of having been deported. He is therefore in  breach  of  his
    deportation order.

 3. In the decision letter the Secretary of State  refused  to  revoke  the
    deportation. The letter summarised -

         "(1) Your client has committed serious offences in the UK for which
             he received custodial sentences, in  particular  it  is  noted
             that your client was initially convicted on 2 January 2001 and
             was last convicted on 23 August 2016.  He  has  received  four
             convictions for five offences. These have been five fraud  and
             kindred  offences.  According   to   the   PNC   obtained   on
             12 September 2016 your client attended South Essex Magistrates
             on 25 August. He attended in relation to the following charges
             - making a false representation  to  make  gain  for  self  or
             another or cause loss to other, expose other to risk.  He  was
             remanded on conditional bail. Ultimately Mr Akilo was given a
             community order in relation to the offence.

         (2)  Your client has no leave to remain in the UK  and  on  25  May
             2004 he was served with a signed deportation order.

         (3)  Your client has demonstrated a blatant disregard  for  the  UK
             immigration laws, in particular it is  noted  that  as  stated
             above your client has a signed deportation order against  him.
             In view of the deportation order he was deported from  the  UK
             on the following dates, 5 August 2004, 14 November 2008 and 1
             October 2010. On each occasion he has  illegally  returned  to
             the UK in breach of the deportation order in order  to  reside
             with his partner and children. It is noted  that  your  client
             has re-offended each time he returned to the UK."

It is difficult to dissent from that last paragraph.

4.   The decision of the Judge can be put quite  shortly.  He  set  out  the
    immigration history and the fact of the various deportation orders.  He
    set out the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules, in particular
    390A:

         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
              consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it does
              not, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that  the
              public interest in maintaining the deportation order will  be
              outweighed by the factors.

         391. In the case of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
              conviction for a criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
              deportation order against that  person  will  be  the  proper
              course:

              (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which  the
                   person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less
                   than 4 years, unless 10  years  have  elapsed  since  the
                   making of the deportation order when, if  an  application
                   for revocation is received, consideration will  be  given
                   on a case by case basis to whether the deportation  order
                   should be maintained...

          unless... the continuation would be contrary to the  Human  Rights
              Convention or the Convention  on  Protocol  Relating  to  the
              Status  of  Refugees,  or   there   are   other   exceptional
              circumstances that mean the  continuation  is  outweighed  by
              compelling factors.

         A398. These rules apply where -

              (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
                   against him to be revoked."

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
              to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
              Convention, and

              (a) ...

              (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                   the public good and in the public interest  because  they
                   have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have
                   been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4
                   years but at least 12 months...

          399.    This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

              (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                   relationship with a child under the age of 18  years  who
                   is in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; or

              (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                   a partner who is in the UK and is a  British  Citizen  or
                   settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  The relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

              (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
                   of his life; and

              (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

              (c) it would be very significant obstacles to his integration
                   into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."



          399D.   Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the
              United Kingdom in breach of a deportation  order  enforcement
              of that deportation order is in the public interest and  will
              be   implemented   unless   there   are   very    exceptional
              circumstances.

7.   In paragraphs 5 through to 8 of his judgment, the  Judge  set  out  the
    evidence that he had heard including evidence from  the  appellant  and
    from the appellant's  stepdaughter.  He  read  reports  that  had  been
    prepared on the appellant's son, David, who is was then about  4  years
    old and who had an autistic spectrum disorder. Complaint is made by  Mr
    Al-Rashid for  the  appellant  that  the  Judge  only  dealt  with  the
    appellant's spouse's evidence very shortly at paragraph 8 where he said
    the appellant's spouse had provided a witness statement  and  that  she
    had given oral evidence as  set  out  in  the  Record  of  Proceedings.
    Criticism is made that the Judge has not set out what it was  that  the
    appellant's spouse had said in her evidence. In light of  that  alleged
    failure we asked Mr Al-Rashid to give us an indication of the  evidence
    that was relied upon. He has not  been  able  to  produce  the  witness
    statement that was before the Judge but what he has done is provide  us
    with a witness statement from the appellant's spouse dated 21  February
    2018 that has been prepared for the purposes of this appeal.

8.   The material parts of this to  which  we  have  been  referred  are  as
    follows:

         "(5) However, our main issue in the family is the health  condition
             of our son David, who is now five years old. His behaviour has
             been very 'odd' from an early age, but it was  only  in  April
             2016 that he  was  formally  diagnosed  with  autism;  he  now
             attends a special school (I refer to the letter from his  Head
             Teacher dated 21st February 2018). David's father is the  main
             person in his life and there  is  a  fantastic  and  extremely
             close relationship between  them,  way  beyond  what  normally
             exists  between  a  five-year  old  and  their  father.  David
             responds positively only to his father. When he is behaving in
             a difficult manner, it is only Johnson who can calm  him  down
             and bring his behaviour back to normal. Even when I am around,
             the main carer for David is Johnson due  to  their  especially
             close bond.

             ...

         (8)  David would be very distressed with his  father's  absence.  I
             fear that his challenging behaviour will worsen, as I and  his
             sisters find it difficult to control him once he becomes upset
             and distressed. David may become very isolated as  I  will  be
             unable to take him out frequently due to the demanding  nature
             of all my other commitments. This  would  have  a  detrimental
             effect on David's social skills  which  are  already  severely
             impaired, and thus worsen his condition. I  truly  believe  it
             will be harmful to David's  health  if  his  father  were  not
             around to support him  in  the  way  that  he  does.  I  would
             describe their relationship as quite unique and special.

         (9)  It would be  virtually  impossible  for  me  to  provide  both
             financial and emotional care for my children. Due to me  being
             the sole bread winner, my working life is very  demanding  and
             stressful, so Johnson provides the physical and emotional care
             for the children. Without him, I fear our children  will  feel
             unloved and may become rebellious, as  I  will  be  unable  to
             provide sufficient emotional and physical  care,  as  well  as
             work full time. I will be unable to attend  parents'  evenings
             and my  children  may  have  to  stop  their  extra-curricular
             activities as I will be unable to take them. Johnson does  all
             these things. If he is not present, I  would  have  to  decide
             between providing financial or  emotional  care,  which  is  a
             terrible decision which would cause harm to my children either
             way.

         (10) David's world would fall apart if his father left him. He will
             start displaying very challenging behaviour, his  relationship
             with others will become fragmented, he will become  frustrated
             both mentally and emotionally as he will not  understand  what
             has happened to his  father,  nor  would  he  communicate  his
             needs. He will continuously be in turmoil. I fear his physical
             health will deteriorate as he only lets his father  feed  him.
             All this would affect the other children too, and I worry that
             our family would become seriously destabilised."

9.   We are prepared to accept that evidence along those lines was given  by
    the appellant's spouse at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Al-
    Rashid says that the appeal statement is more detailed, but it contains
    the gist of evidence that was heard by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

10.  The Judge considered the various factual issues that  he  was  required
    to under the Immigration Rules and our attention has been drawn  by  Mr
    Al-Rashid to paragraph 11(d) of the Judgment in which the  Judge  found
    that the best interests of all the children would be for the  appellant
    to remain in the United Kingdom in order that he continues  to  play  a
    role in their lives. He said:  "I  place  particular  emphasis  on  the
    interests of David who was 4 years of age  and  I  recognise  that  the
    report  from  Social  Services  would  seem  to  indicate,  albeit  not
    expressly, that his father's continuing support  in  David's  treatment
    plans would be important for his overall development". In  subparagraph
    (vii) of paragraph 11, the Judge said:

    "In my opinion the appeal turns largely on a consideration of the  best
         interests of the young boy David. The Appellant's commitment to his
         children's welfare and in particular to his young  son  David  does
         not enjoy my full confidence. There is an extent to  which,  in  my
         view, the Appellant has seen fit to take maximum advantage  of  the
         condition of his son, in order to create a stronger basis for being
         granted leave to remain, notwithstanding  his  adverse  immigration
         history."

The Judge provided reasons for reaching  that  conclusion.  In  subparagraph
    (viii):

    "The Appellant's son David, does  receive  comprehensive  support  from
         Social Services and these are ongoing. His  mother  plays  a  fully
         supportive role. I am not persuaded that  the  Appellant's  absence
         would significantly hinder the provision of the  quality  of  these
         services. There is certainly no categorical statement  from  Social
         Services on the impact of the absence of David's  father  from  his
         life. Having  said  that,  I  do  not  wish  to  underestimate  the
         difficulty of this decision - the refusal of revocation would  mean
         that the Appellant would not feature in the life of David. I do not
         accept that it follows that if this Appellant were granted leave to
         remain, he would continue  to  be  fully  committed  to  his  son's
         treatment plans. I do accept however that he would play some  role,
         be it a limited one. It is clear therefore that the best  interests
         of David dictate that this Appellant be allowed to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom."

11.  Mr Al-Rashid points to the two findings that the  Judge  made  that  it
    would be in the best interests of David for the appellant to be allowed
    to remain in the United Kingdom as being significant factors that ought
    to lead the  Tribunal  to  allow  this  appeal.  That  is  not  however
    determinative of the matter. The best interests of  any  children  were
    just a factor that the Judge had to consider. In paragraph 12 the Judge
    went on to say this:

    "I have therefore for the reasons I have set out come to the conclusion
         that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's children  and
         in particular David, to remain in the UK without him. It is not the
         best outcome for David, but that is what deportation does,  and  in
         particular in cases such as this, where there are  very  compelling
         public interest factors arising from the appellant's  repeated  and
         systematic disdain of previous  Deportation  Orders.  I  find  that
         there are no exceptional circumstances  that  outweigh  the  public
         interest."

12.  The Judge is criticised by  Mr  Al-Rashid  for  addressing  the  unduly
    harsh question. That of course is a feature  of  paragraph  399(a)  and
    (b), particularly (a) in this instance, in relation to  the  impact  of
    deportation on a relevant child and the consideration must be given  at
    that stage to  whether  in  all  the  circumstances,  and  particularly
    measured against the offending of the appellant,  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh on the child for the parent to be removed and the child to remain
    in the United Kingdom without him.

13.  It is not suggested that the Judge was wrong to  reach  the  conclusion
    that there were very compelling public interest factors  in  favour  of
    deportation  arising  from  the  appellant's  repeated  and  systematic
    breaches  of  previous  deportation  orders.   However,   three   basic
    complaints are made.

    (1)  First, that the Judge has not properly factored in to his equation
         the impact on David;

    (2)  Second, delay;

    (3)  Third, that there was here a Zambrano point which the Judge failed
         properly to consider (Ruiz Zambrano -v- Office National de l'Emploi
         (ONEm) [2012] QB 265; that if the Appellant  is  deported  then  it
         would mean, practically, that David would have to leave the  United
         Kingdom as well).

14.  The first two points can be disposed of  quickly.  The  Judge,  in  the
    passages we have already quoted, clearly assessed the impact  that  the
    deportation of the Appellant would have on David. The point on delay is
    a bad one. Little weight is to be attached  to  the  development  of  a
    family life in the UK whilst a person is here illegally. That  must  be
    even more so in cases where the person is present in the UK as a result
    of breaches of deportation orders. There are some  cases  in  which  an
    appellant is able to establish that the Defendant has  essentially  sat
    on her hands for a substantial period before moving to deport  someone.
    That is certainly not the case here.

15.  Turning to Zambrano it was submitted before  the  Judge,  applying  the
    principle in  Chavez-Vilchez  -v-  Raad  van  Bestuur  van  de  Sociale
    Verzekeringsbank [2018] QB 103, it was wrong of the Judge  to  fail  to
    conclude that the effect of the  deportation  of  the  appellant  would
    practically mean that David would have to leave the United  Kingdom  as
    well. I have been referred to paragraph 72 in Chavez-Vilchez:

    "Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that for  the  purposes
         of assessing whether a child  who  is  a  Union  citizen  would  be
         compelled to leave the territory of the European Union as  a  whole
         and thereby deprived of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of
         the rights conferred on him by that article is the  child's  third-
         country national parent were refused a right of  residence  in  the
         Member State concerned, the fact that the other parents, who  is  a
         Union  citizen,  is  actually  able  and  willing  to  assume  sole
         responsibility for the primary day-to-day care of the  child  is  a
         relevant factor, but it is not in itself a sufficient ground for  a
         conclusion that there is not, between third-country national parent
         and the child, such a relationship of  dependency  that  the  child
         would indeed be so compelled were there to be such a refusal  of  a
         right of residence. Such an assessment must take into  account,  in
         the best  interests  of  the  child  concerned,  all  the  specific
         circumstances, including the age of the child, the child's physical
         and emotional development, the extent of his emotional ties both to
         the Union citizen parent and to the third-country national parents,
         and the risks which separation from the latter might entail for the
         child's equilibrium."

16.  On behalf of the Secretary  of  State  we  have  been  referred  by  Mr
    Wilding to various domestic authorities touching upon the Zambrano  and
    Chavez-Vilchez lines of authority. He relies upon a passage from  Patel
    -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2028 (quoted in NP -v- SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    2018) in which the Court of Appeal said:

         [74] It follows in my view Chavez-Vilchez does  not  represent  any
             kind of sea-change to the fundamental approach to be taken. It
             does  not  mean  that  English  reported  cases   implementing
             Zambrano but predating Chavez-Vilchez (such  as  Harrison  and
             Sanneh) hold diminished authority.

         [75] In both Shah and Bourouisa there is impressive evidence of the
             strength of family life,  and  of  the  determination  of  the
             British citizen mother (in each case) to stay with the  family
             unit and move abroad, if the husband and  father  must  leave.
             Every sensible person would wish to honour  such  an  impulse.
             However, recognition of that does  not  alter  the  fact  that
             however hard such a choice may be,  it  is  a  choice,  not  a
             necessity, not compulsion. In my judgment the evidence in each
             of these two cases is clear that were the  British  parent  to
             remain, they would be able to care for the children  concerned
             perfectly well. The child citizen would be under no compulsion
             to leave the EU.

17.  We have also been referred to the decision of  SSHD  -v-  VM  (Jamaica)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 255:


         [55] To recap, the facts in the case before us are that the father,
             VM, is  a  third  country  national  facing  deportation;  the
             mother, KB, is a British citizen who can remain in the  UK  if
             she so chooses; the three dependent young children are British
             citizens who enjoy an active family life with both the  father
             and the mother, but could remain  in  the  UK  if  the  mother
             chooses to stay here.


         [56] In these circumstances, the deportation of the father does not
             automatically entail that the children would have to leave the
             UK (and EU) with him, on the footing that there  would  be  no
             family member with a legal right to be in the UK who would  be
             able to care for them in the UK. So the situation is different
             from that in Ruiz Zambrano.


         [57] Rather than a legal impossibility of remaining in the UK,  the
             family would face a  difficult  practical  choice  whether  to
             separate (with the mother and children remaining in the UK, in
             which  case  there  would  be  no  infringement  of  their  EU
             citizenship rights) or to leave and go to Jamaica as a  family
             unit. This is the situation addressed in Dereci [2011] ECR I-
             11315 and in domestic authority.

         [58] The facts in Dereci concerned a Turkish national who entered
             Austria illegally and married an Austrian national by whom  he
             had three children who were also Austrian nationals  and  were
             minors; Mr Dereci had his application for a  residence  permit
             in Austria  rejected  and  was  made  subject  to  orders  for
             expulsion and removal from Austria: see  [24]  and  [27].  The
             question arose, amongst others, whether Mr Dereci was entitled
             to be granted a residence permit in Austria by reason  of  his
             relationship with his wife and children, who were all Austrian
             nationals with EU citizenship, by virtue of  Article  20  TFEU
             and the principle in Ruiz Zambrano. In its judgment the  CJEU
             said this at [63]-[68]:


                 "[63]     As nationals of a Member State, family members of
                      the applicants in  the  main  proceedings  enjoy  the
                      status of Union citizens under art.20(1) TFEU and may
                      therefore rely  on  the  rights  pertaining  to  that
                      status,  including  against  their  Member  State  of
                      origin (see McCarthy [2011] 3 CMLR 10 at [48]).


                 [64]  On this basis, the Court has held  that  art.20  TFEU
                      precludes national measures which have the effect  of
                      depriving Union citizens of the genuine enjoyment  of
                      the substance of the rights conferred  by  virtue  of
                      that status (see Ruiz Zambrano ... [42]).


                 [65]  Indeed, in the case leading  to  that  judgment,  the
                      question arose as to whether a  refusal  to  grant  a
                      right of residence to a third country  national  with
                      dependent minor children in the  Member  State  where
                      those children are nationals and reside and a refusal
                      to grant such a person a work  permit  have  such  an
                      effect. The Court considered in particular that  such
                      a refusal would  lead  to  a  situation  where  those
                      children, who are citizens of the Union,  would  have
                      to leave the territory  of  the  Union  in  order  to
                      accompany  their  parents.  In  those  circumstances,
                      those citizens of the Union would, in fact, be unable
                      to exercise the substance of the rights conferred  on
                      them by virtue of their status  as  citizens  of  the
                      Union (see Ruiz Zambrano ... [43] and [44]).


                 [66]  It follows that the criterion relating to the  denial
                      of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the
                      rights conferred  by  virtue  of  EU  citizen  status
                      refers to situations in which the Union citizen  has,
                      in fact, to leave  not  only  the  territory  of  the
                      Member State of which he is a national but  also  the
                      territory of the Union as a whole.


                 [67]  That criterion is specific in character  inasmuch  as
                      it  relates  to   situations   in   which,   although
                      subordinate legislation on the right of residence  of
                      third country nationals is not applicable, a right of
                      residence may not, exceptionally,  be  refused  to  a
                      third country national, who is a family member  of  a
                      Member State national, as the effectiveness of  Union
                      citizenship enjoyed by that national would  otherwise
                      be undermined.


                 [68]  Consequently, the mere  fact  that  it  might  appear
                      desirable to  a  national  of  a  Member  State,  for
                      economic reasons or  in  order  to  keep  his  family
                      together in the  territory  of  the  Union,  for  the
                      members of his family who do not have the nationality
                      of a Member State to be able to reside  with  him  in
                      the territory of the  Union,  is  not  sufficient  in
                      itself to support the view  that  the  Union  citizen
                      will be forced to leave Union  territory  if  such  a
                      right is not granted."


         [59] Thus the CJEU ruled that the facts that the family  wished  to
             stay together in  Austria  and  otherwise  faced  a  difficult
             choice of either leaving Austria  (and  the  EU)  together  in
             order to preserve the family unit or splitting  up  (with  the
             mother  and  children  remaining  in  Austria,  as  they  were
             entitled to do) was not sufficient to generate a  right  under
             EU law for the father to remain in Austria, parasitic upon the
             rights of his  wife  or  children  as  EU  citizens.  Clearly,
             depending on the family circumstances and the strength of  the
             ties between them, the practical outcome might  well  be  that
             the wife and children would decide to accompany Mr  Dereci  to
             live in Turkey.


         [60] On this reasoning, VM has no claim to remain in the  UK  as  a
             result of the citizenship rights in EU law  of  his  wife  and
             children. If he is deported to Jamaica, KB  and  the  children
             (with KB deciding for  them)  will  face  a  difficult  choice
             whether to relocate there with him or remain in the UK without
             him. But the fact that  they  will  be  confronted  with  that
             choice, and might in practice feel compelled to go  with  him,
             does not engage EU rights in a way which creates a right under
             EU law for VM to remain in the UK. As this court  held  in FZ
             (China) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
             EWCA Civ 550, following Dereci and the decision in O, S and
             L (at paras. [42]-[44] of the Advocate General's Opinion  and
             para. [56] of the judgment), "the critical question is whether
             there is an entire dependency of the  relevant  child  on  the
             person who is refused a  residence  permit  or  who  is  being
             deported" (see paras. [14]-[19], in particular  at  [19]).  In
             the present case there is no "entire dependency"  of  AB,  KSM
             and KDM on VM, in the  requisite  sense,  because  they  could
             remain in the UK with their  mother,  KB,  who  as  a  British
             citizen herself has a right to be here.


         [61] The analysis in FZ (China) is consistent with  the  guidance
             given by the Supreme  Court  in  respect  of  the  application
             of Dereci in R (Agyarko) -v- Secretary of State for the Home
             Department [2017] UKSC 11, at [61]-[67].  The  Supreme  Court
             distinguished the situation in Ruiz Zambrano - which concerned
             the refusal of a right of residence and a  work  permit  in  a
             member state to the third-country parents of  dependent  minor
             children  who  were  citizens  of  that   state,   which   had
             "the inevitable consequence" that the parents would have  to
             leave the EU and the children would have  to  accompany  their
             parents - from that in Dereci, in which "the same relationship
             of complete dependence" between the EU citizen (the wife  and
             children in the Dereci case) and the third country  national
             (Mr Dereci) was not  present,  where  the  argument  based  on
             Article 20 TFEU and the EU citizenship rights of the wife  and
             children was rejected: see [64]-[67] (emphasis added).


         [62] In FZ (China), as  in  the  present  case,  a  third  country
             national was married to a  British  wife  by  whom  he  had  a
             British daughter, who was a minor dependent  on  her  parents.
             Although the wife would face a difficult choice if her husband
             were deported, whether to go  with  him  to  keep  the  family
             together or to remain  in  the  UK  with  her  daughter,  that
             situation did not engage the principle in Ruiz Zambrano so as
             to generate a right for the husband to be allowed  to  remain.
             The wife might feel compelled by circumstances to  leave  with
             her husband and take their daughter with her, but she was  not
             compelled by law to do so. The wife could  choose  to  remain.
             There was therefore no "entire dependency" of the daughter  on
             the person being deported, namely the father. See also S1, T1,
             U1 & V1 v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department [2016]
             EWCA Civ 560 at [46]-[51], which is to similar effect.


         [63] In my view, the reasoning in FZ (China) covers  the  present
             case and shows that, contrary to the view of the UT  at  para.
             [16] of the UT appeal decision, the possibility  that  KB  and
             the children will choose to go to Jamaica  with  VM  does  not
             "violate the fundamental precepts of EU law."


         [64] It follows that the presence of the children in  the  UK  does
             not, as a result of the  operation  of  EU  law,  have  to  be
             treated  as  a  fixed  point   for   the   purposes   of   the
             proportionality analysis under Article 8.  It  was  legitimate
             for the FTT in the 2015  FTT  decision  to  consider  for  the
             purposes of its Article 8 proportionality analysis whether the
             family unit could be expected to take the option, which EU law
             allows the Secretary  of  State  to  present  to  KB  and  the
             children, of relocating to Jamaica with VM.

18.  On behalf of the Secretary of State it is submitted that there  was  no
    basis on which the Judge could have found that the deportation  of  the
    appellant would lead to circumstances in which David would be forced to
    leave the European Union as well. He  relies,  in  particular,  on  the
    findings of undue harshness in paragraph 11(viii) of the decision under
    appeal. In my judgment that is correct. If it were not unduly harsh for
    David to remain in the United Kingdom without his father,  then  it  is
    untenable to suggest that the Judge should have gone on to find that he
    would have been required to leave the European Union.  The  Appellant's
    spouse's evidence, that we  have  set  out  above,  goes  nowhere  near
    demonstrating the kind of dependence that would make David leaving  the
    UK (and the EU)  the  inevitable  consequence  of  deportation  of  the
    Appellant.

19.  The reality is, on this appeal, is that this was not  a  Zambrano  case
    at all. It was a case that required an analysis of undue harshness  and
    it required, as the Judge gave it, a detailed analysis of the  evidence
    of the likely impact on David measured against the  offending  and  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals. That public interest is
    heightened and recognised by 399D in the instance of  people  who  have
    already been deported and unlawfully returned to  the  United  Kingdom.
    There are numerous decisions of the Court of  Appeal  which  point  out
    that the almost inevitable consequence of deportation of a parent  will
    be some harshness caused to the individual child. In AJ (Zimbabwe)  -v-
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 the Court of Appeal said this [17]:

    "These cases show that it will be rare for the best  interests  of  the
         children to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting
         foreign criminals. Something more than a lengthy separation from  a
         parent is required, even though such separation is  detrimental  to
         the  child's  best  interests.  That  is  commonplace  and  not   a
         compelling circumstance. Neither is it looking at  the  concept  of
         exceptional circumstances  through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. It would undermine the specific exceptions in the  Rules  if
         the interests of the children in maintaining a close and  immediate
         relationship with the deported parent were as a matter of course to
         trump the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule  399(a)
         identifies the particular circumstances where it is  accepted  that
         the interests of the child will outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation. The conditions are onerous and will only rarely arise.
         They include the requirement that it would not  be  reasonable  for
         the child to leave the UK and that no other family member  is  able
         to look after the child in the UK. In  many,  if  not  most,  cases
         where this exception is  potentially  engaged  there  will  be  the
         normal relationship of love and affection between parent and  child
         and it is virtually always in the best interests of the  child  for
         that relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
         deportation a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  it
         would drain the rule of any practical significance. It  would  mean
         that deportation would constitute a  disproportionate  interference
         with private life in the ordinary run of cases where  children  are
         adversely affected and the  carefully  framed  conditions  in  rule
         399(a) would be largely  otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very
         compelling justification overriding the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation, there must be  some  additional  feature  or  features
         affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take  the
         case out of the ordinary."

20.  Like the Judge, we do not doubt that the impact of the  deportation  of
    the appellant in this case will have  a  negative  (possibly  profound)
    effect on David and that, as the Judge found, undoubtedly consideration
    solely of his best  interests  would  dictate  that  the  appellant  be
    allowed to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  However,  Parliament  has
    decided that that is not the determinative factor, it is something that
    has to be balanced against  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular in this instance the maintenance of
    the authority of deportation orders. Despite the submissions that  have
    been made by Mr Al-Rashid we cannot detect  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge.   His   findings   are
    unimpeachable. There were and are no "very  exceptional  circumstances"
    that outweigh the public interest in the Appellant's deportation and in
    those circumstances the appeal will be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed: [pic]          Date: 27 February 2018
     Mr Justice Nicklin


