
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23051/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 9 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS BECKY MANTEY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Layne, of Counsel instructed by Citywide
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Metzer  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 30 January 2018 allowed the appeal of Mrs  Becky  Mantey
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 20 September  2016
    to refuse to grant her leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer  to  him  as  the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier; similarly, I  will  refer  to  Mrs  Becky
    Mantey as the appellant as she was the appellant before the  First-tier
    Judge.

3.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Ghana  born  on  15  March  1970.   She
    entered Britain in 2001  as  a  visitor  for  medical  treatment.   She
    overstayed and in September 2004  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a visitor for private medical treatment.  That was refused in
    February 2005.  In 2010 she applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules - that was refused on 17  December  2010.
    On 15 April 2014 she applied for leave to remain under the  family  and
    private life provisions but that was refused on 11 June 2014.  She then
    made the further application  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds, the refusal of which is the subject matter of this appeal.

4.   When the application was refused the Secretary  of  State  pointed  out
    that the appellant did not have children here, that she had  overstayed
    her leave to remain and had not had leave to  remain  since  2001,  and
    that with regard to the exceptional  circumstances  put  forward  which
    related to the medical treatment which she was receiving  for  glaucoma
    and the fact she suffered from Type 2 diabetes, there would be  medical
    treatment available for her in Ghana.

5.   The grounds of appeal emphasised that  the  appellant's  spouse  was  a
    British citizen  who  was  settled  in  Britain  and  stated  that  the
    respondent had erred in failing to accept that within  the  meaning  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) there would be very significant obstacles to the
    appellant's integration into  Ghana  if  she  were  required  to  leave
    Britain, because the appellant was completely dependent on  her  spouse
    for day-to-day support without which she could not survive.  She  would
    not have the support she received in Britain and that would  constitute
    significant obstacles to her reintegration into  Ghana.   It  was  also
    argued that the Secretary of State had erred in finding there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances which would mean that the appellant should be
    allowed to remain in Britain.

6.   The determination of the  judge  is  extremely  short.   He  noted  the
    appellant's evidence that she had met her husband in  2002,  that  they
    had married in December 2011 and that she was dependent  upon  him  for
    shopping and medication and taking her to her appointments. It was also
    stated that he had family in Britain  -  two  children  from  a  former
    relationship who, having been abandoned by their mother in  Ghana,  had
    joined him and the appellant in Britain in November  2017.   The  judge
    also heard evidence from the appellant's husband and said that  he  had
    taken into account the appellant's husband's wage certificates and  the
    marriage certificate.

7.   The judge stated that the sole issue was whether or not there would  be
    a disproportionate interference with the appellant's  right  to  family
    life under Article 8(2) of the ECHR were the appellant to  be  returned
    to Ghana, taking into account the respondent's legitimate  interest  in
    immigration control.

8.   In paragraph 7 the judge set out his findings as follows:-

         "MY FINDINGS


         7.   Given the particular circumstances of the Appellant's  husband
             who has fought to have his two daughters come  from  Ghana  to
             live with him and the Appellant in the  United  Kingdom  after
             their mother abandoned them and the fact that  he  is  working
             and has all his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom,  I  do  not
             consider it reasonable for the Appellant's husband  to  return
             with the Appellant to Ghana even  though  he  is  of  Ghanaian
             extraction.  The Appellant would  therefore  be  returning  to
             Ghana alone.  She is in a poor state of health and relies very
             heavily upon her husband to look after her.  The  relationship
             was precarious at the beginning given the Appellant's lack  of
             immigration status which is relevant to  2002  Act.   However,
             taking into  account  the  extent  to  which  the  Appellant's
             husband looks after her and the fact that  his  two  daughters
             are living with them and that the Appellant's husband's family
             all live in the United Kingdom and he is a British citizen and
             that the Appellant herself has no family that she is close  to
             in Ghana, I find  carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise  and
             taking into account the Respondent's  legitimate  interest  in
             immigration control that this is an exceptional case such that
             there  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
             Appellant's right to family life under  Article  8(2)  of  the
             ECHR for  the  Appellant  to  return  to  Ghana,  particularly
             bearing in mind the length of time she has spent in the United
             Kingdom albeit unlawfully and the degree of care required  and
             carried out by her husband with whom there is a clear and deep
             love".


     The judge therefore allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

9.   The Secretary of State appealed stating that the judge  had  materially
    misdirected himself in law and had given  inadequate  reasons  for  his
    decision.  It was stated that the judge had failed to assess the public
    interest in line with jurisprudence from the higher courts and  he  had
    failed to have any regard to the Immigration Rules and the  requirement
    that there be "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family  life  continuing
    abroad pursuant to EX.1.  The judge, it  was  argued,  had  erroneously
    used the test of whether or not he considered  it  reasonable  for  the
    appellant's husband to return to  Ghana  with  the  appellant  and  had
    therefore "failed to have any regard to the Supreme Court  decision  of
    Agyarko".

10.   It  was  submitted  that  in  any  event  his  reasoning  was   wholly
    inadequate.  The judge had relied upon the fact that the husband's  two
    daughters were now in Britain and the husband worked in Britain and had
    family here but had failed to  recognise  that  the  two  children  had
    entered Britain in November 2017 having spent  their  entire  lives  in
    Ghana.  The judge had failed to engage in any best interests assessment
    based upon this  factual  matrix.   Equally,  mere  reliance  upon  the
    husband being British  and  working  here  placed  the  choice  of  the
    appellant and her husband over and above the UK's right to control  its
    borders.  Family life in this  case  had  been  contracted  whilst  the
    appellant was here unlawfully.  It was stated that the judge  mentioned
    that the husband had family in Britain but there was  no  consideration
    of whether family life actually existed or with whom.   It  was  stated
    that whilst it was acknowledged by the judge that the husband has other
    children in Britain, there was nothing  to  suggest  that  these  other
    children live with the husband, nor is there consideration of the  kind
    of relationship that they enjoyed, if any.   It  was  argued  that  the
    judge had not considered the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles  as  a
    factor in the proportionality exercise and failed to have any regard to
    the ongoing cost of the appellant's NHS treatment.  The judge had  also
    failed to have any regard to evidence,  or  the  lack  thereof,  as  to
    whether there was care available for the appellant in Ghana.  While the
    judge had acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had  been  unlawfully  in
    Britain it was self-evident that he  had  failed  to  attribute  little
    weight to that family life as is required by Section  117B.   The  care
    given by the husband could be continued in Ghana.

11.  Mr Duffy argued that the grounds set  out  a  reasons  challenge.   The
    reality was that the judge had not engaged with the situation here.  He
    had not applied the test of insurmountable obstacles and merely that of
    whether or not it was reasonable for the appellant to return.  That was
    not the correct test.  Moreover, he had  referred  to  the  appellant's
    situation here as being precarious - that was wrong - the  reality  was
    that she had overstayed since 2001.  While the  judge  was  correct  to
    state that the appellant's  husband  was  a  British  citizen,  he  had
    ignored the fact that  the  appellant's  husband's  children  had  only
    received settlement when they had entered into Britain  last  year  and
    there was nothing to indicate that the children  could  not  return  to
    Ghana with their father and the appellant.  He asked me  to  set  aside
    the decision.

12.  Mr Layne stated that the decision, although short,  was  not  perverse.
    The judge had dealt with all the  main  issues  in  the  case  and  the
    reality was that the children, who had had a disrupted life when  their
    mother had abandoned them in Ghana, had only recently entered  Britain.
    Given their ages of 10 and 15 it would not  be  in  their  interest  to
    further disrupt their life here in uprooting them yet again.  Moreover,
    he pointed out that the appellant was blind in one  eye  and  that  the
    sponsor cared for her and that she could not live  without  that  care.
    He stated that while it was the case that the judge had  not  mentioned
    the issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles,  the  reality  was  that  the
    appellant's circumstances were such that the obstacles she  would  face
    in Ghana would be insurmountable.

13.  Mr Duffy in reply stated that he  was  not  arguing  the  decision  was
    perverse but that the proper exercise had not been carried out in  that
    the judge had not considered  whether  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant and her husband living  in  Ghana  with  the
    husband's two children who had only recently arrived in  Britain.   The
    issue was not whether there would be insurmountable obstacles  for  the
    appellant if she returned to Ghana on her own but whether or not  there
    would be insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing there.   He
    asked that I set aside the decision and return  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Discussion.
14.  I consider that the judge clearly did not  consider  the  facts  as  to
    whether or not  there  would  be  insurmountable  difficulties  to  the
    appellant's husband and his wife returning to Ghana. It  was  incumbent
    on him to do so as is clear from the judgement in Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC
    11.  By  not  applying  that  test,  or  at  least   taking   it   into
    consideration, he erred in law. While I accept that the  appellant  has
    very serious medical problems and requires care from  her  husband  the
    reality is that  that  care  would  continue  should  the  family  life
    continue in Ghana.  Moreover, the children have spent all  their  lives
    to date, apart from the last year, in Ghana and they would therefore be
    returning to the life which they had led there in the past.

 15.  In these circumstances I consider it  appropriate  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge and that  it  is  further  appropriate
    that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier  so  that  the  necessary
    findings of fact can be made and the relevant test applied.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Judge is set  aside.   The  appeals  are
remitted to a judge in the First-tier for a hearing afresh on all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                      Date: 6 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
