

                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                       |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: HU/23129/2016           |
|the immigration Acts                                                          |
|Heard at: Field House|              |  |       Decision  and Reasons         |
|                     |              |  |promulgated                          |
|ON 31 JANUARY 2018   |              |  |        ON 15 february 2018          |
|                                                                              |
|                                                                              |
|                                                                              |
|Before                                                                        |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                     |
|                                                                              |
|Between                                                                       |
|                                                                              |
|           |Entry Clearance Officer, UKVS Sheffield           |              |
|           |                                                  |Appellant     |
|                                                                              |
|And                                                                           |
|                                                                              |
|           |PA Saikou Bojang                                  |              |
|           |(Anonymity Order Not Made)                        |              |
|           |                                                  |Respondent    |

Representation:

For the  appellant:          Ms  A  Brocklesby-Weller,  Senior  Home  Office
                 Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Mr Y Y Darboe of Queen's Park Solicitors.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (hereafter  the  "ECO")  has  been  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Kimnell who, in a decision promulgated on 6 October  2017  following  a
    hearing on 26 September 2017, allowed the appeal of Mr Pa Saikou Bojang
    (hereafter the "claimant"),  a  national  of  the  Gambia  born  on  17
    November 1982, against a decision of the  respondent  of  14  September
    2016 to refuse his application of 13 June 2016 for entry  clearance  as
    the husband of Mrs. Kemi Liza Bojang (hereafter  the  "sponsor")  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The sponsor is a British citizen.



 2. The ECO refused the application under paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Rules
    and S-EC.1.4.(c) of Appendix FM because the  claimant  was  apprehended
    previously when he arrived at Luton Airport on 25th May 2015 travelling
    on a Belgian passport (in the identity of a person with a date of birth
    of 17 November 1983) which had been deliberately  altered  to  make  it
    appear as if it belonged to him. He was carrying a Swedish bank card in
    another name. He claimed asylum, saying that he feared returning to the
    Gambia or Denmark. He withdrew his asylum claim two hours later. He was
    removed on the same day to Denmark where he was convicted of a criminal
    offence and sentenced to 40 days' imprisonment.

 3. In relation to the refusal under paragraph 320(11), the ECO  considered
    that the claimant had attempted to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
    Immigration Rules in view of the fact that, on  25  May  2015,  he  had
    carried a fraudulently altered passport, used different identities with
    no satisfactory explanation and made a frivolous application to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

 4. In relation to the refusal under S-EC.1.4.(c) of Appendix FM,  the  ECO
    considered that the claimant did not meet the suitability  requirements
    on account of the fact that he had a criminal conviction for  which  he
    was sentenced to 40 days'  imprisonment.  The  ECO  accepted  that  the
    remaining requirements for entry clearance as a partner were satisfied.



 5. Paragraph S-EC.1.4.(c) provides that an applicant will be refused entry
    clearance on the grounds of suitability where exclusion is conducive to
    the public good because he has been convicted of an offence  for  which
    he has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  twelve
    months, unless a five year period has  passed  since  the  end  of  the
    sentence.  Where  that  paragraph  applies,  unless  refusal  would  be
    contrary to the 1950 European Convention for the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) or the Convention  and  Protocol
    Relating to the Status of Refugees, it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
    circumstances that the public interest in maintaining refusal  will  be
    outweighed by compelling factors.

 6. Accordingly, as the judge noted (at  para  23  of  his  decision),  the
    appellant in this case could make  another  application  without  being
    caught by the suitability requirement,  provided  he  waits  a  further
    three to four years before making a renewed application.

 7. The ECO also considered the application outside the  Immigration  Rules
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The ECO considered that the decision  was
    proportionate, noting, in particular, that no reason had been  advanced
    as to why the sponsor was unable to enjoy family life with the claimant
    in the Gambia.

The judge's decision

 8. In summary, the judge found that, although "highly borderline", it  was
    just about possible to  say  that  the  sponsor  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to join the claimant in the Gambia.  He  considered  that  the
    claimant had returned at his own expense to the Gambia and  waited  for
    12 months before making the application for entry  clearance,  that  he
    withdrew his asylum claim speedily "thus  causing  the  UK  authorities
    virtually no  trouble,  expense  or  inconvenience",  that  the  prison
    sentence was short and there was no other criminality, that the factors
    in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  as  to
    financial independence and English language were satisfied and that the
    decision to maintain the refusal now and insist that the claimant  wait
    until 5 years had elapsed would have a disproportionate impact  on  the
    sponsor, regardless of the impact on the claimant.

 9. The judge gave his reasons for his decision at paras 11-34 which read:

     "11.     The burden is on the [claimant]  to  establish  the  facts  on
             which he relies, though in  this  case  there  is  no  dispute
             between the parties as to the facts; it is the decision to  be
             drawn  from  those  facts  that  is  in  dispute  between  the
             [claimant] and [ECO].

        12.  The accepted facts are these: the [claimant] was born on  17th
             November 1982 in Gambia and is married to  his  current  wife,
             his sponsor, Mrs Kemi Liza Bojang whom he first met in  Gambia
             on 25t1 October 2011.


        13.  The couple married in Gambia on 25th April  2014.  In  May  of
             that year the [claimant] had a visit visa for  Denmark  for  a
             period of three months. He travelled there on 29th  June  2014
             and moved to Sweden on 30th June 2014, the following day.  The
             visa expired and the [claimant] remained living  illegally.  A
             civil marriage  ceremony  was  conducted  in  Sweden  on  31st
             January  2015.  The  couple  could  not  settle   in   Sweden,
             consequently it was decided that the sponsor should return  to
             the United Kingdom, which  she  did,  and  where  she  secured
             employment with a software company earning  �26,500  per  year
             which has since increased to an annual salary �47,000 a year.


        14.  The [claimant] accepted  advice  that  he  could  use  a  fake
             Belgian passport to visit the United  Kingdom  and  with  that
             passport he travelled to Luton where he was  apprehended.  The
             [claimant] confessed to possession of  a  false  passport  and
             claimed asylum but after a short period of time the [claimant]
             acknowledged that he was happy to return it to Denmark, and he
             was removed the same day. He was detained on return to Denmark
             and sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 40 days, following
             which he returned to the Gambia.


        15.  The [claimant's] wife advised him to return to the  Gambia  to
             make a proper application to join her in the  United  Kingdom.
             He waited, as advised, for a period of  twelve  months  before
             making his application during which time he  has  remained  in
             the Gambia whilst his wife has lived in the UK.


        16.  In his witness statement the [claimant] protests  that  he  is
             not a criminal, but he  has  obviously  committed  a  criminal
             offence.


        17.   As  regards  paragraph  320(11),  where  an   applicant   has
             previously contrived in a significant  way  to  frustrate  the
             intentions of the Rules by using deception in  an  application
             for entry clearance or leave to remain, and  where  there  are
             aggravating  circumstances,  for  example  using  an   assumed
             identity of switching  nationalities  or  making  a  frivolous
             application, the application may be refused.


        18.   In  the  present  case,  the  [claimant]  did  use  deception
             involving a different nationality and he had documents in more
             than one identity. He did make a frivolous asylum application.




        19.  That is not disputed by the [claimant], but Mr  Darboe  refers
             to the case of [PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed)
             India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC)]. That was a case where the  Entry
             Clearance Officer making the decision to refuse an application
             referred  nowhere  to  guidance  issued  by  the  [ECO]  under
             paragraph 320(11). The Tribunal found that the Entry Clearance
             Officer in that case should have specifically recognised  that
             the [claimant] had voluntarily left the  United  Kingdom  more
             than twelve months previously with a view to regularising  his
             immigration  status.  There  was  no  question  but  that  the
             marriage was a genuine one and  there  was  a  risk  that  the
             decision could be counterproductive to the general purpose  of
             the Rules and to the  maintenance  of  a  coherent  system  of
             immigration.


        20.  The guidance issued to Entry Clearance Officers referred to in
             paragraph 10 of the decision of PS relates to the  meaning  of
             "aggravating circumstances". Where such a circumstance applies
             paragraph 320(11) dictates that entry clearance  or  leave  to
             enter should normally be refused.


        21.  The Tribunal  in  PS  had  regard  to  paragraph  320(7B)  and
             320(7C).  Those  paragraphs,  the  Tribunal   observed,   were
             intended  to  encourage  a  person  in  the  position  of  the
             [claimant] in that case voluntarily to leave  the  UK  and  to
             remain outside the UK for a significant  period,  which  is  a
             desirable objective. Paragraph  320(7B)(iii)  adds  a  proviso
             where an applicant left the UK voluntarily, not at the expense
             of the Secretary of State, more than twelve months previously.
             Paragraph 320(7B) leads  to  an  automatic  refusal  of  entry
             clearance, but it is Mr Darboe's argument that the  period  of
             twelve months referred to in 320(7B) is a reasonable yardstick
             to apply when considering an application under 320(11).


        22.  In the present  case,  in  common  with  the  Entry  Clearance
             Officer in PS, no recognition was made for the fact  that  the
             [claimant]  voluntarily  departed  and  spent  twelve   months
             residing in the Gambia before he made the application  leading
             to the decision now under appeal. It  was  accepted  that  the
             bogus asylum claim was withdrawn within two  hours  of  making
             it, which is another matter that should have been  taken  into
             account against the background of so many bogus asylum seekers
             who maintain a deceitful application for many months and  even
             pursue  an  appeal  process  against  a  refusal  of  such  an
             application.


        23.  As regards the other basis for  refusal,  namely  S-EC.1.4.(c)
             that  provides  that  an  applicant  will  be  refused   entry
             clearance on the grounds of  suitability  where  exclusion  is
             conducive to the public good because an  [claimant]  has  been
             convicted of an offence for which he has been sentenced  to  a
             period of imprisonment of less than twelve  months,  unless  a
             five year period has passed since the  end  of  the  sentence.
             Where that paragraph applies, unless refusal would be contrary
             to the Human Rights Convention or the Convention and  Protocol
             Relating to the  Status  of  Refugees,  it  will  only  be  in
             exceptional  circumstances  that  the   public   interest   in
             maintaining refusal will be outweighed by compelling factors.


        24.  The [claimant] in this case  could  make  another  application
             without being caught by the suitability requirement,  provided
             he waits a further three to four years before making a renewed
             application.


        25.  Turning to Article 8 principles, there is undoubtedly a family
             life between the [claimant]  and  sponsor,  and  that  is  not
             challenged.  [The  ECO's  representative]  argues   that   the
             decision involves no breach thereof because  family  life  can
             continue as it has been while  the  couple  have  been  living
             apart, but I do not accept that argument. The  [claimant]  and
             sponsor are unable to  be  reunited  in  the  United  Kingdom,
             which, if the sponsor cannot reasonably be  expected  to  join
             the [claimant] in the Gambia,  interferes  with  their  family
             life and would be  sufficiently  grave  a  consequence  as  to
             engage Article 8 ECHR.


        26.  The sponsor has said at paragraph 15 of her witness  statement
             that it is not possible for family life to take place  in  the
             Gambia because it would be difficult for the sponsor  to  find
             work there comparable with her current employment, indeed  her
             husband has found it difficult to obtain work in  the  Gambia.
             By remaining in the United Kingdom the sponsor has the ability
             to  meet  other  aspects  of  Appendix  FM,  particularly  the
             financial provisions. It is highly borderline but  on  balance
             it is just about possible  to  say  that  the  sponsor  cannot
             reasonably be expected to join her husband in the Gambia.


        27.  The decision is in accordance with the law and in pursuit of a
             legitimate aim so it comes to the question of proportionality,
             weighing the private and family life rights of the  [claimant]
             and  sponsor  against  the  undoubted  national  interest   in
             maintaining immigration controls.


        28.  The [claimant] would meet the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,
             suitability apart.


        29.  I find as regards  the  paragraph  320(11)  refusal  that  the
             [ECO], when exercising  discretion,  should  have  taken  into
             account the fact that  the  [claimant]  returned  at  his  own
             expense and has waited for twelve  months  before  making  his
             current application and should also have  taken  into  account
             the speed with which the  asylum  claim  was  withdrawn,  thus
             causing the UK authorities virtually no  trouble,  expense  or
             inconvenience. The magnitude of the [claimant's] offence ought
             to have been taken into account; the prison sentence was short
             and there is no other criminality. Discretion  ought  to  have
             been exercised in the [claimant's] favour.


        30.  The only point standing in the way of allowing the  appeal  is
             therefore the five  year  period  stipulated  in  S-EC.1.4.(c)
             which the [claimant] should observe before successfully making
             an application for entry clearance, but there is  the  proviso
             that where the  decision  is  contrary  to  the  Human  Rights
             Convention the public interest is capable of being outweighed.




        31.  Section 117B factors  need  to  be  taken  into  account.  The
             section reiterates the importance of  maintaining  immigration
             controls in the public interest and that is always  a  weighty
             factor; indeed, it  was  a  weighty  factor  even  before  the
             legislation was passed.


        32.  It is in the public interest that a person seeking  entry  can
             speak English, which appears to be the case  in  this  appeal.
             The couple are certainly  capable  of  maintaining  themselves
             without recourse to public funds. There  are  no  children  to
             take into account. The relationship between the [claimant] and
             sponsor has developed while the couple have been living  apart
             in separate continents.


        33.  There is of course the matter of the [claimant's]  conviction,
             as previously stated,  but  he  returned  voluntarily  to  the
             Gambia to make this application and waited  for  a  period  of
             twelve months before doing so.  His  criminal  history  is  an
             isolated offence which was dealt with comparatively leniently,
             and, whilst serious, was not the most serious offence  of  its
             kind. He did  not  maintain  a  false  asylum  claim  for  any
             significant period.


        34.  The [claimant] has done  his  best  to  make  amends  for  his
             foolish  behaviour  in  the  past;  not  merely  foolish   but
             criminal, and he deserves some credit for that.  The  decision
             also has an impact on the sponsor whose employment and  career
             prospects in the United Kingdom  are  good.  It  was  not  the
             sponsor who committed the criminal offence and indeed  it  was
             she who encouraged the [claimant] to return to the Gambia  and
             wait for a year before making his application. The decision to
             maintain the refusal now and insist that the  [claimant]  wait
             until five years have elapsed would  have  a  disproportionate
             impact on her, regardless of the impact on the [claimant].

The grounds:

10. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  (Ground 1) The judge provided inadequate reasons for finding  that
         it would be unreasonable for the sponsor to enjoy family life  with
         the claimant in the Gambia. The grounds state (incorrectly,  as  Ms
         Brocklesby-Weller accepted before  me)  that  the  sponsor  was  of
         Gambian ethnicity. The grounds contend that  the  judge  failed  to
         identify anything that would pose a substantial obstacle to  family
         life continuing in the Gambia without under hardship. The fact that
         the sponsor would not be  able  to  obtain  a  comparable  job  was
         insufficient.

    (ii) (Ground 2) The judge failed to have regard to the  fact  that  the
         claimant was removed to Denmark by the Secretary of State and  only
         as a result of having been detected at the border. If the  claimant
         had not been apprehended, it was his intention to enter the UK  and
         remain illegally. Accordingly, the grounds contend  that  the  fact
         that  he  returned  to  Denmark  and  served  his  sentence  before
         returning to the Gambia is immaterial. The judge's finding that the
         claimant  had  returned  to  the  Gambia  voluntarily  had   unduly
         influenced his decision  in  the  claimant's  favour.  The  renewed
         grounds contend that the claimant was given credit for returning to
         the Gambia on a false basis.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me, Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted that the author
    of the grounds was mistaken in stating that the sponsor was of  Gambian
    origin. Mr Darboe informed me that the sponsor was born in the UK.  Her
    mother is of Jamaican descent and her father of Nigerian descent.

12. I asked for clarification as to whether the claimant had  travelled  to
    Denmark on his own volition in  the  sense  that  he  made  the  travel
    arrangements himself or whether he was  removed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and, if so,  whether his removal was arranged at the Secretary of
    State's expense.

13. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted a copy of form IS.83. This was a  notice
    to the relevant carrier (in this case, Ryanair) directing  the  carrier
    to remove the claimant on 25 May 2015 at  17:40  on  Flight  FR7408  to
    Copenhagen. She also submitted a screenshot showing  an  entry  in  the
    Secretary  of  State's  CID  database,  which  records  the  "Departure
    Outcome" as "Removed with EU Letter".  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted
    that these two documents show that the claimant was removed to  Denmark
    at the Secretary of State's expense. The most that  can be said is that
    he did not resist or disrupt removal. In that  sense,  he  returned  to
    Denmark voluntarily but, she submitted,  it  cannot  be  said  that  he
    returned to Denmark voluntarily in the sense that he arranged  his  own
    departure and at his own expense.

14. In relation to ground 1, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  the  only
    reason given by the judge for his finding that it was  unreasonable  to
    expect the sponsor to enjoy family life with the claimant in the Gambia
    was that her employment prospects in the Gambia were not comparable  to
    her employment prospects in the UK. The judge said  that  the  claimant
    had found it difficult to find work in the Gambia.  This  accords  with
    para 15 of his witness statement where he said that he  was  unable  to
    find work on his return to the Gambia.  However,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    submitted that this ignores the fact that the claimant said at  para  2
    of his witness statement that he had previously worked in the Gambia at
    a hotel. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted, in reliance upon the Court  of
    Appeal's judgment in R (Agyarko and others) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440,
    that the mere fact that the sponsor is a British citizen and  that  she
    would not be able to obtain a comparable job in another country is  not
    sufficient to establish that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life being enjoyed outside the UK. The judge erred  in  limiting
    his consideration of whether it was reasonable for the sponsor to enjoy
    family life in the Gambia to her employment  prospects  and  failed  to
    consider other factors such as whether she is familiar with the  Gambia
    and whether she could obtain assistance from the claimant.

15. In relation to ground 2, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the  judge
    had made a material error of fact at para 29  when  he  said  that  the
    claimant had returned to the Gambia at his own expense.  There  was  no
    evidence before the judge to this effect. The judge did  not  hear  any
    oral evidence. The claimant had not said in his witness statement  that
    he returned to the Gambia at his own expense.  The judge had  therefore
    speculated when he said  that  the  claimant  returned  to  the  Gambia
    voluntarily and at his own expense.

16. In addition, the judge took into account in the claimant's  favour  the
    fact that the claimant  withdrew  his  asylum  claim  two  hours  after
    claiming asylum whereas para 320(11) specifically lists the making of a
    frivolous asylum claim as an aggravating factor.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    submitted that the judge failed to understand or take into account  the
    purpose behind this being  an  aggravating  factor.  The  making  of  a
    frivolous asylum claim is an abuse  of  process.  Furthermore,  it  was
    clear that, if the claimant had not been  apprehended,  he  would  have
    entered the UK illegally and  lived  here  illegally.  The  Immigration
    Rules  provide  the  route  by  which  individuals  should  make  their
    applications for leave to  enter  to  remain.  The  claimant  chose  to
    attempt to enter illegally on false  documents.  The  judge's  decision
    would mean that there would be no deterrence. It would be  a  precedent
    to other would-be applicants to abuse the system.

17. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that, in any event, the judge  erred  in
    stating that the claimant's withdrawal of his asylum claim  caused  the
    UK authorities virtually no  trouble,  expense  or  inconvenience.  She
    submitted that the Secretary of State had incurred expense in detaining
    the claimant and arranging his removal.

18. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  the  judge's  misunderstanding  of
    events after the claimant's arrival in  the  UK  was  material  to  his
    decision.

19. Mr Darboe relied upon the reasons given  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lever in refusing the application to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

20. In response and in relation to ground 1, Mr Darboe submitted  that  the
    judge took into account the impact of the decision on  the  sponsor  at
    para 34. Mr Darboe submitted that para 34 reflects the decision in  PS.
    The sponsor is not of Gambian ethnicity or origin. The sponsor and  the
    claimant had tried to live in Sweden. They had tried to obtain jobs  in
    Sweden. The sponsor had to return to the UK. Para  13  of  the  judge's
    decision shows that the sponsor's earnings increased  substantially  in
    the UK. The judge was correct to conclude that it  was  not  reasonable
    for the sponsor to live in the Gambia, although he said that it  was  a
    borderline decision.

21. Mr Darboe submitted that it was  immaterial  to  the  judge's  decision
    whether or not the claimant was removed at  the  Secretary  of  State's
    expense. This issue was not material to his  decision  that  the  ECO's
    decision was disproportionate  because  he  reached  that  decision  on
    account of the impact on the sponsor.

22. In relation to ground 2, Mr Darboe  submitted  that  the  ECO  had  not
    provided conclusive evidence to show that the claimant was  removed  to
    Denmark at the Secretary of State's expense, although he accepted  that
    the claimant had not said in his witness statement that he travelled to
    Denmark or the Gambia at his own expense. However, at para  11  of  his
    statement, the claimant said that he informed the UK  authorities  that
    he would be happy to return to Denmark and that he was then removed  to
    Denmark. Mr Darboe submitted that this evidence was correctly  recorded
    at para 14 of the judge's decision where the judge said that "...  [the
    claimant] acknowledged that he was happy to return to Denmark,  and  he
    was removed the same day".

23. Mr Darboe asked me to note that not only did the  claimant  voluntarily
    return to Denmark, he returned voluntarily to the Gambia. On  returning
    to the Gambia,  he  waited  for  12  months  before  making  his  entry
    clearance application. This was in line with the decision in  PS.   The
    judge took these factors into account  in  considering  proportionality
    outside the Immigration Rules. He  also  emphasised  the  role  of  the
    sponsor in encouraging the claimant to return to the  Gambia  and  wait
    for 12 months. It would be counter-productive to ignore  all  this,  as
    the Upper Tribunal said in PS.

24. At para 22, the judge noted that the claimant withdrew his asylum claim
    after two hours and compared this with cases  in  which  the  claim  is
    pursued.

25. Mr Darboe submitted that the judge followed the approach at paras 40-41
    of the Court of Appeal's judgment in Entry  Clearance  Officer,  United
    States of America v MW (United States of  America)  and  others  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 1273 which deals with S-EC.1.4. At para 29  of  his  decision,
    the judge said that the magnitude of the claimant's offence should have
    been taken into account, that the prison sentence was  short  and  that
    there is no other criminality.

26. Mr Darboe submitted that the fact that the claimant  had  attempted  to
    enter the UK on false identity documents was not  such  as  to  justify
    excluding him for 5 years. PS is authority for  the  proposition  that,
    where an individual leaves the UK voluntarily and waits  for  a  period
    before making his entry clearance application, entry  clearance  should
    be granted where Article 8 would be engaged.

27. In response and in relation to ground 1, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted
     that, when paras 26 and 34 of the judge's decision are read  together,
    it is clear that the judge found that the decision was disproportionate
    due to the sponsor's career prospects.

28. In relation to ground 2, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the  judge
    incorrectly considered that the facts of the instant case were  similar
    to the facts in PS, whereas PS  was  fundamentally  different,  in  her
    submission. In PS, the claimant was present within the UK. He left  the
    UK voluntarily and made an entry clearance application. In the  instant
    case, the Secretary of State set removal directions and  paid  for  the
    claimant's flight. Although the claimant may not have been  disruptive,
    the fact is that he did not leave the UK on his own volition.

29. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that, although the judge  had  correctly
    recorded the claimant's evidence at para 14 of his decision, he said in
    terms and incorrectly at para 29 that the claimant had returned at  his
    own expense. He plainly made an error of fact. In the  alternative,  he
    speculated. Although the judge  gave  other  reasons  at  para  29  for
    finding that the discretion in para 320(11) should have been  exercised
    in the claimant's favour, the error he made as to whether the  claimant
    had left of his own volition was  material  to  his  decision  on  para
    320(11).

30. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that MW was irrelevant  in  the  instant
    case. Pursuant to paras 40-41 of MW, if  an  individual  was  convicted
    abroad of an act which is a crime in that country but not  in  the  UK,
    for example, engaging in a homosexual act, then the person  should  not
    be  excluded  under  para  320(11).  Similarly,  if  an  individual  is
    sentenced more harshly abroad for a crime that would attract  a  lesser
    sentence in the UK, one should take that into account. However, in  the
    instant case, it is not being suggested that a sentence of 40 days  was
    harsh when compared with the sentencing regime in the UK.  Accordingly,
    MW does not assist the  claimant.  Furthermore,  in  MW,  the  claimant
    freely admitted his convictions. In  the  instant  case,  the  claimant
    attempted to enter the UK in a carefully thought-out plan to secure his
    illegal admittance and illegal stay in the UK. The judge had failed  to
    consider the deterrent effect of para 320(11) in the  circumstances  of
    the instant case and  the  reason  why  the  discretion  had  not  been
    exercised by the Secretary of State in the claimant's favour.

Assessment

31. I shall first consider ground 2.

32. In relation to ground 2, the two documents  that  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    submitted (para 13 above) were not before the  judge.   I  shall  leave
    them to one side as I have concluded that it is not necessary for me to
    consider these documents.

33. At para 22 of his decision, the judge referred to the  claimant  having
    "voluntarily departed". He did not say whether he was referring to  the
    claimant's departure from the UK for  Denmark  or  his  departure  from
    Denmark to the Gambia. At para 29, the judge referred to  the  claimant
    having "returned at his own expense". Again, he did not make  it  clear
    whether he was referring to the claimant having returned to Denmark  at
    his own expense or to the Gambia at his own expense.

34. However, Mr Darboe accepted that the claimant had not  stated  anywhere
    in his witness statement that he had left the UK at his own expense.  I
    can see that the claimant did not state in his witness  statement  that
    he left Denmark for the Gambia at his own expense either. There was  no
    oral evidence before the judge.

35. Not only was there no evidence  in  the  claimant's  witness  statement
    before the judge to the effect that he left the UK for Denmark  at  his
    own expense or that he left Denmark for the Gambia at his own  expense,
    the judge had specific evidence before him to the contrary, as follows:

    (i)  A "Notice of Refusal of leave to enter", form "IS.82  No  AR  RLE"
         dated 25 May 2015. Under  the  heading  "Removal  Directions",  the
         following is stated:

         "I have given directions for your removal to  Denmark  by  flight:
             FR7408 to copengahen [sic] at 17:40 on 25/05/2015."

    (ii) In his application dated 13  June  2016,  the  claimant  gave  the
         following answers to questions 34-36:


         Qn 34:    Have  you  ever  been  deported,  removed  or  otherwise
                                         required  to  leave   any   country
                                         including the UK  in  the  last  10
                                         years?
         Answer:  Yes


         Qn 35:
         Country: UK
         Date of deportation/removal:   24 May 2015
         The port or airport:  Luton Airport
         Reason for Deportation/Removal:    Removed/Denied entry for  using
                                         false Belgium pass.


         Country: Denmark
         Date of deportation/removal:   08 Jul 2015
         The port or airport:  Copenhagen Airport
         Reason for Deportation/Removal:    Travelled there  with  a  false
                                         Belgium passport.


         Qn 36: Have you ever  voluntarily
         elected to depart the UK?  No

36. It is clear from the "Removal Directions" in the decision notice  dated
    25 May 2015 that the claimant's departure from the UK was  arranged  by
    an immigration officer. In light  of  this  fact,  the  most  that  can
    reasonably be inferred from para 11 of the claimant's witness statement
    where he said that he told the UK authorities that he "would  be  happy
    to return to Denmark" is that he indicated that he  would  not  disrupt
    his removal by the Secretary of State. In that sense, his  removal  may
    have been voluntarily but the decision notice dated 25 May  2015  shows
    that it cannot be said, as the judge plainly inferred, in referring  to
    the claimant's departure at his own expense, that he left  on  his  own
    volition, i.e. by making his own arrangements and at his own expense.

37. However, even if I am wrong in  what  I  have  said  in  the  preceding
    paragraph, it is clear from the claimant's answers to  questions  34-36
    that: (i) the claimant was deported or removed from  the  UK  and  from
    Denmark; and (ii) he had not voluntarily departed from the UK.

38. I am therefore  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by  either
    misapprehending the evidence before him or speculating in  the  absence
    of evidence, when he said that the claimant  had  departed  voluntarily
    and that he had done so at his own expense. I  am  therefore  satisfied
    that, in applying PS, the judge  gave  credit  on  this  issue  to  the
    claimant on a false basis.  Whereas  the  claimant  in  PS  had  indeed
    voluntarily departed the UK at his own expense, i.e. he  made  his  own
    arrangements and at his own expense, there was nothing in the  evidence
    before the judge that showed that the claimant in the instant case made
    his own arrangements to leave the UK or Denmark and/or that he  did  so
    at his own expense.

39. I turn to the judge's reasoning at paras 22 and 29 to the effect  that,
    as a consequence of the claimant having withdrawn his asylum claim  two
    hours after making it, he had caused the UK authorities  "virtually  no
    trouble, expense or inconvenience". Plainly, a frivolous  asylum  claim
    that is pursued for a long time  and  through  the  Courts  is  a  more
    serious matter than a frivolous asylum  claim  that  is  withdrawn  two
    hours later. However, speedy withdrawal of  a  frivolous  asylum  claim
    does not extinguish the public interest in ensuring that the system  of
    immigration control is not abused  by  the  making  of  such  frivolous
    applications. There is nothing in the judge's decision which shows that
    he recognised that a speedy withdrawal of a frivolous asylum claim does
    not extinguish the need to consider what weight should be given to  the
    fact that the individual has made a frivolous  application.  The  judge
    plainly failed to consider this issue. He therefore failed to take into
    account the public interest in the deterrent effect of para 320(11).

40. There is also nothing in the judge's decision which shows that he  took
    into account the fact that, if the claimant had not been apprehended at
    Luton airport, it was his intention to enter, and  remain  in,  the  UK
    illegally.

41. I am therefore satisfied that the judge failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant considerations, i.e. the  public  interest  in  deterring  the
    making of frivolous asylum claims and the public interest in  deterring
    people from illegally entering and remaining in the UK.

42. In summary, in relation to ground 2, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    erred in law as follows:

     (i) The judge erred in  law  by  either  misapprehending  the  evidence
         before him or speculating in the absence of evidence, when he  said
         that the claimant had departed voluntarily and that he had done  so
         at his own expense.

     (ii)     This led him to err,  further,  by  applying  PS  on  a  false
         basis.

     (iii)    He  failed  to  take  into  account  the  public  interest  in
         deterring the making of frivolous asylum claims.

     (iv)     He also failed to take into account  the  public  interest  in
         deterring people from illegally entering and remaining in the UK.

43. These errors are plainly material to his decision that  the  discretion
    under para 320(11) should have been exercised in the claimant's favour.
    This is because, when one strips away the reasoning that relates to the
    errors described above, one  is  left  with  the  following:  that  the
    claimant waited 12 months in  the  Gambia  before  making  his  current
    application, that the magnitude of the claimant's offence had not  been
    taken into account, that the prison sentence was short and  that  there
    was no other criminality. These  factors,  taken  cumulatively,  cannot
    compel a positive decision in the claimant's favour in the absence of a
    proper assessment of the public interest in deterrence.

44. I turn to ground 1.

45. The judge's error in relation to ground  2  in  failing  to  take  into
    account the public interest, as explained above, is  also  relevant  to
    ground 1, to which I now turn. The fact that the judge failed  to  take
    into account the public interest in deterring the making  of  frivolous
    asylum  claims  and  the  public  interest  in  deterring  people  from
    illegally entering and remaining in the UK is fatal to his decision  to
    allow the Article 8 claim  outside  the  Rules.  This  is  because  the
    balancing exercise in relation to proportionality  cannot  be  lawfully
    conducted otherwise.

46. In any event, even if I am wrong in this regard, it is clear  that  the
    judge found that it was unreasonable to expect the sponsor to  relocate
    to the Gambia because he accepted her evidence that she  would  not  be
    able to find employment  there  that  was  comparable  to  her  current
    employment. In reaching this finding, he relied upon the fact that  the
    claimant had said that he had found it difficult to find  work  in  the
    Gambia.

47. It is not clear what the judge meant by "comparable work",  whether  he
    was referring to the nature of the employment and career  prospects  or
    whether he was referring to  work  for  a  comparable  salary.  If  the
    latter, the judge failed to recognise that an  equivalent  standard  of
    living (even if that is the yardstick, which is not the  case)  may  be
    attainable in the Gambia at a lower salary. However, it has to be said,
    more importantly, that a lower standard of living does not  necessarily
    make it unreasonable to expect the sponsor to enjoy family life in  the
    Gambia with the claimant. It is often the case that it is  argued  that
    one or more persons affected by an adverse decision will not  have  the
    same employment or career prospects or earn  an  equivalent  salary  in
    another  country  outside  the  Rules.  Such  considerations  are   not
    generally  sufficient,   on   their   own,   to   render   a   decision
    disproportionate.  The  judge  did  not  explain  why   the   sponsor's
    circumstances compel a different outcome.

48.  Furthermore,  there  was  simply  no  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    substantiate the claimant's evidence that he had been  unable  to  find
    work and the sponsor's evidence that she would  not  be  able  to  find
    "comparable work".

49. Even if the sponsor was unable to obtain comparable work in the Gambia,
    which was  not  properly  evidenced  before  the  judge,  this  is  not
    reasonably sufficient on its own to displace the weight to be given  to
    the general public interest in immigration control.

50. Given the absence of any evidence, independent of both the claimant and
    the sponsor who have vested interests in the outcome of the appeal,  to
    substantiate their evidence that it would be difficult for them to find
    employment in the Gambia, I have concluded that,  notwithstanding  that
    the judge said at para 31  that  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control is always a weighty factor, the only reasonable inference  that
    can be drawn is that the judge placed no weight at all  on  the  public
    interest. I say this for the following reasons:

    (i)  At para 32, the judge took into account as positive factors in the
         claimant's favour, the fact that he speaks English and that he  and
         the sponsor are capable of maintaining themselves without  recourse
         to public funds, contrary to AM (S 117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
         (IAC) and Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803. At best,  these  are
         neutral factors.


    (ii) The whole of the judge's reasoning, save for para 31,  shows  that
         he was only focused on  factors  that  were  either  in  claimant's
         favour or that were, or  should  have  been  regarded  by  him  as,
         neutral.

51. Thus, save for the bare assertion at para 31, that the public  interest
    is a weighty consideration, there is nothing that  indicates  that  the
    judge in fact  considered  that  the  public  interest  was  a  weighty
    consideration in the instant case. In the absence  of  any  independent
    evidence of any  difficulties  experienced  by  the  claimant  and  the
    sponsor to find employment in the Gambia, he could  only  have  reached
    his decision, that the ECO's decision is disproportionate,  by  placing
    no weight or impermissibly very little weight on  the  public  interest
    contrary to what he said at para 31.

52. In summary, in relation to ground 1, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    erred in law as follows:

    (i)  The judge's material error of law  in  relation  to  his  decision
         under para 320(11) is fatal to his decision to allow the Article  8
         claim outside the Immigration Rules.

    (ii) In any event,  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate to the Gambia on the
         basis of her  evidence  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  obtain
         comparable employment in the Gambia.

    (iii)     Furthermore,  the  judge  erred  in  placing  no  weight   or
         impermissibly little weight on the public interest contrary to what
         he said at para 31 of his decision.

53. I am satisfied that these errors  are  each  material  to  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal on the basis  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

54. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of Judge Kimnell
    in its entirety.

55. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:


         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or
         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

56. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b). In addition,  given
    that the claimant won his appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kimnell  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that his decision  is  set  aside  in
its entirety. This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
hearing on the merits on all issues by a  judge  other  than  Judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Kimnell.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 12 February 2018
