





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23595/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 11 February 2019                 |On: 6 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                              Ms Sumitra Gurung
                        anonymity direction NOT made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, counsel, instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nepal,  born  on  5  January  1990.  She
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge who, in a decision promulgated on 19  September  2018,  dismissed
    her appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse her  application
    for entry clearance to join her parents in the UK. Her father is an ex-
    Gurkha soldier.


 2. After he retired in 1994 he lived with his family until  2008  when  he
    went to Brunei to work as  a  security  guard  until  March  2015.  The
    sponsor and his  family  were  granted  settlement  in  the  UK  on  13
    September 2009. The sponsor initially came to the UK on 14 January 2013
    to activate his visa. He returned to Brunei for employment and came  to
    the UK on 10 August 2014 to help settle his wife and son who arrived on
    11 August 2014. He returned to Brunei on 18 August 2014 and  then  went
    to Nepal in March 2015 staying with the appellant until he came to  the
    UK in August 2015.


 3. The appellant is the oldest of her parents' three children. She applied
    for entry clearance to join her parents as their dependant on  8  April
    2016.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the sponsor's oral evidence  to  be
    credible. He accepted that there has been financial  contribution  over
    the years from the appellant's parents. With regard to the evidence for
    emotional dependency,  the  sponsor's  oral  evidence  was  general  in
    nature. The sponsor stated that they have taken all major decisions  in
    relation to the appellant's life. Whilst accepting that this  may  have
    been the case when she was at school studying, the Judge did not accept
    that the sponsor showed any real examples of where  the  appellant  had
    needed her parents' emotional support, such as in making life decisions
    since she had been living alone [19].


 5. Their conversations were more around providing  reassurance  that  they
    would be reunited in time once the entry clearance application had been
    concluded. There was no suggestion that the appellant  could  not  live
    alone, or was finding that aspect  difficult.  Nor  did  she  have  any
    medical issues. There did not  appear  to  be  any  need  for  specific
    emotional support beyond that shared between close family members [18].


 6. He reminded himself that the appellant is in her late 20s and in normal
    circumstances it would be unusual for grown adults to be so emotionally
    dependent  on  their  parents,  even  taking  into   account   cultural
    differences without some psychological reason which he was not provided
    with [20].


 7. He considered that the appellant has lived  alone  for  the  last  four
    years and did not require any further support from her  parents  beyond
    the necessary financial support. He had regard to the decision  of  Sir
    Stanley Burnton in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 that the  love  and
    affection between an adult and his parents  or  siblings  will  not  of
    itself justify a finding of family life.  There  has  to  be  something
    more.


 8. He appreciated that this is a case of historic injustice.  The  sponsor
    and the appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  but  for
    the  historic  injustice.  However,  on  current  case  law,   historic
    injustice can only be remedied in cases such as these where  the  Court
    finds that family life ties between an adult child and parent remains.


 9. He found that her ties to her parents cannot currently be  regarded  as
    amounting to family life. He stated that if he had found that the  ties
    between the appellant and her parents still amounted  to  family  life,
    despite her age, then the historic  injustice  would  have  led  to  an
    outcome in the appellant's favour [25].


10. On 31 December 2018, Resident Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Zucker
    granted the appellant permission to appeal on  the  basis  that  it  is
    arguable that the Judge erred in assessing the quality of  family  life
    which needs to be established in adult dependent Gurkha case.


11. Mr Jaisri submitted that the Judge did not adopt the  correct  approach
    in assessing whether family life existed in this case. He  referred  to
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in Rai v Entry  Clearance  Officer:
    New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.


12. At [42], Lord Justice Lindblom stated that:


         "Those circumstances of the appellant and his family, all  of  them
         uncontentious, and including - perhaps crucially - the fact that he
         and his parents would have applied at the same time  for  leave  to
         enter the United Kingdom and would have come to the United  Kingdom
         together as a family unit had they been able to afford to do so, do
         not appear to have been grappled with by the Upper  Tribunal  judge
         under article 8(1). In my view they should have been. They went  to
         the heart of the matter: the question of whether, even  though  the
         appellant's parents had chosen to leave  Nepal  to  settle  in  the
         United Kingdom when they did, his family life with  them  subsisted
         then, and was still subsisting at the time of the Upper  Tribunal's
         decision. This was the critical question under article  8(1).  Even
         on the most benevolent reading of his determination, I do not think
         one can say that the Upper Tribunal judge properly addressed it."

13. Mr Jaisri submitted that the approach set out in the case law  was  not
    applied to the facts in the appellant's  case.  The  Tribunal  did  not
    assess whether family life existed at the time that the sponsor and his
    wife left Nepal and whether it was still subsisting.


14. Moreover, the Judge erred in stating that they left  knowing  that  the
    appellant would not automatically qualify for entry, even if  this  did
    amount to a compromise that he had no choice but to  accept.  They  had
    lived apart for four years and  he  thus  questions  how  relevant  the
    custom is to him, having unmarried children living with their  parents.
    The ongoing financial support given to the appellants by their  parents
    was not enough to lead to a decision that  there  remains  family  life
    [23].


15. Mr Jaisri also relied on ground 3. He contended that the Judge erred in
    failing to make the assessment of "committed", "real"  and  "effective"
    support, and suggested that  there  was  a  need  to  find  a  specific
    emotional support beyond that shared between close family members [19].


16. That, he submitted, departed from the decision in the Court  of  Appeal
    with regard to the "committed", "real" and "effective"  test  that  was
    correctly identified. He submitted that the family lived  as  a  family
    unit before the sponsor and  his  wife  came  to  the  UK.  There  were
    subsequently visits which occurred and effective support since then.


17.  On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Ms  Pal  submitted  that  the  Judge
    acknowledged that the appellant's parents played an important  part  in
    her life while they were living together. [19] There was  at  least  an
    implicit  finding  that  they  accordingly  played  an  important   and
    significant role in her life.


18. She referred to  [18]  where  the  Judge  found  that  there  had  been
    financial contribution over the years from the appellant.


19. She referred to the appellant's bundle at 195-199, where  her  father's
    bank statements from his Standard Chartered Bank account were produced.
    The appellant had access to that account, including  the  period  2016-
    2017 which post-dated the decision.  Her father gave her a card to draw
    money from his account.


20. Ms Pal referred to the Western Union receipts produced at  pages  57-63
    showing transfers from the sponsor  to  the  appellant  in  Nepal.  The
    reason why ATM withdrawals occurred only from 2017  was  because  there
    was a  cheque  book  system  at  the  time.  The  ATM  was  only  later
    introduced. Prior to  2017  he  had  signed  cheques  for  her  to  use
    according to her requirements.


21. Ms Pal also referred to the sponsor's evidence that he  has  frequently
    travelled to Nepal to see her and has left cash for her to use for  her
    expenses.  He and his wife had recently travelled to see her. They left
    the UK on 15 October 2017 and arrived in Nepal the following  day,  and
    then returned to the UK on 14 November  2017.  His  wife  stayed  there
    longer, only returning on 28 January 2018. During the stay, they looked
    after the appellant and spent time as a family.


22. Ms Pal stated that it is 'difficult to submit' adequate  findings  were
    made with regard to family life, and particularly those that he made at
    [24].










    Assessment


23. In her witness statement, the appellant stated that her parents did not
    include her in an application when they made their application, as  she
    was over the age of 18. At that time 'the policy for under 30 dependent
    policy was not published'. After that policy was issued, it became more
    broad and flexible.


24. She also stated that she was not working in Nepal and did she  lead  an
    independent life. She was dependent on her parents. She has no job  and
    no independent life in Nepal. She tried to look for a job  without  any
    success.


25. When her parents went to settle in the UK, family life  with  them  was
    subsisting. Further, it subsisted at the date of the  hearing.  On  the
    evidence presented, the appellant did not found an  independent  family
    life of her own. Nor had she found employment. She remained part  of  a
    family unit even after her parents settled in the UK.


26. Ms Pal properly accepts that the Judge has not made  adequate  findings
    with regard to the nature  and  extent  of  family  life  that  existed
    between the appellant and her parents.


27. In the circumstances, I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    made errors of law. I accordingly set aside the decision.


28. The parties agreed at the  hearing  that  there  would  have  to  be  a
    complete re-hearing. The extent of judicial fact finding  necessary  in
    order for the decision to be re-made is extensive.


29. In the circumstances I find that this a proper case  to  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.






    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision is set aside.


    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for  a
    fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


    Anonymity direction not made.






    Signed                                  Date 1 March 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

