
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23765/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|On 8 July 2019                   |
|On 23 May 2019                            |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                    mr L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Goldborough, Solicitor of Julia & Rana
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                 DECISION AS TO ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Ghana who was  born  on  25
    June 1990.  He applied for permission to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of his Article 8 private and family life, which application was refused
    in September 2016.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and  but  his  appeal  was
    dismissed following a hearing before First-tier Judge Kaler sitting  at
    Taylor House on 19 February 2018.  The respondent was  not  represented
    at that hearing.

 3. The appellant then appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  pursuant  to  leave
    which had been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, but following a
    hearing before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I Murray at Field  House  on
    15 August 2018, in a decision and reasons  dated  31  August  2018  and
    promulgated shortly afterwards, Judge Murray dismissed the appeal.

 4. Both Judge Kaler and Judge Murray had relied upon a  previous  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  which  was
    found to have been wrongly decided by the Supreme  Court  in  its  very
    recent decision in KO.

 5. For this reason the decision was reviewed by Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill
    pursuant to Rule 46 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 on the basis that the law had subsequently changed.

 6. The appeal was then again put before the Upper  Tribunal  and  it  came
    before me on 21 February 2019 when I found that Judge Kaler's  decision
    had contained a material error of law.  I made my decision orally  (and
    it was subsequently sent to the parties in writing)  and  much  of  the
    foregoing and  below  of  necessity  repeats  what  was  said  in  that
    decision.  I noted that on behalf of the respondent,  very  fairly  and
    entirely professionally, Mr Whitwell,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer who had represented the respondent at that hearing  had  stated
    as follows:

         "In short, Judge Kaler arguably misdirected herself at paragraph 24
         with regard to MA (Pakistan), when stating that she was relying  on
         what was stated in this  case  to  the  effect  that  'a  court  or
         Tribunal should not simply focus  on  the  child  but  should  have
         regard to the wider public interest considerations,  including  the
         conduct and immigration history of the parents'.  The  judge  seems
         to have misdirected herself there, and the application of that goes
         to paragraph 26, where the judge referred to 'whether it is in  the
         best interests of the children that the  appellant  be  allowed  to
         remain in the UK in light of his past actions  and  behaviour'  [Mr
         Whitwell's emphasis]".

 7. I also noted in my error of law decision that Mr Whitwell had continued
    by saying as follows:

         "That is not my only concern.  More importantly, at  paragraph  27,
         the judge does not answer  the  question  set  out  within  Section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  of
         whether it is reasonable for a British child to leave the UK.  That
         is wrong, as is now clear from the decision of the Supreme Court in
         KO (which obviously the judge was unaware of) and Judge I.  Murray,
         who also was wrong because she too made her decision (relying on MA
         (Pakistan)) prior to the decision of the Supreme Court in KO."

 8. At the previous hearing Mr Goldborough, who represented  the  appellant
    then as he does at this hearing today informed the Tribunal that  there
    had been some changes in circumstances concerning the appellant and the
    children and it was now the case that the appellant currently (that  is
    at that stage) lives separately from the children, who continue to live
    with their mother, but that he did engage with  all  the  children  (of
    which one is his biological child and the other, it is accepted, he has
    a parental relationship with) and sees them on a daily basis.

 9. I noted in my previous decision as to error of law that there would  be
    no question of the mother moving to Ghana to live  with  the  appellant
    together with her children and that it would be  the  appellant's  case
    that in these circumstances whatever might ultimately be considered  to
    be the effect of the Supreme Court decision in KO this would not  be  a
    case where it could ever be said  to  be  "reasonable"  to  expect  the
    British child (who it is conceded  is  a  qualifying  child  for  these
    purposes  as  it  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a   parental
    relationship with that  child)  to  leave  the  UK.   However,  it  was
    appropriate to have up-to-date reports from Social Services with regard
    to these children, and accordingly  the  hearing  was  adjourned  until
    today in order for reports to be before the Tribunal.

10. The Social Services reports cause this Tribunal some  concern,  because
    it is clear from these reports that the parents, that is the biological
    mother and this appellant, who is the biological father of one  of  the
    children and as noted above fulfils the role of a father in respect  of
    the other, are not, certainly in the view  of  Social  Services,  ideal
    parents.  I set out what is stated within a  very  detailed  assessment
    report, what  is  felt  by  Social  Services  to  be  the  "reason  for
    Children's Services involvement and any previous history" as follows:

         "The children have been open to Children's Services since 2013  due
         to concerns in relation to [the mother's] ability to care  for  her
         daughter, ability to  prioritise  the  children's  needs  and  [the
         mother's] decision to expose S to contact with adults that she does
         not know and not following professional advice.   There  have  been
         further  concerns  about  domestic  abuse   within   the   parents'
         relationship,  concerns  of   physical   chastisement   from   [the
         appellant],  [the  appellant's]  alcohol  misuse,   both   parents'
         inability to prioritise the children's safety needs, poor  parental
         mental health, lack of candidness in working with professionals and
         [the mother's] lack of ability to understand the consequence of her
         actions and her inability to prioritise [S's] health  appointments.
         [The mother] is a former Child Looked After  and  there  have  been
         previous concerns about her ability to provide basic care needs  to
         S.".

    Effectively, therefore, this Tribunal s faced with  a  situation  where
    the appellant while regarded as  a  potentially  unsuitable  parent  is
    nonetheless the biological  parent  of  one  child  and  is  exercising
    parental responsibility in respect of the other in circumstances  where
    the children are qualifying children as defined in Section  117D(1)  of
    the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, the Tribunal has to have regard to  Section
    117B(6) which states in terms that:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

11. Following the decision of the Supreme Court in KO, it might be arguable
    that were this a normal family it would be reasonable  to  expect  both
    the parents and the children, notwithstanding the  British  citizenship
    of at least one of the children, to return to Ghana with their parents.
     There are however in this case two difficulties.  The  first  is  that
    the mother might not be able to because of her personal history,  which
    it is neither appropriate nor necessary to go into, for the purposes of
    this decision; it is sufficient to note that she apparently has refugee
    status in this country because of that history.  Secondly,  and  rather
    more importantly, in light of the involvement of Social Services in the
    children's life, it would not be reasonable to expect the children, one
    of whom at least is entitled as a British  citizen  to  the  protection
    that she receives from the involvement of  Social  Services,  to  leave
    this country to be with parents who are possibly unable to cope unaided
    without the assistance of Social Services in circumstances where to  do
    so might effectively place them in danger.

12. It may be that the children's best interests  would  be  better  served
    were this appellant to be removed from their lives given the  criticism
    of  his  methods  of  discipline,  as  expressed  by  Social  Services.
    However, even if this were the case,  by  section  117B(6)  the  public
    interest does not require the removal of someone who has a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying  child,  as  this
    appellant has, in circumstances where it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect that child  to  leave  the  UK  (and  because  of  the  need  of
    continuing involvement by Social Services  it  would  not  be  in  this
    case).  So even if it might be arguable that the best interests of  the
    children would not necessitate the appellant remaining, by statute, the
    public interest does not require his removal.  In these  circumstances,
    as he has a family life in this country, and the public  interest  does
    not require his removal, it cannot  be  proportionate  to  do  so.  His
    appeal must accordingly be allowed under Article 8  and  this  Tribunal
    must so find.  Accordingly, this Tribunal makes the following decision.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside as  containing
a material error of law, the appellant's appeal is  allowed,  under  Article
8.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 June 2019





























