
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23938/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2019                  |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                simarjit kaur
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsey, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by Cooper Tuff
Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department   (hereafter
         Appellant) appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal Hoffman (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated  on  28
         May 2019, allowed the appeal  of  Ms  Kaur  (hereafter  Respondent)
         against the Appellant's decision of 13 November 2018 to refuse  her
         application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.



Background

      2. The Respondent is a national of  India,  born  in  June  1956.  She
         entered the UK on 18 June 2005 as a visitor. She remained in the UK
         after the expiry of her entry clearance.

      3. The Respondent,  who  left  school  at  a  young  age  and  who  is
         illiterate, was subjected to domestic  violence  from  her  husband
         when she lived in India. The domestic violence was perpetrated over
         a long period of time and sometimes occurred in the presence of the
         Respondent's children. The Respondent has no money or  property  in
         her name, has never worked and has no qualifications.

      4. The Respondent's daughter was married when she was 18 years old  to
         a British citizen in 1997 and she entered the UK in March 1998. She
         has two children born in October  2001  and  March  2004.  After  a
         particularly violent incident of domestic violence in October  2004
         the Respondent's daughter made arrangements for her mother to visit
         the UK. Although the Respondent did not intend to remain in the  UK
         the sense of safety she experienced in this country and her growing
         anticipation of the  abuse  she  feared  would  continue  from  her
         husband caused her  to  overstay.  She  remained  living  with  her
         daughter and helped raise and look after her grandchildren.

      5. The Respondent's youngest son arrived in the UK in April  2011  and
         was granted leave to remain on 13  March  2015  under  the  10-year
         partner route. He had a son born in June 2014  and  the  respondent
         moved into her son's property in order to help with the  child  who
         suffered from eczema and to do the cooking  and  household  chores.
         Another grandchild was then born. The Respondent continues to  have
         a  close  relationship  with  her  two  children   and   her   four
         grandchildren.

      6. On 20 November 2015 the Respondent made a human  rights  claim  for
         leave to remain but this was refused and certified  under  S.94  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  After  further
         representations  the  Appellant  refused  the   application   under
         paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules. The  Appellant  was  not
         satisfied there were very significant obstacles to the Respondent's
         integration in India given that she lived in the country until  the
         age of 49, spoke Punjabi and would have retained knowledge  of  how
         life was carried on and the culture of the country.  The  Appellant
         acknowledged  that  the  Respondent   was   caring   for   her   to
         grandchildren  but  found  that   she   did   not   have   parental
         responsibility as this laid with the Respondent's  adult  children.
         In reaching her decision the Appellant had regard to  s.55  of  the
         Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.  The  Appellant
         acknowledged the Respondent's claimed to be a  victim  of  domestic
         violence but considered that she could move to another part of  the
         country. The Respondent's  family  and  friends  in  the  UK  could
         provide her with financial support. The Respondent had not made  an
         asylum  claim  and  this  was  an  option  available  to  her.  The
         Respondent  exercised  her  right  of  appeal  under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge  had  before  him  a  number  of  documents  including  a
         statement from the Respondent,  statements  from  the  respondent's
         daughter and son, and two expert country  reports  authored  by  Dr
         Livia Holden, the first written in September 2016, and the addendum
         report written on 30 April 2019. The judge also  had  a  report  by
         Peter Horrocks, and Independent Social Worker,  dated  21  February
         2019.

      8. The judge set out the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  and  s.117B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  properly
         directed himself in respect of the burden and  standard  of  proof.
         The judge heard oral evidence from  the  Respondent  and  her  son.
         Their  evidence  was  also  subject  to  cross-examination   by   a
         Presenting Officer. The judge summarised the submissions from  both
         representatives.

      9. In the section of his decision headed 'Findings of fact' the  judge
         accepted that the Respondent was  a  victim  of  domestic  violence
         perpetrated from her husband in India. There has been no  challenge
         to this factual finding. From [38]  onwards  the  judge  considered
         whether there were any 'very significant obstacles' preventing  the
         Respondent from returning to India. The  judge  noted  Dr  Holden's
         evidence that women who did  not  comply  with  their  male  family
         members were said to bring dishonour to the family  and  that  this
         could lead to ostracism or even honour killings.  The  judge  noted
         that the Respondent left her husband in  India  in  2005  and  that
         there had been no suggestion that she had been  ostracised  by  her
         family either in the UK or  India.  The  judge  did  not  therefore
         accept that the Respondent was likely to be ostracised by  her  own
         family, and in particular her sister, if she returned to  India  on
         the basis that she left her husband.

     10. At [42] the judge referred to Dr Holden's assessment concerning the
         lack of proper shelters in India. The judge found however that  the
         Respondent would be able to live with her sister in India and  that
         her children in  the  UK  would  make  financial  contributions  to
         mitigate any risk that the Respondent would  be  a  burden  on  her
         sister. At [43] the judge noted Dr Holden's assessment that poverty
         continued to be a decisive factor in the quality  of  life  of  the
         elderly in India but found that, as the Respondent would be able to
         live with her sister, she  was  unlikely  to  become  destitute  on
         return.

     11. At [44] the judge  was  however  satisfied  that  the  Respondent's
         husband would discover, through family members or friends, that she
         had returned if she went to live with her sister. The  judge  found
         that, in the circumstances, the Respondent was likely to be subject
         to further abuse from her husband. At [45] the judge stated,

             "It is important to note that the [Appellant] has  not  sought
             to challenge  either  of  Dr  Holden's  reports,  not  in  the
             decision letter or at the hearing. I have carefully considered
             Dr Holden's  most  recent  report  where  she  writes  of  the
             difficulties that women face in seeking  protection  from  the
             Indian authorities: see paragraphs 29 to 45. At paragraphs 29-
             31, Dr Holden writes that the [sic] it is difficult for  women
             and [sic] India to bring domestic abuse cases to court due  to
             an inadequate legal aid system, a poor disposal rate in courts
             for crimes against women and a lack of protection officers. At
             paragraphs 36 to 39, Dr  Holden  refers  to  inefficiency  and
             corruption of the police. At paragraph 40,  Dr  Holden  writes
             about the fear that women in India have  of  reporting  family
             problems too, and, at paragraph  41,  about  general  lack  of
             trust that women have of the (mostly male) police. I therefore
             conclude that if the [Respondent's] husband  was  to  discover
             that she had returned to the Punjab, it is unlikely  that  the
             [Respondent] could seek adequate redress from the authorities.
             Furthermore, the [Respondent's] brother has  moved  to  Canada
             and she would be living  in  an  all-female  house  while  her
             nephew works in Dubai, which means they would be no males  you
             could offer some level of protection from her husband."

     12. At [46] the judge stated,

             "... finally, I find that it would not be reasonable to expect
             the [Respondent] to relocate to another part  of  India.  Were
             she to do so, in the absence of family to live  with,  I  find
             that it  would  be  likely  that  she  would  be  forced  into
             destitution for the reasons set out in Dr Holden's reports."

     13. The  judge  then  considered  the  ISW's  report  relating  to  the
         Respondent's relationship with her son's  two  children  but  found
         that this was the sort of relationship that one  would  expect  the
         average grandmother to have. The judge found  that  the  Respondent
         was not the primary carer of the children and that, whilst  it  was
         in the best interests of the children for the Respondent to  remain
         in the UK, this  was  not  a  paramount  consideration.  The  judge
         stated,

             "Absent my findings of fact in relation to the risk  that  the
             [Respondent's] husband would pose to her in India, on its  own
             I would not have been satisfied that the best interests of the
             [Respondents]'s grandsons would  have  outweighed  the  public
             interest in her removal."

     14. At [50] the judge concluded that,  although  the  Respondent  could
         live with her sister in India and be financially supported  by  her
         children in the UK, her husband was likely to try to abuse her were
         she to return there  and  that  the  Indian  authorities  would  be
         unlikely to provide her with an adequate degree  of  protection  or
         legal redress against him. The judge found that this amounted to  a
         very significant obstacle to her integration back into Indian life.
         He found that the Respondent met  the  requirements  for  leave  to
         remain  on  the   grounds   of   private   life   under   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi). The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.



The challenge to the judge's decision

     15. The written grounds contend that the judge "failed to  utilise  any
         objective evidence relating to the availability of  protection  for
         the [Respondent] from her husband and that there are no significant
         obstacles to her return to India." The written grounds contend that
         the judge failed to provide adequate reasons  as  to  why  internal
         relocation would not be a viable option. Given that the  Respondent
         and her husband have lived apart since  2005  the  judge's  finding
         that the authorities were unlikely to offer her protection in India
         was speculative. The judge failed to  refer  to  "recent  objective
         evidence" in  his  determination.  Country  information  for  India
         apparently indicated that  the  authorities  would  offer  adequate
         protection to the Respondent. The Respondent could return to  India
         and live with her sister and receive  financial  support  from  her
         son.

     16. In granting permission judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  P  J  M
         Hollingworth found it arguable that  the  judge  gave  insufficient
         reasoning  on  the  issue  of  protection  and  made   insufficient
         reference to "objective material in this context."

     17. In his oral submissions Mr Lindsey accepted that the Appellant  had
         not provided any "objective evidence" to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         and that no application had been  made  to  adduce  any  background
         country evidence pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Whilst it was not problematic for  the
         judge  to  rely  on  the  country  expert's  report,  it  was   not
         sufficiently clear which of the reasons  contained  in  the  expert
         report were relied on by the judge in concluding, at [46], that the
         Respondent would be destitute if she was unable to  live  with  her
         sister. The judge had already found that the Respondent's  children
         in the UK could financially support her and there was  no  adequate
         finding as to why the  children  would  be  unable  to  financially
         support their mother even if she was not living with family members
         in India. It was submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
         substance of the guidance provided in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ
         813.

     18. Mr MacKenzie relied on his Rule 24  Response.  There  had  been  no
         challenge to the judge's finding that the Respondent was  a  victim
         of domestic violence. The judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
         Respondent's husband would locate her and abuse her if she went  to
         live  with  her  sister.  The   judge   properly   considered   the
         unchallenged expert reports and was entitled to accept the expert's
         opinion that the  Respondent  would  be  unable  to  seek  adequate
         protection from the authorities. Dr Holden explained in her  report
         why the Respondent could not obtain protection from the authorities
         or move to another part of India, in particular because  she  would
         be socially excluded and stigmatised, and the judge was entitled to
         accept the expert's opinion. Extracts from  the  CPIN  had  in  any
         event been provided to the judge in the skeleton argument and these
         supported  the  expert's  conclusions.  Dr   Holden's   conclusions
         relating to the possibility of the  Respondent  living  in  another
         part of India did not depend on any financial support  provided  to
         her.

     19. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     20. There is no merit in  the  contention  that  the  judge  failed  to
         consider "objective evidence" in reaching his conclusion. The judge
         demonstrably relied on the expert country  report  to  support  his
         conclusions. The Appellant did not make any reference to background
         evidence such as the CPIN or human rights reports  in  the  Reasons
         for Refusal Letter, and the  Appellant  does  not  appear  to  have
         provided the First-tier Tribunal with  any  such  evidence  at  the
         hearing on 3 May 2019. It was open to the Appellant to provide  her
         own evidence concerning the situation for separated or single women
         in India but she failed to do so. A judge can only make a  decision
         on the basis of the evidence made  available  to  him  or  her.  Dr
         Holden carefully examined the state protection available  to  women
         in India and concluded that there was a lack of effective means  to
         protect women  from  domestic  violence.  She  considered  evidence
         relating to corruption and inefficiency within the police force and
         gave examples of recent cases of police failures. Given the absence
         of any challenge to Dr Holden's standing as an  expert,  and  given
         that her report was properly referenced, the judge was entitled  to
         attach weight to the expert's conclusions.

     21. Nor is it made out that the judge failed to consider the  financial
         contributions that could be  provided  from  the  Respondent's  two
         children  in  the  UK.  The  judge  specifically  considered   this
         financial  contribution  at  [42]  and  [43]  in  relation  to  the
         possibility of  the  Respondent  living  with  her  sister.  It  is
         unlikely  that  the  judge  would  have  failed  to  consider   the
         possibility financial contributions  three  paragraphs  later  when
         considering whether there were very significant  obstacles  to  the
         Respondent integrating into Indian society if she moved to  another
         part of the country. The judge specifically relied on  Dr  Holden's
         reports in reaching this conclusion. Although the judge could  have
         more clearly articulated the  specific  reasons  identified  by  Dr
         Holden it is readily apparent from the expert's 1st report that the
         Respondent, if she wanted to relocate, would be met with  suspicion
         and hostility as a single woman with no family network,  especially
         in medium and lower income neighbourhoods. Newcomers  were  heavily
         questioned on their ethnicity, caste, family, belonging and reasons
         for relocating and Dr Holden referred to  the  stigma  attached  to
         single women in India and that single  women  in  particular  faced
         multiple barriers to their access to and use of public and  private
         healthcare services in both rural and  urban  areas  of  India.  Dr
         Holden also considered evidence relating to the neglect  and  abuse
         of elderly women  in  India,  and  that  the  Respondent  would  be
         considered to be an elderly woman. In her addendum report Dr Holden
         further described the problems facing  the  elderly  in  India  and
         concluded that the Respondent, who  is  illiterate  and  lacks  the
         support from relatives within the country,  would  be  at  risk  of
         abuses and violence if relocating to another part of  the  country.
         As a lone woman she would be vulnerable and would  be  unlikely  to
         obtain support from the general public in the  Indian  context.  In
         her reports Dr Holden described the inadequacy of existing shelters
         to respond  to  the  demands  of  single  women  and  women  headed
         households, and that reliance on the private sector  has  generated
         an even  greater  discrimination  of  these  vulnerable  groups  in
         society. It is apparent from the judge's reliance  on  Dr  Holden's
         reports that there were other powerful factors at play unrelated to
         financial support entitling him to conclude  that  this  particular
         Respondent would face very significant obstacles in integrating  if
         she  moved  to  another  part  of  India.  This  was  a  conclusion
         rationally open to the judge for the reasons he gave.  The  judge's
         conclusions were also consistent with the broad evaluative judgment
         necessary assessing integration for particular individuals.  Whilst
         another judge may have reached a different conclusion on the  basis
         of different background evidence provided by the parties, it cannot
         be said that this judge reached a conclusion not open to him on the
         evidence before him.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain an error on a  point  of
law requiring it to be set aside.

The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum                                  4 September 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
