
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/23188/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd January 2020                           |On 14th  February 2020        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               Mr amir gurung
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Nepalese national born  on  8th  February  1993  and
    appeals against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen
    who dismissed his appeal against the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (the "Entry Clearance Officer") dated 26th October  2018.   The
    ECO had refused to grant him entry clearance to settle in the UK as the
    adult dependent relative of  Mrs  Ram  Kumari  Gurung  his  mother  and
    sponsor, who is a widow of a former Ghurkha soldier.   The  application
    was  considered  under  paragraph  EC-DR1.1  of  Appendix  FM  of   the
    Immigration Rules and refused under  the  Home  Secretary's  policy  as
    outlined in Annex K IDI Chapter 15 Section 2A 13.2 as  amended  on  5th
    January 2015.

 2. In sum, the respondent was not satisfied that the relationship  between
    the adults constituted family life and found that any family life could
    continue in the manner currently enjoyed without  interference  by  the
    decision.

 3. This matter had previously been the subject of appeal in 2011 not least
    because as at the date of  application  the  matter  fell  outside  the
    applicable Immigration Rules and the  continued  exclusion  was  not  a
    breach of the United Kingdom's international obligations under  Article
    8.  This decision however referred to the authorities prior to  Ghising
    and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs : historic  wrong:  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  567
    which followed Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Jitendra  Rai  v
    ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Cohen recorded in his determination that on the day
    of the appeal he had two similar cases in which Everest Law  Solicitors
    were acting and he  noted  two  identical  paragraphs  in  the  witness
    statements of the different cases.

 5. The judge recorded  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  stating  that  she
    remitted  funds  to  the  appellant  every  two  to  three  months  for
    approximately �50 and that the sponsor needed to go to Nepal to  access
    her pension there.  She sometimes used the "Hundi" system.  The sponsor
    under cross-examination confirmed that she did not have evidence of the
    appellant seeking employment and  he  was  educated  to  higher  school
    level.  She stated her son had never worked.

 6. The judge made the following findings:

    (1)    There was no provision under the Immigration Rules or policy for
         leave to enter to be granted.

    (2)    The appellant was the adult child of the widow of a Ghurkha.

    (3)    He would need to show  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances
         warranting his appeal being allowed (paragraph 25).

    (4)    It  was  argued  that  the  appellant  was  totally  financially
         dependent upon the sponsor but there was no  evidence  to  indicate
         why it was necessary for him to be totally financially dependent as
         the appellant was educated and in good  health  and  there  was  no
         reason why he could not find some form of gainful  employment.   He
         lived with his older divorced sister (paragraph 26).

    (6)    The sponsor gave unconvincing evidence why  he  could  not  find
         work and the judge observed that it was "within my knowledge and  I
         put it to the parties that the unemployment rate in Nepal  is  just
         4% and the fact that he lived close to town made his  prospects  of
         gaining employment better". (paragraph 27).

    (7)    The sponsor provided some money transfers showing remittance  of
         funds and it was submitted that other funds were  remitted  through
         the "Hundi" system but 'there  was  no  evidence  to  support  that
         claim'.  The judge did not accept that the appellant was  'entirely
         dependent on the sponsor over the course of  the  period  that  the
         sponsor had been in the UK'.  The sponsor had  three  children  who
         were all remaining in Nepal and she was reliant on a  very  limited
         income in the UK herself.

    (8)    The appellant's bank account had not been submitted.   This  was
         indicative that he was working (paragraph 29).

    (9)    The evidence of contact between the appellant and the mother was
         unexceptional and not beyond the norm (paragraph 30).

    (10)   The sponsor was working in the UK  and  self-supporting  and  in
         good health.

    (11)   The judge rejected the evidence of the sponsor in  part  because
         of the duplicated paragraphs in the sponsor's witness statement and
         that of another appeal (paragraph 32)

    (12)   The father died prior to completing his service and this was put
         into  the  balancing  exercise   in   relation   to   compassionate
         circumstances and the judge did not find  historical  injustice  in
         this case had significant weight because  the  father  died  before
         completing his service and thus it did not fall within Ghising.

    (13)   The judge specifically found that  family  life  did  not  exist
         between the parties or that the relationship between the  appellant
         and his adult relative in the UK extended beyond normal family ties
         bearing in mind he lived with his divorced sister and her  children
         and had formed an independent life in Nepal.  The judge found  that
         the appellant was working and they had  not  lived  together  since
         2010.  He lived with other family members. The appellant could keep
         contact through family visits and modern means of communication.

    (14)   The judge  did  not  find  the  appellant's  circumstances  were
         exceptional compassionate circumstances or would  be  allowed  with
         reference to R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11.

 7. The grounds of appeal were as follows:

       i) There was a failure to apply the correct  test  for  family  life
          between adults.  The  correct  question  was  whether  there  was
          support between the appellant and sponsor his mother,  which  was
          "real", "effective" or "committed" as set out in Jitendra  Rai  v
          Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA  Civ  320  at  paragraph  17.
          Whether it was of need or choice, whole or partial replaceable or
          not, arguably related to proportionality, not matters which  went
          to whether Article 8(1) was engaged.  It  was  not  necessary  to
          look for something extraordinary  or  exceptional  featuring  the
          appellant's  dependence  upon  his   parents   as   a   necessary
          determinant of the existence of  family  life  with  them.   That
          elevated the threshold of "support" that is "real" or "committed"
          or "effective" too high.  It was  also  set  out  that  what  may
          constitute extant family life fell well short of what constituted
          dependency.

          The appeal added that the judge failed to have proper  regard  to
          the  established  binding  case  law  of   Ghising   and   Others
          (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic  wrong:  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  567  and
          Gurung  and  Others   [2013]   EWCA   Civ   8   in   respect   of
          proportionality.  The  judge  conflated  the  issues  of  whether
          family  life  existed  and  proportionality   and   treated   the
          respondent's  immigration  policy  as  if  it  was  part  of  the
          Immigration Rules.

          The judge erred in  his  assessment  of  whether  Article  8  was
          engaged in that he had regard to irrelevant matters.

      ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take  into  account  very
          relevant evidence that was present and instead rejected financial
          dependence on the basis of what he  saw  as  being  absent.   The
          judge found  no  evidence  of  financial  dependence  because  he
          thought:

        a. The evidence was unconvincing that the appellant could not  find
           a job, but this was not uncommon in Nepal.

        b. His bank account was not submitted but there was no evidence the
           appellant had one.

        c. The evidence of funds did not show he was  entirely  financially
           dependent on the sponsor but there were twelve remittances  over
           a period of time.

        d. The judge supplied his own research in finding or substantiating
           or providing any basis regarding the employment.

        e.  He  rejected  the  appellant's  statements  and  the  sponsor's
           statement  because  there   were   similarities   with   another
           statement, but the contents of both paragraphs  were  common  to
           Ghurkha  appeals  and  there  was   nothing   controversial   or
           contentious about them.

           Further, it was argued, the appellant's life with his sister did
           not exclude him from having a family life with his mother  since
           his birth and whom he was emotionally and financially dependent.
            The crux of the case was whether there  was  evidence  of  more
           than normal emotional  ties  as  per  the  case  of  Kugathas  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ  31;
           [2003] INLR 31.

     iii) There was a failure to perform the proportionality assessment and
          properly consider the issue of  historic  injustice.   The  judge
          failed to consider family life correctly under Article  8(1)  and
          therefore found it was not engaged and failed to consider Article
          8(2) finding  there  were  no  countervailing  considerations  in
          favour of the respondent's position on the  facts  of  the  case.
          The grounds submitted that if Article 8(1) was engaged the appeal
          should have been allowed bearing in mind the historic weight  and
          Ghising and Others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]
          UKUT 567.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Jaja submitted, on behalf of the appellant,
    that the judge had  effectively  not  applied  a  proper  direction  or
    included the legal principles set out in Jitendra  Rai  and  failed  to
    take into account the relevant evidence.

 9.  The  previous  application  for  entry  clearance,   for   which   the
    determination was not  available,  was  in  fact  a  joint  application
    between the appellant and his mother.  She was granted entry clearance,
    but the appellant was refused.

10.  Ms  Jaja  submitted  that  the  judge,  impermissibly,   applied   the
    requirement  of  'exceptionality'  in  considering  whether  there  was
    Article 8 family life.  Further errors consisted of the judge rejecting
    evidence on the basis of no bank statement and thus the refusal of  the
    appeal on the basis of something not being there.  There was  a  simple
    explanation in that the appellant did not have a bank statement, but he
    was not asked.

11. It was also relevant to note that the mother had travelled six times to
    Nepal, which was relevant evidence as to whether family life  continued
    to exist and to whether there was continued  emotional  dependency  but
    the judge did not refer to that evidence at all.  The  judge  may  well
    have come to a  different  conclusion  in  relation  to  the  financial
    support of the appellant and the emotional support, had he  taken  into
    account all the relevant facts.  It was also relevant  that  the  judge
    had given no weight to the witness statements at all despite  the  fact
    that the duplicated paragraphs were merely generic  paragraphs  and  Ms
    Jaja submitted that they were merely a reiteration of case law.

12. Mr Clarke referred the court to paragraph 17 of Kugathas v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31; [2003] INLR 31.  Real
    and committed support could be evidenced by money but needed more  than
    just financial remittances.  By considering substance rather than  form
    it was necessary to look at the way the judge had set out his  findings
    and he only considered the human  rights  findings  from  paragraph  35
    onwards.  He acknowledged that the policy was not determinative of  the
    appeal.  Annex K looks at many of the facets  of  whether  someone  has
    family life and whether they are in fact living  an  independent  life.
    The use of the word exceptional was in relation to the policy  guidance
    and not of what was said in Rai.

13. It was clear that the appellant was living with his  older  sister  and
    the judge found at paragraph 28 that the  appellant  did  have  another
    income stream.  It was open to the judge at paragraph 29 to  take  into
    account the fact that the appellant had no  bank  account.   There  was
    nothing exceptional in the terms of the level of contact.  It was  open
    to the judge to find at paragraph 31 that the sponsor was  working  and
    to reject the evidence in the witness statements.  In fact,  there  was
    very  severe  criticism  of  the  representatives  that   the   witness
    statements were not informed what the appellant had actually said,  and
    this was a serious allegation.  The judge was right to apply no  weight
    to the witness statements.

14. At paragraph 33 the judge found that the father  had  died  before  the
    discharge and this generated the problem that without family  life  the
    appellant could not get to Article 8(2).  The reality was that  if  the
    father died before discharge, he would never have been deprived of  the
    right to apply for leave to remain.

15. What is found at paragraph 36 from the fact that  the  appellant  lived
    with his sister chimes was the fact of an independent life and as  such
    he would have unexceptional contact with his mother  and  it  was  more
    likely than not that he was working.

16. It was not a satisfactory way to structure the  determination,  but  it
    was sustainable in the light of the findings.  And it  was  argued  the
    judge had not taken relevant factors into account but nevertheless  the
    evidence accepted was that the appellant was educated, lived close to a
    town and it was open to the judge on that basis to consider and find he
    was living independently.

17. Ms Jaja responded that the judge  should  have  been  absolutely  clear
    whether he was  looking  at  exceptionality  under  the  policy  or  in
    relation to Article 8.

Analysis

18. In relation to ground (i), I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge  was
    merely, from paragraph 26 onwards, applying considerations in  relation
    to the  policy,  as  valiantly  submitted  by  Mr  Walker.   The  judge
    specifically referred to the Immigration Rules and policy at  paragraph
    24 and had stated at paragraph 25

           "The  appellant  would  therefore  need  to  show  that  he  has
           exceptional   compassionate   circumstances    warranting    his
           application/ appeal being allowed".

19. As pointed out at paragraph 17 of Rai

            "if dependency is  read  down  as  meaning  "support",  in  the
           personal  sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the   Strasbourg
           jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective" to the  word
           "support", then it represents ...  the  irreducible  minimum  of
           what family life implies". Arden L.J. said (in paragraph  24  of
           her judgment) that the "relevant factors ... include identifying
           who are the near relatives of the appellant, the nature  of  the
           links between them and the appellant, the age of the  appellant,
           where and with whom he has resided in the past, and the forms of
           contact he has maintained with the other members of  the  family
           with whom he claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at
           paragraph 25) that "there is no  presumption  of  family  life".
           Thus "a family life is not established between  an  adult  child
           and his surviving parent or other siblings unless something more
           exists than normal emotional ties". She added that "[such]  ties
           might exist if the appellant were dependent  on  his  family  or
           vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the  members  of
           the family should be in the same country". In Patel and others v
           Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley  L.J.
           said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with which  Longmore  and
           Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an extant  family
           life falls well short of what constitutes dependency, and a good
           many adult children ...  may  still  have  a  family  life  with
           parents who are now settled here not by leave  or  by  force  of
           circumstance but by long-delayed right".

20. In other words,  it  was  not  permissible  to  elevate  the  requisite
    threshold of support, that is real or committed or  effective,  to  too
    high a  threshold  approaching  exceptionality  or  to  show  that  the
    appellant was required to show he was 'entirely' financially  dependent
    on the sponsor as the judge did.

21. At paragraph 28 the judge, however, stated

         "The  sponsor  has  provided  some  money  transfers  showing   the
         remittance of funds to the appellant.   However,  it  is  submitted
         that other funds are remitted through the Hundi system.   There  is
         no evidence to support this claim.  I do not find that the evidence
         of funds  remitted  show  that  the  appellant  has  been  entirely
         financially dependent on the sponsor over the course of the  period
         that the sponsor has been present in the  UK,  particularly  noting
         that the sponsor has 3 children who are all remaining in Nepal  and
         she is on a very limited income in the UK herself."

22. And at paragraph 30 the judge had this to  say,  "Evidence  of  contact
    between the appellant and his mother in the UK is unexceptional and not
    beyond the norm."

23. These findings indicate that the judge has proceeded on the basis  that
    there needed to be some exceptionality in order  to  constitute  family
    life and is contrary to Jitendra Rai and that was an error of law.

24. Ground (ii) argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  the
    treatment of the evidence, not least the judge had failed to take  into
    account relevant evidence.  It appears that the sponsor's statement was
    given no credence as a result of duplicated  sections  in  the  witness
    statements.  The judge found at the outset at paragraph [10]  "I  could
    not be satisfied  that  the  sponsors  had  actually  stated  what  was
    included in their witness statements.  I  attach  no  weight  to  these
    statements therefore". There was no explanation from the solicitors who
    had prepared the  statements  as  to  why  the  judge  found  identical
    replicated  statements  in  the  personal  witness  statements  of  the
    appellant and sponsor in another appeal but, that said, it would appear
    from paragraphs 10 and 32 of the decision that the judge  has  accorded
    no weight to the statements at all.  It is the  responsibility  of  the
    solicitors to prepare a  statement  and  although  I  accept  that  the
    sponsor would be responsible for reading and signing those  statements,
    the replication of something  which  was  described  as  "generic"  and
    common to Gurkha appeals, should not preclude consideration of the rest
    of the evidence in the statements some of which was relevant, pertinent
    and germane; the evidence should not have been dismissed out of hand.

25. There were various factors raised which  were  relevant,  even  on  the
    findings of the judge himself, such as  the  appellant  living  in  the
    family home, that were disregarded when considering family  life.   The
    judge did not consider whether family life existed at the time  of  the
    departure  of  the  sponsor  from   Nepal   and   endured   beyond   it
    notwithstanding the sponsor having  left  Nepal  when,  and  under  the
    circumstances she did.  The critical question is whether, as  a  matter
    of fact, the appellant still enjoyed family life with his  sponsor;  in
    relation to this issue the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    numerous visits made by the mother to Nepal and seemingly her  evidence
    as to support.  There is no requirement that the appellant should  have
    been entirely  financially  dependent  on  the  sponsor  as  the  judge
    appeared to consider was required at paragraph 28.  That the  appellant
    did not have a bank account was not necessarily an indicator  that  the
    appellant worked, possibly the opposite, and not necessarily  a  factor
    to be taken against the appellant when possibly indicating  an  overlay
    of alternative cultural standards.  The evidence of  the  Hundi  system
    transfer was that of the  sponsor  which  the  judge  appears  to  have
    rejected for the reasons which are not adequately  explained  and  thus
    sustainable.  Further that the appellant lived with his sister and that
    there were other family members in Nepal did not preclude  family  life
    with the sponsor.

26. As such I find that the judge erred in the approach to the evidence and
    when considering whether family life existed and as a result failed  to
    make the relevant findings and failed to consider  Article  8(2)  as  a
    result of finding no family life.   The  judge  failed  to  follow  the
    relevant authority in relation to finding family life and as  a  result
    failed, as maintained in ground (iii),   to  follow  the  authority  on
    proportionality specifically that of the Court of Appeal in  R  on  the
    application of Gurung and Others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] 1 WLR 2546 and in  relation  to  historic  injustice.
    Taken against the appellant was the fact that the  father  died  before
    his discharge.  That did not preclude the mother from entering  the  UK
    as the spouse of a former Gurkha  and  equally  should  not  have  been
    visited on the appellant.

27. The treatment and assessment of the evidence is such that the  findings
    are materially unsafe.

28. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the  Presidential  Practice  Statement.   I  preserve  no
    findings of fact.

Direction

29. There was considerable  criticism  of  the  appellant's  and  sponsor's
    witness statements because of the preparation thereof.   Fresh  witness
    statements should be prepared and filed and served  at  least  fourteen
    days prior to any substantive hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 20th January 2020
