
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23300/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                          Ms Ehis Patience Enebabor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, counsel instructed by Victory at Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  NM
    Paul, promulgated on 22 July 2019. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia on 16 October 2019.




Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom  on  16  June  1996  and
    applied for asylum. She married an EEA national in 1999 and was  issued
    an EEA residence card in the name of  Patience  Osas  Ereyi.  She  made
    applications for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Rules in 2012 and 2013 in her current  identity,  both  of  which  were
    refused with no right of appeal. On 14  December  2017,  the  appellant
    made a further application and it is the refusal  of  this  application
    which is the subject of this appeal. The substance of this  application
    was that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)
    of the Rules, that  is  that  she  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for at least 20 years.

 4. In refusing the appellant's application, by way of a decision dated  20
    October 2018, the respondent rejected  her  claimed  evidence,  stating
    that she had failed to provide sufficient evidence of her residence for
    the years 1996 to 2001 inclusive. The respondent did  not  accept  that
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    integration as she had resided in Nigeria up until the of 30 and  would
    have retained knowledge of the life, language and culture.  There  were
    said to be no exceptional circumstances which would warrant a grant  of
    leave to remain outside the Rules.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  gave
    evidence that she had returned to Nigeria  in  2002.  The  judge  found
    there was a dearth of material prior to 2001 to  demonstrate  that  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom, that a document  provided  by  the
    appellant was a forgery and that she had not demonstrated that she  was
    continuously present in the UK for 20 years prior to  her  application.
    The judge was also concerned by the fact that the appellant made an EEA
    application in another identity.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to have been living in  the
    United Kingdom from 1996 until 2001. Furthermore, the judge had found a
    document to be  a  forgery,  despite  the  respondent  making  no  such
    allegation and no notice was  given  to  the  parties  of  the  judge's
    concerns. Secondly, it was argued that  the  judge's  reasons  did  not
    explain why the remainder of the appellant's evidence during the period
    in issue was rejected.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought,  with  the  judge
    granting permission commenting that the Tribunal may need  to  consider
    whether any error is material in view  of  the  appellant's  acceptance
    that she visited  Nigeria  on  three  occasions  during  2002  and  was
    therefore absent from the United Kingdom.

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.










The hearing

 9. Mr Slatter relied on the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission.
    He also made the following points. The errors could  be  summarised  as
    inadequate reasons, procedural unfairness and irrationality. There  had
    been a failure both by the  respondent  and  the  judge  to  take  into
    account documents presented which covered the period from 1996 to 2001.
    The respondent did not allege  forgery  and  therefore  had  the  judge
    raised his concerns about the document at page 115 of  the  appellant's
    bundle, these could have been addressed with the provision  of  further
    evidence. As for the materiality of any errors, Mr Slatter argued  that
    the appellant had leave to remain when she left the United  Kingdom  on
    three occasions, by way of an EEA  residence  card  issued  to  her  in
    another identity. When asked if this met the requirements of  paragraph
    276A(a) of the Rules, he argued that the point had not  been  taken  by
    the respondent. At this point I reminded  Mr  Slatter  that  the  judge
    granting permission had raised the issue  of  the  materiality  of  any
    error in view of the appellant's absence from the  United  Kingdom.  Mr
    Slatter relied on paragraph 5 of the Immigration  Rules,  stating  that
    the Rules did not apply because the appellant was entitled to enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom by virtue  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016. He further argued that  the  appellant
    met the requirement of Rule 276A(a)(iii) because she  had  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom and a reasonable expectation  to  lawfully
    return.  Mr Slatter clarified that the primary point of the appeal  had
    been long residence, with some reliance on 276ADE(1)(vi).

10. Mr Whitwell argued that the judge had provided adequate reasons for his
    findings. As for the fairness issue, he argued that the judge  provided
    cogent reasons for his concerns as to the document in issue and he  was
    not expected to flag up his concerns at the hearing in  order  for  the
    matter to be adjourned for further  evidence.   Mr  Whitwell  contended
    that there had been no failure to refer to the evidence and that  there
    was no materiality in any event because of the appellant's three return
    trips to Nigeria. He described Mr Slatter's argument that the appellant
    could have lawful leave  in  a  false  identity  as  an  oxymoron.  The
    appellant failed to satisfy two parts of Rule 276A (a)(iii) because her
    leave was in a false identity and it could not be said that  she  would
    have a reasonable expectation of returning to the United Kingdom  using
    an alias.

11. In response, Mr Slatter argued that it was wrong to say that the  judge
    reached adverse credibility findings, the only criticism being  of  the
    appellant's frank and prejudicial admission that she went  to  Nigeria.
    As for the procedural unfairness point, the document at page 115 was in
    issue at the hearing and the judge needed to consider  obvious  points,
    including that the date on  the  letter  was  wrong.  Mr  Slatter,  who
    represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal confirmed that
    he had made submissions to the effect that there was a mistake with the
    date on this letter. He accepted that the judge had noted a  number  of
    the documents in issue, however he had not dealt with them or explained
    why they did not demonstrate the appellant's  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

12. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made no material errors of law. I give my reasons below.





Decision on error of law

13. The first issue raised in the grounds is the unfairness  of  the  judge
    rejecting a document which purported to show  that  the  appellant  was
    residing in the United Kingdom as of 7 February 2001. The document  was
    said to be evidence of a commission payment to Patience Ereyi, a  false
    identity used by the appellant at the time.

14. The judge found that the commission document was a forgery, created  by
    cut and pasting, because the body of the document  gave  a  date  of  3
    February 2007 for the date on which the  commission  payment  would  be
    credited  to  the  bank  account.  As  was  clear  from  Mr   Slatter's
    submissions to the Upper Tribunal, the inconsistency with the dates was
    a matter which he addressed before the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore,
    it is wrong to suggest that the judge alighted  upon  the  inconsistent
    dates after the hearing and prevented the appellant from being able  to
    address the matter. On the contrary, as  the  differing  dates  was  an
    obvious issue, the onus was on the appellant  to  provide  any  further
    evidence to the First-tier Tribunal to support the submission  that  it
    was a simple mistake by the author. There  was  no  unfairness  to  the
    appellant in the judge's approach. While the judge used robust language
    in referring to the document, he was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    letter represented a "significant and serious attempt  to  mislead  the
    Tribunal."

15. Addressing the judge's treatment of the evidence relating to the period
    from 1996 to 2001,  it  is  apparent  from  [5],  that  the  judge  had
    considered this and indeed he lists every document. In  addition,  from
    [7] onwards, the judge sets out the appellant's evidence which includes
    further descriptions of the relevant evidence. By contrast, there  were
    scores of documents  which  covered  the  years  2002  onwards  in  the
    appellant's bundle of over  360  pages  and,  indeed,  those  years  of
    residence were accepted by the respondent.   Accordingly,  the  judge's
    description of a dearth of evidence, other  than  in  relation  to  the
    asylum application was not entirely inaccurate. The  term  dearth  does
    not mean there was no evidence at all, but that  what  there  was,  was
    scarce or inadequate and in the case  of  the  document  at  page  115,
    unreliable.

16. Even had the judge made errors of law in his assessment of the evidence
    in this case,  they  would  have  been  immaterial  for  the  following
    reasons.

17. Paragraph 276A(a) sets out  the  definition  of  "continuous"  for  the
    purposes of the Rules relating to long residence.

        (a) "continuous residence" means residence in the United Kingdom for
        an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period shall not be
        considered to have been broken where an applicant is absent from the
        United Kingdom for a period of 6 months or less at any one time,
        provided that the applicant in question has existing limited leave
        to enter or remain upon their departure and return, but shall be
        considered to have been broken if the applicant:


           (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act, section
           10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or has left the United
           Kingdom having been refused leave to enter or remain here; or


           (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so, evidenced a
           clear intention not to return; or


           (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which he could
           have had no reasonable expectation at the time of leaving that
           he would lawfully be able to return; or


18. Paragraph 5 of the Immigration Rules states as follows;

    5. Save where expressly indicated, these Rules do not  apply  to  those
    persons who are entitled to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  by
    virtue of the provisions of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016. But any person who is not entitled  to  rely  on  the
    provisions of those Regulations is covered by these Rules.

19. I accept the submission that paragraph 5 of the Rules  has  application
    where a person is entitled to rely on the  Regulations.  That  has  not
    been established in this case.

20. It  was  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  that  she  was  using  three
    identities during the 1996-2001 period. In addition to her own identity
    which she used to apply for asylum (with a year of birth of 1965),  she
    was issued with an EEA residence card in  the  name  of  Patience  Osas
    Ereyi (born in 1963) and was also using the name Mrs O  Lakhezwoum  for
    other purposes.  This was not just a matter of the  appellant  lawfully
    changing her name, but by the use of a  different  date  of  birth,  of
    inventing or adopting an alternative identity. In these  circumstances,
    I do not accept that she was a person who was entitled to rely  on  the
    provisions of the Regulations. Therefore, the Immigration Rules apply.

21. The appellant admits leaving the  United  Kingdom  on  three  occasions
    during the time when she was issued with an EEA residence  card.  Owing
    to her use of a false identity, I find that the  appellant  could  have
    had no reasonable expectation that she would lawfully be able to return
    to the United Kingdom and she therefore cannot meet the requirements of
    paragraph 276A(a)(iii) of the Rules. It follows that  the  requirements
    of 276ADE(1)(iii) are not met.  There is no challenge  to  the  judge's
    findings  in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)   at   [22]   "the
    appellant's history  is  so  opaque  as  to  mean  there  is  a  strong
    possibility that she may have been travelling  backwards  and  forwards
    between Nigeria and the UK, and maintained close connections  with  the
    country."

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 21 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
