

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23470/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal      |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 24 October 2017                           |On 26 October 2017            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Bradshaw, instructed by Samad & Co Immigration
(Witton)
For the Respondent: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Carlin promulgated  on  22  June  2017  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal.






Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1946.
     3. On 27 November 2002, the applicant  presented  a  false  Portuguese
        passport using a false name in order to secure  the  entry  of  his
        wife and five children to  the  UK.  The  Judge  records  that  the
        appellant used the false identity because he could not act  as  the
        sponsor of his family because he was an over stayer in  the  United
        Kingdom.
     4. The appellant has worked illegally without paying tax which  it  is
        claimed was to enable him to support his  family  financially.  The
        appellant lives at his home address with his wife, their four adult
        children,  and  younger  son  N  born  on  23  October  2001.   The
        appellant's four  grandchildren  and  his  daughter's  spouse  also
        reside at the property.
     5. N is educated in the United Kingdom and due to take  his  GCSEs  in
        summer 2018.  N  is  a  British  citizen  who  has  never  been  to
        Bangladesh.
     6. The Judge notes the appellant has multiple  health  problems  which
        are  generally  controlled  by  medication  prescribed  by  his  GP
        although he attended hospital in  February  2017  due  to  a  heart
        condition.
     7. The appellant has little contact with relatives in  Bangladesh  his
        parents having  passed  away.  He  has  two  sisters  who  live  in
        Bangladesh who  are  married.  The  appellant  has  not  maintained
        contained contact with them and does  not  know  where  they  live.
        Other relatives such as aunts and  uncles  formally  in  Bangladesh
        passed away with the appellant not having contact with any  cousins
        who live in Bangladesh.  None  of  the  appellant's  relatives  who
        reside in Bangladesh have visited the appellant since  he  came  to
        the UK, and the appellant's wife has not visited  Bangladesh  since
        she arrived in the UK in 2001 and nor does she  have  contact  with
        her parents or siblings.
     8.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  an  order  for  the   appellant's
        deportation from the United Kingdom as a result of  his  offending.
        On 26 September 2016, the respondent refused the appellant's  human
        rights claim and maintained the  earlier  decision  to  deport  the
        appellant. The appeal before  the  Judge  is  in  relation  to  the
        appellant's challenge to this decision.
     9. The Judge sets out the reasons  for  the  decision  dismissing  the
        appeal from [11 - 46] of the decision under challenge, the relevant
        parts of which can be summarised in the following terms:


                  a. The appellant was sentenced to 19  months  imprisonment
                     for two offences for which he was convicted.  Paragraph
                     398(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules   applies   meaning
                     consideration has to be given as to  whether  paragraph
                     399 or 399A apply [11]. It  is  necessary  to  consider
                     whether section 117 and in particular 117C of the  2002
                     Act apply [12].
                  b. The appellant was not sentenced to a term of four years
                     or more, section 117C(3)  applies  which  provides  two
                     exceptions set out in subsections (4) and  (5)  to  the
                     rule that the public interest requires the  appellant's
                     deportation [13].
                  c. The Judge found witnesses credible as  to  the  factual
                     situation of which they spoke but did  not  necessarily
                     accept the views of the appellant and his family as  to
                     the consequences of the appellant leaving the UK [14].
                  d.  The  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the  criteria   in
                     paragraph 399A as he has not been lawfully resident  in
                     the UK for most of his life [16].
                  e. Is not disputed by the respondent  that  the  appellant
                     has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
                     a child under the age of 18, namely his son N.  It  was
                     not disputed that N is a British citizen  and  that  he
                     has lived in UK all his life therefore continuously for
                     seven years immediately preceding the date  immigration
                     decision. Paragraph 399 (a) (i) and (ii) are  therefore
                     satisfied [17].
                  f. The issue was whether it would be unduly harsh for  the
                     child to live in the country to which the appellant  is
                     to be deported or it will be unduly harsh for the child
                     to remain in the UK without the person  who  is  to  be
                     deported [18].
                  g. The Judge found it would be unduly harsh for N to  live
                     in Bangladesh for the reasons set out at [19].
                  h. The Judge did not find it would be unduly harsh  for  N
                     to remain in the United Kingdom without his father as:


                             i. N will be able to remain in the UK to  take
                                his GCSEs [21].
                            ii. N will remain living with  his  mother  and
                                older siblings having a large family around
                                him  living  in  the  same  household   and
                                attending the same school meaning a  degree
                                of stability would be maintained [22].
                           iii. The Judge accepts  N's  close  relationship
                                with his father. N's behaviour deteriorated
                                when his father was  in  prison  and  daily
                                contact between them was broken [23].
                            iv. N is now a little  older  with  the  family
                                knowing   from   their   experiences    how
                                separation affected N and it is likely they
                                will do everything they can to ensure  that
                                the obvious effects upon N of his  father's
                                absence will be mitigated.  The  family  is
                                close with N's mother and older siblings in
                                the UK and the  absence  of  the  appellant
                                would be mitigated, to  a  degree,  by  the
                                positive influence of the remainder of  the
                                family [24].


                  i. The Judge refers, when  considering  the  term  "unduly
                     harsh" to the decision in MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [2016]
                     EWCA Civ 450 [26].
                  j. The offence committed by the appellant  was  a  serious
                     offence. By virtue of section 117C (2) the more serious
                     the  offence  the  greater  the  public   interest   in
                     deportation [30-32].
                  k. The exception in Section 117C (4) does not apply to the
                     present  case  because  the  appellant  has  not   been
                     lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life [34].
                  l. The exception in section  117C  (5)  provides  for  the
                     situation where the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
                     subsisting relationship with a  qualifying  partner  or
                     qualifying child and  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
                     deportation on the partner or  child  would  be  unduly
                     harsh. Both the appellant's  wife  and  N  satisfy  the
                     criteria of  a  'qualifying  partner'  and  'qualifying
                     child'. The unduly harsh test is not satisfied  in  the
                     case of the  appellant's  wife  because  she  would  be
                     surrounded by the rest of her  family,  including  four
                     children in the  UK.  The  unduly  harsh  test  is  not
                     satisfied in relation to N [35].
                  m. The Judge accepted the risk of reoffending on the  part
                     of the appellant was low largely due to the appellant's
                     age and  his  health  problems.  The  Judge  noted  the
                     passport offence was committed in 2001 and is of an age
                     which  points  against  a  likelihood  of  reoffending.
                     Balanced against the low risk of  reoffending  is  that
                     the appellant has worked for a considerable  period  of
                     time illegally and paid no tax, committed  a  Bail  Act
                     Offence in 2002, and was at large for a period of about
                     10 years before being arrested on  the  warrant  issued
                     for his failure to attend; which it is found points  to
                     a person who does not comply with rules when  it  suits
                     his purpose not to, which tempered the weight the Judge
                     was able to give to the fact the appellant  was  a  low
                     risk of reoffending [37].
                  n. In relation to deterrence, the Judge finds that  public
                     confidence may be undermined in the immigration  system
                     by this type of offending and that there  is  a  strong
                     public interest in deporting people who commit offences
                     of this nature [38].
                  o. The Judge took into account  the  appellant's  personal
                     circumstances. His health conditions were noted some of
                     which  are  chronic  and  permanent   but   not   life-
                     threatening. The appellant leads a reasonably full life
                     as shown by his involvement with and activities carried
                     out with N. The Judge noted availability  of  treatment
                     in Bangladesh [39 - 40].
                  p. The Judge accepted the appellant will have difficulties
                     on his return to Bangladesh which is  a  factor  to  be
                     taken into account [41].
                  q. The Judge noted authority from the Court of  Appeal  in
                     which it was found the interests of the children  carry
                     considerable weight but have to be balanced against the
                     substantial  weight  of  the  public  interest  in  the
                     removal of the appellant [42].
                  r. The  interests  of  N,  whilst  important,  to  do  not
                     outweigh the public interest. The decision to deport is
                     proportionate. N will still be living with  his  mother
                     and  siblings.  It  was  not  found  there   are   very
                     compelling circumstances  that  outweighed  the  strong
                     public  interest  in  deportation  and  no  exceptional
                     circumstances  outside  the  Rules   amounting   to   a
                     violation of article 8 rights [43 - 45].
                  s. The Judge took into account, in relation to N, the duty
                     to promote and safeguard the welfare of children in the
                     UK as set out in section 55  Borders,  Citizenship  and
                     Immigration Act 2009 [46].


    10. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable the Judge did not have proper regard to the considerations
        regarding the 'unduly harsh' test as referred to  in  MM  (Uganda).
        All the  circumstances,  including  the  appellant's,  need  to  be
        considered. It is also said to be  arguable  that  despite  stating
        that in coming to the conclusions  relating  to  N  the  Judge  had
        regard to section 55, he did not properly assess N's best  interest
        as part of the proportionality balance.



Error of law


    11. In MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450 it  was  held  that  the  phrase
        'unduly harsh' plainly meant the same in  section  117C(5)  of  the
        2002 Act as it did in paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules.  It
        was an ordinary English expression coloured  by  its  context.  The
        context invited emphasis on two factors: first, the public interest
        in the removal of foreign criminals and, secondly, the need  for  a
        proportionate assessment of any interference with Article 8 rights.
        The public interest factor was expressly vouched by  Parliament  in
        section 117C(1). Section 117C(2) provided that the more serious the
        offence committed, the greater the public interest in  deportation.
        That steered the tribunals and the court  towards  a  proportionate
        assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.
        Accordingly, the more pressing the public interest in his  removal,
        the harder it would be to show that the  effect  on  his  child  or
        partner would be unduly harsh. Any other approach  would  dislocate
        the 'unduly harsh' provisions from  their  context  such  that  the
        question of undue hardship would be decided wholly  without  regard
        to the force of the public interest in deportation. In such a  case
        'unduly' would  be  mistaken  for  'excessive',  which  imported  a
        different  idea.  What  was  due  or  undue  depended  on  all  the
        circumstances, not merely the impact on the child or partner in the
        given case. The expression 'unduly harsh' in  section  117C(5)  and
        paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  required  consideration  of  all   the
        circumstances, including the criminal's  immigration  and  criminal
        history. MAB was wrongly decided (paras 22 - 26).
    12. In IT (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 932 it was held that the First-tier
        Tribunal had not given appropriate weight to  the  public  interest
        when revoking a deportation order made against a foreign  criminal.
        The undue harshness standard in section 117C  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  read  in  the  context  of  the
        Immigration Rules, meant that a deportee had  to  demonstrate  that
        there were very compelling reasons for revoking a deportation order
        before its expiry.
    13. Although the case was decided on its own particular  facts,  in  CD
        (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1433 the Court  of  Appeal  upheld
        the Upper Tribunal and First-tier Tribunal who agreed that it would
        be unduly harsh on the 4 children of the appellant to remain in the
        UK without their father who  although  sentenced  to  3  years  for
        dealing in class A drugs was now a very low risk of offending,  was
        committed to change, and there was evidence that the children would
        find it very difficult to cope if their father were separated  from
        them.
    14. The submission on the appellant's behalf by Mr  Bradshaw  that  the
        Judge had not applied the correct approach as per  MM  (Uganda)  is
        based upon an assertion the Judge at [20  -  26]  assessed  whether
        removing the appellant would be "unduly harsh" without  considering
        other factors that account in the appellant's favour.
    15. The submission by Mr Mills that the Judge was  required  to  assess
        the position in relation to the children and balance  that  against
        the public interest was not accepted by Mr Bradshaw  who  indicated
        that all relevant matters had to be  taken  into  account.  It  was
        submitted there are matters in the decision  appearing  after  [26]
        that should have been factored into the earlier assessment.
    16. The Judge at [26] notes the two factors  to  be  considered  in  MM
        (Uganda) and notes the cases referred to  in  paragraph  10  of  Mr
        Bradshaw skeleton argument in relation to which  the  Judge  states
        specific attention has been given.
    17. At paragraph 10 of the skeleton Mr Bradshaw writes:


             10.   It is noted that MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWAC Civ  617
                  endorsed the view that  the  expression,  "unduly  harsh",
                  "requires regard  to  be  had  to  all  the  circumstances
                  including the criminal's immigration and criminal history"
                  (see MM para 26). The Court of Appeal  used  the  term  "a
                  proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation  in
                  any given case", at para 24.


    18. The Judge was therefore aware that what was required is a  holistic
        assessment. The Judge thereafter considers a number of  factors  by
        reference to section 117 and six  further  factors  including  best
        interest considerations. The finding at [20] was not the summary of
        the Judges fact-finding or reasoning, in totality,  but  the  Judge
        setting out what the finding is by reference to the final  sentence
        of the paragraph which reads "in coming to this conclusion, I  took
        into account the following". What followed [20] to the end  of  the
        determination is therefore an analysis by  the  Judge  of  all  the
        circumstances of the  case  both  in  favour  of  and  against  the
        appellant which  supported  the  conclusion  that  removal  of  the
        appellant from the United Kingdom as a result  of  the  deportation
        order and the impact upon N was not unduly harsh. Within  this  the
        Judge considered a number of factors including risk of reoffending,
        date  of  commission  offence,  deterrent   elements,   appellant's
        personal circumstances including health and difficulties  he  would
        endure on return to Bangladesh, the bond between the appellant  and
        N, remaining support N will have in the  United  Kingdom  with  his
        mother and siblings, and other matters relied upon in the  skeleton
        argument prepared by Mr Bradshaw.
    19. The appellant fails to make out any misdirection in law in relation
        to the understanding of the manner in which the unduly  harsh  test
        is to be assessed or the manner in which that test  was  undertaken
        by  the  Judge.  The  Judge  carried  out  the  required   holistic
        assessment and the findings in  relation  to  that  matter,  weight
        given to the competing elements, and overall  assessment,  are  all
        arguably within the range of findings reasonably open to the  Judge
        when considering the evidence as a whole.
    20. Ground 2 asserts the Judge did not identify what  is  in  N's  best
        interests and made no clear finding on this individual  point.  The
        decision clearly shows the Judge did consider this element and,  as
        Mr Mills submitted,  [24]  illustrates  this.  In  that  the  Judge
        writes:


             24.  However, I was of the view that N is now a little  older,
                  that the rest of the family know  from  their  experiences
                  how the appellant's imprisonment and separation affected N
                  and it is likely that they will do  everything  that  they
                  can to ensure that the  obvious  effects  upon  N  of  his
                  father's  absence  will  be  mitigated.  I  did  have  the
                  opportunity  of  listening  to   the   evidence   of   the
                  appellant's wife and [M]. It is abundantly clear that  the
                  family is close. The family still resident in the  UK  are
                  N's mother and elder siblings. I was of the view that  the
                  absence of the appellant would to a degree be mitigated by
                  the positive influence of the remainder of the family.


    21. Also, at [42], the Judge finds:


             42.  The sixth factor I took  into  account  when  considering
                  public interest considerations was the decision in SSHD  v
                  AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636. This case was similar to
                  the present case in that an  offence  had  been  committed
                  involving a forged passport and there were children and  a
                  partner to be taken into account. In paragraph 55  of  the
                  decision, it is noted that the interests of  the  children
                  carry  considerable  weight  but  that  they  have  to  be
                  balanced against the  substantial  weight  of  the  public
                  interest in the removal of the appellant. In that case, in
                  the event that the appellant was  deported,  the  children
                  would continue to have a family life with their mother  in
                  the UK, "albeit one which is not so rich as it might be if
                  the appellant were given leave to remain".


    22.  The  Judge,  at  [43],  was  of  the  view  that  this  case  bore
        similarities to AJ (Angola) and that  the  interests  of  N,  while
        important, do not outweigh the public interest. The Judge noted  "a
        particularly important factor was N but he will be living with  his
        mother and elder siblings".
    23. The Judge clearly approaches the matter on the basis that the  best
        interests of the child are to remain within the family. This would,
        based on the current composition of the family, be that of  mother,
        father, and older siblings. The  Judge  was  aware  that  the  best
        interests of N are not the determinative factor  but  a  factor  of
        considerable  importance  when   conducting   the   proportionality
        exercise but found they did not tip the balance in the  appellant's
        favour. The Judge  confirms  at  [46],  that  in  coming  to  these
        conclusions relating  to  N  "I  took  into  account  the  duty  to
        safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK are set out
        in s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009".
    24. Whilst the Judge may not have set out this matter in the manner  Mr
        Bradshaw submitted was required,  it  is  clear  from  reading  the
        decision that the Judge was aware of the importance of this  issue,
        that the ideal solution would be for N to remain with both parents,
        but that on balance for the reasons set out  in  the  decision  the
        respondent  had  established  that  the  decision  to  deport   was
        proportionate in relation to  any  interference  with  a  protected
        right of the appellant or other family member. This is  within  the
        range of findings reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
    25. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out.

Decision

    26. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    27. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 24 October 2017












