
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/23649/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 February 2018                         | On 14 March 2018                   |
|                                           |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR NICARDO DWIGHT ROACH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed by Thomas Andrew
& Daodu Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent, (hereafter the claimant), a citizen of Jamaica  aged
       41 was made the  subject  of  a  deportation  order  served  by  the
       appellant (hereafter the SSHD) on 29  September  2016.   His  appeal
       came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (FtT)  Herbert  who  in  a
       decision sent on 17 July  2017  allowed  his  appeal  on  Article  8
       grounds under the  Immigration  Rules.  Following  a  hearing  on  2
       October 2017 I set aside the decision of Judge Herbert for  material
       error of law. I found the judge to have erred in his application  of
       Exception 2 of s.117C NIAA 202 and also in his assessment of factors
       relevant to the public interest when  assessing  proportionality.  I
       stated, however, that the  SSHD's  grounds  did  not  challenge  the
       judge's primary findings of fact as regards  the  claimant's  family
       circumstances in the UK, although it would be a matter for the Upper
       Tribunal at the next hearing to determine the strength  and  quality
       of the claimant's ties with his children and the  likely  impact  on
       their best  interests  of  his  deportation  and  to  determine  the
       parties' willingness and ability to live in Jamaica.


    2. The claimant was tendered for cross-examination. Asked by Mr  Clarke
       whether he accepted his guilt for the offences of  rape  and  sexual
       assault, the claimant said yes, he did. Asked whether  he  stood  by
       his statement of May 2017 that there were  mitigating  circumstances
       and that  he  'honestly  believed'  the  victim  gave  consent,  the
       claimant said he did not believe that. He had signed it but  it  was
       incorrect; he did not understand. Afterwards he realised  that  what
       he had done was wrong.


    3. Asked whether he had made  inquiries  about  getting  employment  in
       Jamaica the claimant said that he had spoken to one or  two  friends
       who said there was nothing there. His mum had died  and  he  had  no
       siblings. He did have cousins but they lived separately and did  not
       like family sticking together. He  had  work  experience  as  a  car
       mechanic for 15 years. He did  not  think  his  wife  had  made  any
       inquiries about  employment  for  herself.  She  had  no  family  in
       Jamaica.


    4. The claimant said he had not been in touch with his son  R  for  two
       and a half years. The boy's mother had cut him out. He did  what  he
       could.


    5. As regards his son J, he sees him regularly, every  other  day.  His
       mother is Ms L. The boy complains when he does not get to  see  him.
       He could not visit the appellant in Jamaica as his mum  would  never
       go there or allow it.


    6. Asked why she had not come today to give evidence, the claimant said
       he did not know she was needed as well. He is told just to bring his
       partner.


    7. He was asked about his son, D. He was very close to D. The  boy  has
       been told his father may be deported but he does not understand.  He
       gets very unhappy if he does not see and do things with his dad. His
       partner's mum lives nearby and helps with child-minding but she  has
       some health care issues. He  does  not  know  what  she  does.   His
       partner, JW, suffers from depression and has had to  take  time  off
       work once or twice. When she can't cope, she shuts down. Her  mother
       helps calm her down.


    8. Mr Clarke asked the claimant what he  knew  about  the  incident  in
       which his partner was robbed whilst on holiday in Jamaica.  He  said
       it was racially motivated because she was  white  and  she  received
       comments about 'not taking our boys away'.


    9. I then heard evidence from the claimant's partner, JW. She said  she
       had met the claimant in 2009 and commenced a relationship  in  2010.
       When she found out she was pregnant  they  moved  in  together.  The
       claimant had raised her son. The claimant cared deeply for her  son.
       She did not know at the beginning of their relationship that he  had
       immigration difficulties but he told her in approx. 2012.  When  she
       found out she took steps to help him regularise his status.

   10. Asked about the claimant's use of the alias 'Sean Scott',  she  said
       she had not been aware of him using that name, but he had  told  her
       that he had had to use this name previously.

   11. Asked if she would consider  going  to  live  in  Jamaica  with  the
       claimant she said they would have nowhere to live and the last  time
       she went she had been  verbally  and  racially  abused  as  well  as
       robbed. She agreed that crime happens everywhere but she had already
       experienced it and did not want to take that risk again. She had not
       researched about levels of crime and violence in different parts  of
       Jamaica or whether there were safe areas.


   12. Asked about her family ties in the UK, she said she had a mother and
       brother. Her brother lives in North London. Her mother lives  nearby
       and has a very big family.  She is very supportive. Her mother works
       and has an elderly stepmother. She divides her time between  helping
       JW and other family. She works in a school, for  something  like  20
       hours a week. She is looking for a second job. Her mother would  not
       be able to give up work to look after her son. The claimant did  the
       picking up from school.   Ms  JW  said  she  worked  in  a  nursery,
       averaging around 20 hours a week. She had not done any investigation
       of childcare employment opportunities in Jamaica.  She did not  have
       any family members there.


   13. She  said  that  D  did  not  understand  that  the  claimant  faces
       deportation, but he would be devastated if he  did  know.  It  would
       break his heart. They have a close bond. Without the  claimant,  the
       boy would have no male figure to look up to and be guided by and  to
       keep him from taking the wrong path.   She suffers from  depression.
       The uncertainty about the claimant's situation made it worse;  there
       was only so much she could  take.  Without  the  claimant,  she  was
       afraid she would break down.


       Submissions


   14. Mr Clarke said there was no dispute that the claimant was a  foreign
       criminal and could only  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  or
       s.117C  of  the  NIAA  2002  if  able  to   show   very   compelling
       circumstances over and above those relating to whether it  would  be
       unduly harsh to require him to  leave  the  UK.  The  assessment  of
       whether it would be unduly harsh for him to be deported had to  take
       into account  his  criminality  as  well  as  his  poor  immigration
       history. He had not had lawful leave to remain since 2002  when  his
       visit visa expired.  In  cross  examination,  the  claimant  gave  a
       different version of whether he had shown remorse than he did in his
       witness statement signed in May 2017. He had  also  convictions  for
       lesser  crimes,  including  possession  of  crack  and   a   driving
       disqualification. On the authority of Danso [2015] EWCA Civ 596  his
       rehabilitation could not in any  event  contribute  greatly  to  the
       balancing exercise. Regardless of the positive steps he had taken to
       undertake relevant courses any contrition he had for his criminality
       could carry little weight. Mr Clarke said he did not  consider  that
       the delay of some 10 years  between  his  last  conviction  and  the
       decision to make a deportation order assisted  the  claimant's  case
       and whilst EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 remained relevant,  Parliament
       had decided to apply more stringent legal requirements  for  foreign
       criminals and the Upper Tribunal was bound to  follow  higher  court
       authority interpreting that.


   15. In assessing undue hardship Mr Clarke  said  he  accepted  that  the
       claimant's partner's circumstances were relevant but  she  had  been
       suffering from depression prior to meeting the claimant, even if  it
       had got worse recently. It  was  speculation  on  the  part  of  the
       claimant and his partner as to how badly the claimant's  deportation
       would affect D but he could be expected to get over it.  There  were
       no welfare reports from his schools or social workers.


   16. As regards the claimant's  partner's  fear  that  if  she  moved  to
       Jamaica she would suffer another racist attack, Jamaica was a  large
       place and there were relatively safe areas.  Her  not  going  was  a
       matter of choice; she had not shown she had  an  objective  fear  of
       further attacks. It was clear the  claimant  could  set  himself  in
       employment in Jamaica given his experience as a car mechanic  and  a
       painter and decorator.


   17. The Upper Tribunal should attach little weight, submitted Mr Clarke,
       to the claimant's ties with the second eldest child,  J,  and  there
       was no evidence from the boy's  mother  to  support  the  claimant's
       importance to her child's welfare.  He had not seen his oldest child
       for 2 and half years. Accordingly,  his  deportation  would  not  be
       unduly harsh and there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to
       his integration into Jamaican society and there were  no  compelling
       circumstances. The claimant was not financially independent.


   18. Miss Haybroek emphasised that the error of law decision  had  stated
       that there was no need to revisit the primary findings of fact  made
       by the First-tier judge.  She accepted that the claimant had to show
       very compelling circumstances,  but  submitted  he  could  do  that,
       especially taking into account the guidance  given  by  the  Supreme
       Court in Hesham Ali [2016] 60.  The adverse effect  on  the  partner
       and  child  would  be  very  considerable.   The  evidence  of   his
       rehabilitation was relevant.  As  regards  delay  the  claimant  was
       entitled to pray in aid EB (Kosovo) since  his  case  fell  squarely
       within the third category of a 'dysfunctional  immigration  system'.
       What could  be  more  dysfunctional  than  the  Secretary  of  State
       delaying 10 years since his conviction and taking no steps to deport
       him when he came out of prison and formed family life ties with  his
       partner and had a child with her.


   19. As regards Mr Clarke's submissions that the claimant had  failed  to
       show full remorse the claimant had explained why he had said what he
       did in his May 2017 witness statement about honestly  believing  his
       victim consented; he had said the same thing to the  FtT  judge.  He
       had come to realise, despite his belief at the time, that it was not
       reasonable. It was not  incorrect  of  him  to  say  that  he  'now'
       understood this.


   20. Miss Heybroek submitted that the fact that Miss JW  had  experienced
       assault  and  abuse  in  Jamaica  on  a  visit  there  was  relevant
       especially as she was someone who suffered from depression.  If  she
       was a more robust character, it would perhaps be different. She  did
       not want her  son  to  be  involved  in  the  same  milieu  she  had
       experienced.  The effect of deportation  on  the  claimant's  family
       would be to split  it.  Skype  would  be  the  sum  total  of  their
       relationships. Miss JW would not be able to afford to go to  Jamaica
       for visits. It was significant that Mr  Clarke  had  said  that  the
       effect of the claimant's deportation on the child D would be akin to
       'bereavement' as that underlined how severe the effect would in fact
       be. It would inevitably  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  child's
       future.


   21. As regards delay, Miss Heybroek said she  stood  by  her  contention
       that the decision-making in the claimant's case  was  dysfunctional.
       Even if the reason why the Secretary of State had delayed  making  a
       deportation order was because of the claimant's use of an alias, she
       had not sought to deport Sean Scott.

My assessment

   22. I am tasked with re-making the decision  on  the  claimant's  appeal
       against the deportation order made against him on 29 September 2006.
       In doing so I must take into account the entirety  of  the  evidence
       which includes the oral testimony I heard from the claimant and Miss
       JW. The claimant is now aged 42. It is not in dispute that he  is  a
       foreign criminal and that he is only  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
       appeal if able to show that he falls within one of the exceptions in
       s 33(2)(a) of the UK Border Act by being able to establish that  his
       deportation would breach his Article 8 rights. The Immigration Rules
       set out the practice the Secretary of State follows when considering
       an Article 8 claim from a person liable to deportation on the  basis
       of criminal convictions. By virtue of the fact that the claimant was
       sentenced  to  five  years  imprisonment,  in  order  to  meet   the
       requirements of the Rules he must show, pursuant to para  398,  very
       compelling circumstances over and above those described in paras 399
       and 399A. He is also entitled to succeed in his appeal  if  able  to
       show, pursuant to s117C(6) of the NIAA 2002,  that  there  are  very
       compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those   described   in
       Exception 2 as set out in s117C(5) (the latter which applies where a
       claimant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying
       partner and child and the effect of his deportation on  the  partner
       and child would be  unduly  harsh).  Despite  having  at  least  one
       British citizen child the claimant cannot benefit  from  the  SSHD's
       policy on parents of British citizen children because of his history
       of serious criminality.

   23. On 27 February2002 the claimant was convicted  of  possession  of  a
       class A controlled drug (Crack  Cocaine),  using  a  vehicle  whilst
       uninsured and driving otherwise than in accordance with  a  licence.
       On 10 March 2006 at Oxford Crown Court in the name of Sean Scott the
       claimant was convicted of sexual assault and rape of a  female  aged
       16 or over and he was  sentenced  to  5  years  imprisonment  and  a
       requirement to register on the sex offenders register for  life.  On
       18 December 2009 he was  convicted  of  driving  otherwise  than  in
       accordance with a licence, using  a  vehicle  whilst  uninsured  and
       failing to give name and address. He has not committed  any  further
       offences since 2009. On 2 February 2016 a request was  sent  to  the
       claimant in relation to his claimed entry to the UK and  his  family
       life. A subsequent biometric revealed a match to the alias  name  of
       Sean Scott. As already noted, when the  claimant  was  convicted  in
       2006 it was in the name of Sean Scott. Since he committed  his  2006
       offences he has gained a number of certificates of NVQ training  and
       has successfully completed courses in Basic  Lift  Truck  Operating,
       tyre fitting, decorating finishing  and  industrial  painting  among
       others. He is blind or has diminished sight in one eye.

   24. The claimant's family circumstances are not in dispute. He has three
       children by different partners - R aged 12, J aged 7 and D  aged  6.
       He currently lives with D and D's mother, Miss JW. The child, D,  is
       a British citizen, as is his mother Miss JW. The claimant has little
       or no contact any more with R, limited  contact  with  J  and  close
       contact with D. The claimant has been in  a  committed  relationship
       with Miss JW since 2010.

   25. B y s.117C(6) of the 2002 Act, one of the elements the claimant must
       establish is that the effect of the claimant's  deportation  on  the
       partner  or  child  would  be  unduly  harsh.   In  assessing  undue
       hardship, I must take into account public interest considerations as
       well as factors in the claimant's favour.

   26. One possible way in which the effect of the  claimant's  deportation
       might be mitigated for Miss JW and the  child  D  would  be  if  the
       latter returned to Jamaica to live with the claimant there. I concur
       with Mr Clarke that the fact that Miss JW  had  one  bad  experience
       when visiting Jamaica does not mean that the couple could  not  find
       somewhere to live in Jamaica where they were safe and where she  was
       not likely to suffer a repetition of such an  incident.  It  is  not
       suggested by Miss Heybroek that the  country  information  regarding
       Jamaica  demonstrates  a  consistent  pattern  of  racist  behaviour
       towards white women. I agree  with  Miss  Heybroek  that  Miss  JW's
       psychological situation makes it more difficult for her to  take  an
       objective view of what would happen if she went to live  in  Jamaica
       and that gin her psychological problems she is  likely  to  be  more
       fearful than an ordinary person; at the same time, I agree  with  Mr
       Clarke that it cannot be said that she is objectively at risk  of  a
       repetition of this type of incident. I also consider it likely  that
       the claimant will  be  able  to  utilise  his  work  experience  and
       qualifications achieved in the UK  to  find  gainful  employment  in
       Jamaica. It  is  also  possible  Miss  JW  might  be  able  to  find
       employment looking after children.  That  said,  the  evidence  also
       indicates that Miss JW relies quite  heavily  on  support  from  her
       mother and that she would lack such support if the  couple  went  to
       Jamaica.  Whilst D is likely to be able to adapt to life in  Jamaica
       fairly quickly, he is a British citizen and it is not reasonable  to
       expect him to have to depart the UK.  Hence,  I  consider  that  the
       issue of the effect on Miss JW and the child D is properly  confined
       in the circumstances of this case  to  whether  the  family  can  be
       separated.

   27. In conducting the balancing of factors  relevant  to  the  issue  of
       undue hardship - as so confined- there  are  weighty  considerations
       pointing to the effect on Miss JW and the child being considered  as
       unduly harsh. Miss JW suffers from depression and it was accepted by
       the  First  Tier  Tribunal  judge  that  the   claimant   gave   her
       considerable positive support in her daily life which helped her  to
       perform her own parental role and be able to work part-time.  Whilst
       I do not consider that the child R's life will  be  affected  either
       way by the claimant's deportation, and whilst I consider there would
       be a quite limited effect on the child J  (whom  the  claimant  sees
       twice a month), it is clear that the  claimant's  deportation  would
       have a serious impact on the child D with whom he lives and in whose
       upbringing he takes  a  very  active  role.  As  Mr  Clarke  himself
       described it, the effect on D would be  "devastating".  There  is  a
       lack of welfare reports on D's situation but that does  not  detract
       from the surrounding evidence indicating how important the  claimant
       has become to D's life. I also take into account that the  claimant,
       albeit not financially independent, has  demonstrated  that  he  can
       support himself through gainful  employment.  Manifestly  he  speaks
       excellent English.



   28. On the other side of the scale there  are  very  significant  public
       interest considerations in play in the  claimant's  case.  The  2006
       offences were of a serious  nature  as  reflected  in  the  5  years
       sentence. Whilst I accept that  the  claimant  has  not  re-offended
       since 2009 and has taken significant  rehabilitative  steps  through
       undertaking training and vocational courses and has proved himself a
       good father, it  cannot  be  said  that  he  has  demonstrated  full
       remorse. I do not consider that his statement in May  2017  that  he
       believed the victim consented can be understood to be referring only
       to his belief at the time. At para 7 he still considered that  there
       "were however mitigating circumstances as the alleged victim  was  a
       friend of mine whom I honestly believed engaged in consensual sexual
       acts with me". Further, there is not only his criminal  history.  He
       has remained in the UK without lawful  leave  since  2002.  All  his
       private life ties and  indeed  his  ties  with  Miss  JW  have  been
       developed at  a  time  when  he  knew  his  immigration  status  was
       precarious.  Making matters worse, he used  an  alias  in  order  to
       enable him to work but maintained it when he was  arrested  for  the
       2006 rape. His use of  an  alias  also  undermines  Miss  Heybroek's
       argument that he was entitled to benefit from the third category  of
       delay identified in EB(Kosovo) as counting in favour of a  claimant,
       by virtue of a 'dysfunctional immigration  system'.  The  chronology
       makes clear that it was only in March  2016  that  the  SSHD  became
       aware that the client was  someone  who  had  committed  a  criminal
       offence using the alias of Sean Scott. Had  the  claimant  not  used
       that alias the SSHD would have been in a position much more  quickly
       to take steps to deport the claimant. Miss Heybroek sought to  argue
       that this should make no difference because the SSHD did not move to
       deport Sean Scott, but we have no certain particulars regarding Sean
       Scott's basic particulars, including his immigration  status,  where
       he  was  born  etc.  Her  submissions  on  this  issue  are   purely
       speculative.


   29. Having considered the evidence as a  whole,  I  conclude  that  when
       assessing  the  issue  of  whether  the  effect  of  the  claimant's
       deportation on his partner and child would be unduly harsh the  very
       significant  public  interest  considerations  applicable   in   the
       claimant's case outweigh those considerations pointing in favour  of
       a   different   conclusion,   notwithstanding   that   the    latter
       considerations are weighty.


   30. However, even if I had concluded that the claimant  had  established
       he could benefit from Exception  2,  it  is  entirely  clear  in  my
       judgment that the  claimant  cannot  establish,  as  he  must  under
       s117C(6),  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those
       described  in  Exception  2.  At  the  very  best,   the   competing
       considerations applicable to the issue of undue hardship would  have
       resulted in a decision in favour of the  claimant  by  a  very  fine
       margin.

   31. In reaching my decision I have had regard to established  principles
       set out in decided authorities. Whilst the Court of  Appeal  in   JZ
       (Zambia) [2016] EWCA Civ 116 at [29]-[30] and in SSHD v KE (Nigeria)
       at [24] have highlighted that paras 399 and 399A of  the  Rules  and
       Exception 2 of the 2002 AC provide some indication of  the  sort  of
       matters which the Secretary of State might regard as very compelling
       in this context, they make equally clear  that  the  requirement  to
       show very compelling circumstances "over and  above"  those  set  in
       these provisions means that the threshold is raised.

   32. For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside  for  material
    error of law.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed            [pic]                 Date: 13 March 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


