
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/23443/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Belfast                                 |                                    |
|On 5 June 2019                          |On 25 June 2019                     |
|Decision given orally at hearing        |                                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               IFRAH ALI SAID
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Brennan, Martin Brennan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which followed a hearing in Belfast on 19 April 2018  in  which  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fox dismissed the appellant's human  rights  appeal
    following a decision of the respondent to refuse her human rights claim
    and refuse the appellant entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as  the
    spouse of a person present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    recognised in this country as a refugee under the Refugee Convention.

 2. The judge heard evidence from the sponsor and also from a witness.   He
    described the core of the dispute as revolving around the  fulcrum,  as
    he put it, of the lack  of  proof  of  the  marriage.   The  judge  was
    concerned, as we see at paragraph 13, that in his view no  attempt  had
    been made by the appellant to return to the Somali Embassy in  Ethiopia
    to have her identification certified.

 3. At paragraph 16, the judge said it would in his view  have  taken  very
    little for the Embassy to undertake a process  which  they  would  have
    been used to performing; namely, to certify the identity of one of  the
    nationals.

 4. At paragraph 17, it was recorded by the judge that the sponsor's cross-
    examination indicated that he and the  appellant  did  not  attend  the
    Embassy with a view to asking them to carry out this task.

 5. At paragraph 18, the judge stated that  over  and  above  this  problem
    hovered an issue as to the source  of  the  information  regarding  the
    claimed marriage. It was in the judge's view not made clear, either  by
    the sponsor or by the evidence of the witness, who the people were  who
    actually witnessed the ceremony, and why they had not been required  to
    make statements.

 6.  At paragraph 21 the judge said:

         "What is required is that an agency that can be accepted as capable
         of so doing certifies the appellant's  identity  as  claimed.   The
         obvious source of that certification would have been  the  Somalian
         Embassy in Ethiopia.  The failure of the appellant to approach  the
         Embassy has the effect of mitigating against  her  credibility  and
         the validity of the claimed marriage.  This remaining hurdle is all
         is required to ensure a successful outcome in her application."

 7. The application for permission to appeal was put forward on a number of
    grounds.  In his submissions to the Tribunal today,  Mr  Brennan  began
    his critique of the judge's decision by reference to his own Record  of
    Proceedings, saying that the judge was mistaken in saying what  he  had
    about the visit, or lack of visits, to the Ethiopian Embassy  and  what
    had been done there.

 8. The questions and answers in that  Record,  attached  to  Mr  Brennan's
    witness statement, make it plain that the sponsor was asked about  this
    issue in detail. He answered that his wife went  to  the  Embassy  with
    everything she had for them to identify her and that she had been  told
    by the Embassy that a Somali Community ID was enough and  she  did  not
    require another ID.  When she went to the UK Embassy she had, according
    to the sponsor, taken all her documents.  There was no  one  there  who
    told her from the beginning that they did not accept a Somali Community
    ID.

 9. As for obtaining a letter from the Somali Embassy,  again  the  sponsor
    told the judge that his wife went several times and they did  not  give
    her anything and eventually she gave up, since "when  you  are  from  a
    small clan, he said, no one values you".

10. None of this finds any expression in the decision of the judge.  It  is
    apparent to the Upper Tribunal that the credibility of the  appellant's
    case was severely affected by the mistaken assumption of the judge,  as
    just described.  That error is material because there was a  wealth  of
    evidence  before  the  judge,  dealing  with  not  only  the  issue  of
    identification, which seems to have preoccupied the judge, but also the
    evidence  as  to  the  marriage  of  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant.
    Reference is made in paragraph 1 of the grounds to  some  of  the  more
    salient aspects of the evidence.  That evidence is to be  found  in  an
    appellant's bundle, which runs to more than 200 pages.

11. Ms Cunha for the respondent submitted that none of this was  in  effect
    material because it could be inferred from the decision  of  the  judge
    that, although he concentrated upon the issue of identification of  the
    appellant, he also in effect found that there was not any evidence that
    was sufficient to satisfy him on the balance of probabilities that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had married in Somalia before  the  appellant
    left to claim asylum: namely in 2005, when the marriage is said to have
    taken place.

12. We respectfully reject that submission.  It is difficult to infer  such
    a finding on the part of the judge but, even if one could,  his  errors
    regarding the credibility of the appellant and  the  sponsor  nullified
    any findings that  he  made  regarding  the  date  and  nature  of  the
    marriage.  The judge had heard evidence from the sponsor as to the date
    of the marriage.  The judge had also heard evidence from a witness  who
    said that she had been invited to the wedding.  There was a certificate
    issued in respect of the marriage by the Embassy of Somalia in Ethiopia
    that recorded  the  marriage  as  having  taken  place  in  2005.   The
    respondent had  cast  doubt  on  the  genuineness  of  the  information
    contained in that certificate because the certificate was only obtained
    in 2016.

13. There was, however, evidence before the judge that could,  if  properly
    considered, have overcome that problem.  We say this, bearing  in  mind
    what is said in the Family Reunion  Home  Office  Guidance,  which  was
    helpfully supplied to us by Ms Cunha.  There, at page 21 of 31  we  see
    what we respectfully  regard  as  sensible  statements  concerning  the
    difficulties that people in the  position  of  the  appellant  face  in
    providing  documentary  evidence.  Those   difficulties   are   plainly
    exacerbated in the case  of  a  country  such  as  Somalia,  which  has
    suffered from significant lawlessness for a considerable period of time
    and certainly was suffering from that in 2005.

14. For those reasons, we have decided to set aside  the  decision  of  the
    judge and to re-make the decision ourselves.   To  that  end  we  heard
    evidence from the  sponsor  who  spoke  in  English  and  who,  we  are
    satisfied, understood the questions being put and was  able  to  answer
    them satisfactorily in that language.  We did not  hear  evidence  from
    the witness but Ms Cunha helpfully indicated  that  the  only  question
    that she had about the witness's evidence; namely whether  the  witness
    had actually attended the wedding of the appellant and the  sponsor  in
    2005, could be put to the sponsor.  That question was indeed put and he
    gave a detailed account of the reason why the witness  did  go  to  the
    wedding, having  been  invited  to  it.   That  account  concerned  the
    relationship between the witness and  the  witness's  sister  who,  was
    known to the sponsor,

15. Overall, we have come to the conclusion that the sponsor was a  witness
    of truth.  We have regard to the evidence as a  whole.  Notwithstanding
    the concerns raised by the respondent, in particular those relating  to
    the date on  which  the  marriage  certificate  was  obtained,  we  are
    satisfied that a marriage took place  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor in 2005.  It is quite understandable, for the reasons  we  have
    given, why there may not have  been  any  formal  documentary  material
    relating to that marriage, produced in 2005.   It  is  also  noteworthy
    that the sponsor referred in some detail to his wife when  he  came  to
    the United Kingdom to claim asylum.

16. Even if we were wrong about that, however; and even if the evidence did
    not show on balance that the parties had actually been married,  it  is
    manifest that there has  been  at  the  relevant  time  a  relationship
    between them. As Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul pointed out at the  close
    of submissions, the relevant  Immigration  Rules  changed  in  November
    2016.  Paragraph 352A of the Rules now covers a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage that has subsisted for at least two  years.   Ms  Cunha  quite
    correctly appreciated that point and its significance.

17. In  all  the  circumstances,  therefore,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to  refugee  family
    reunions, as they bear upon this particular appellant, are met  in  the
    present case.  They are met by the fact  that  it  has  been  shown  on
    balance that the appellant and the sponsor were married in  Somalia  in
    2005. Alternatively, the Rules are met for the reason  given  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul.

18. That being so, it is clear that the respondent can point to  no  aspect
    of his immigration policy as a justification for interfering  with  the
    enjoyment of Article 8  family  life  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor in the United Kingdom.  Accordingly, to refuse the human rights
    claim and the related refusal of entry  clearance  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate  interference  with  their  Article  8   rights.    We
    therefore re-make the decision by allowing it on human rights  grounds.



Decision

The appeal is allowed.



                      Signed                     Date 22 June 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
