
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/23002/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 5 March 2019                              |On: 26 April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GODLIVES [N]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Strestha, instructed by Mirach Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary for  the  Home
    Department.  For the sake in convenience, I will refer herein to Mr [N]
    as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria, born in 1972. He lawfully entered
    the United Kingdom on 7 September 2012  with  leave  to  enter  as  the
    partner of a person present and settled here, such leave expiring on 23
    October 2014.  On 06 November 2014, the claimant made  a  human  rights
    application, seeking to remain indefinitely in the United Kingdom. That
    application was refused by way of a decision dated 16 September 2016.

 3. The claimant's subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was allowed
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge T  Jones,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 23 March 2018 - the hearing having taken  place
    on 5 February 2018.

Permission to Appeal

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  in  support  of  the
    application for permission assert as follows:

         "The First Tier Tribunal has allowed the appeal  of  the  Appellant
         finding that his relationship with a British Citizen is genuine and
         subsisting. The FTTJ found the Appellant and his alleged spouse  to
         be witnesses of truth. It is submitted  that  this  finding  is  in
         complete opposition to the remarks of the Judge at the hearing  and
         the conduct of the appeal.

         Attached to these  grounds  are  the  minute  of  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer that refer how the  appeal  progressed.   It  is
         noted that the FTTJ warned the Appellant he would  be  required  to
         take an oath due to the appalling inconsistencies in his testimony,
         and  that  the  FTTJ  even  offered  to   allow   the   Appellant's
         representative to withdraw.

         It is respectfully submitted  that  the  Respondent  is  unable  to
         understand how it is that an Appellant who was warned he  would  be
         required to take an oath as the  evidence  he  was  giving  was  so
         utterly inconsistent, and that the Representative was advised  that
         he could withdraw if he wished, has subsequently been found to be a
         witness who was open and plausible and whose testimony stood up  to
         test. It is submitted the determination of the First Tier  Tribunal
         bears no resemblance  to  the  manner  in  which  the  hearing  was
         conducted and to the serious concerns raised by the  judge  himself
         at the hearing.

         It is submitted that it is  notable  that  little  if  any  of  the
         evidence  of  either   Appellant   has   been   recorded   in   the
         determination, and the FTTJ has failed at any point to identify why
         that evidence was so consistent."

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted in the following
    terms by FtT judge Buchanan, in a decision dated 29 June 2018:

         "2.  Grounds of Appeal contend inter alia "... the determination of
             the First-Tier Tribunal bears no resemblance to the manner  in
             which the hearing was conducted and to  the  serious  concerns
             raised by the judge himself at the  hearing...  the  FTTJ  has
             failed at any point to  identify  why  that  evidence  was  so
             consistent."

         3.   In the Decision at [27], the FTTJ concludes "I  found  that  a
             number of issues raised have been  explained  quite  plausibly
             and openly by the appellant, who has outlined his knowledge of
             his wife's children and her family to the best of his ability,
             though he was extremely nervous at times."

         4.   It may be arguable that there are inadequate reasons given for
             allowing the appeal where  the  "number  of  issues"  are  not
             specified; and where the test of "best of his ability" may not
             explain why the burden of proof has been met.

         5.   For these reasons, it is arguable by reference to the  Grounds
             of Appeal that there has been material error  of  law  in  the
             Decision.  I grant permission to appeal.  In doing  so,  I  do
             not restrict the scope  of  issues  which  may  be  argued  at
             appeal."

 6. It is prudent to observe at this stage that despite the  assertions  in
    the grounds there was no  'minute'  attached  to  the  application  for
    permission to appeal. As a consequence, the Upper Tribunal emailed  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer's unit on 29 October  2018,  identifying
    the fact that the minute was missing.  This  email  did  not  elicit  a
    response.

Discussion and Decision

 7. It was not until the day of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal  that
    Ms Jones, on behalf of the Secretary of State, sought to introduce  the
    evidence which was promised in the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  minute,
    which is signed by Ruqaya Suleiman Mohamed and dated 06  February  2018
    i.e. the day after the hearing before the FtT, reads as follows:

         "...Cross:

         The app was so inconsistent that IJ even  told  the  rep  he  would
         understand if he would want to withdraw  his  representation.   The
         app was lying about the number of kids he  had,  the  name  of  the
         children's mother, their ages, etc.  The sponsor did  not  remember
         what she said during the interview such as you accompanied  her  to
         NGA, when the app came to the UK to live with her, how many kids he
         had.  IJ threatened to put them both under oath due to the  blatant
         lies.

         100% sure it will be dismissed"

 8. No explanation has been provided as to why this minute was not produced
    earlier and, in particular, why there was no response to the Tribunal's
    email of 29 October. The claimant's  representatives  had  not  had  an
    opportunity to consider the terms of the minute prior to the hearing.

 9. Not content with seeking to rely on one  document  that  had  not  been
    provided prior to the hearing, Ms Jones also sought to rely on  a  such
    second such document,  which  she  asserted  to  be  a  record  of  the
    proceedings before the FtT authored  by  the  Presenting  Officer.  The
    document was not accompanied by a  witness  statement  identifying  the
    circumstances in which it  was  made,  indeed  there  was  no  evidence
    confirming that the document even purported  to  be  a  record  of  the
    proceedings. Whatever the document maybe, and whenever it may have been
    made, the one thing that it is not is a verbatim  record  of  what  was
    said in the claimant's hearing before the FtT. At its highest, it is  a
    document summarising the events at the hearing before the FtT  and,  in
    particular, the answers given by the appellant and his wife to  unknown
    questions. Most strikingly the document does not obviously contain  any
    reference to the purported interjection of the FtT judge  of  the  type
    identified in the minute referred to in  the  preceding  paragraph.  No
    explanation has been provided for this.

10. As a consequence of the late production of the aforementioned evidence,
    I invited Mr Strestha's submissions as to whether I should allow it  to
    be adduced.  After taking instructions, Mr Strestha indicated that  the
    claimant was content for the documents to  be  admitted  and  happy  to
    proceed immediately. This was not, however, to be taken as an admission
    that the documents were of assistance in demonstrating that  the  FtT's
    decision contained an error of law. In these circumstances, I  admitted
    the documents.

11. Turning then to the initial task before me i.e.  to  determine  whether
    the FtT's decision contains an error of law.

12. At the core of the Secretary of State's appeal is a claimed absence  of
    adequate reasoning in the FtT's decision given, what is said to be, the
    significant disparity in the evidence given by  the  claimant  and  his
    wife. This submission is fuelled by  the  contents  of  the  presenting
    officer's minute and supported, it is said,  by  the  contents  of  the
    record of proceedings authored by the presenting officer.

13. Any analysis of the adequacy of the FtT's reasoning must be  undertaken
    in its proper context, which includes how the Secretary  of  State  put
    his case before the FtT.

14. In her closing submissions  before  the  FtT,  the  presenting  officer
    relied upon the terms of the  SSHD's  decision  letter  [21].   It  was
    submitted, in particular, that there was little  cohesion  between  the
    information provided by the claimant and  that  provided  by  his  wife
    during the course of interviews undertaken by immigration officials  in
    2015. The decision letter highlights the following, what  are  said  to
    be, discrepancies between answers given  by  the  claimant  during  his
    interview and those given by his wife:

          i) The decade in which the claimant's wife arrived in the UK  and
             the reason why the she was granted British Citizenship;

         ii) The name of the claimant's UK based sister

        iii) When the claimant last spoke to his family in Nigeria;

         iv) The circumstances of the claimant's second  meeting  with  his
             wife  in  2007  and  the  exact  month  in   2007   that   the
             'relationship started';

          v) The year the claimant returned to Nigeria thereafter;

         vi) Where the claimant proposed to his wife;

        vii) Whether the claimant and his wife travelled  together  to  the
             marriage ceremony.

15. In addition, it is asserted in the decision letter  that  the  claimant
    did not know where in  Nigeria  his  wife  was  born.  It  was  further
    observed that he had children born to another person during the time he
    was allegedly in a relationship with his wife. Of the claimant's  wife,
    it was said that she did not know that the claimant was in the UK on  a
    visit visa when they met in 2007, nor did she know how  often  or  when
    the claimant had contact with his children.

16. The abovementioned points were clearly not lost on the FtT  because  it
    said as follows in summarising the SSHD's case:

         "6.  The Respondent refers to paragraph  287(a)(ii).   This  states
             that the applicant is still the spouse or civil partner  of  a
             person he or she was admitted or granted an extension of  stay
             to join and marriage or civil partnership is subsisting.

         7.   With this in mind, the Respondent notes  the  claim  that  the
             Appellant is in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
             [DK].  The representatives then  instructed  advised  on  18th
             February 2015 that the  Appellant  had  temporarily  left  the
             family home at Jansons Road N15 to move to  Park  Avenue  N15,
             London.  On 2nd  April  2015,  the  representatives  wrote  to
             advise that the Appellant had returned to Jansons  Road.   The
             reason he had  left  temporarily  was  due  to  his  partner's
             children visiting and the house was overcrowded.  Given  this,
             the Secretary of State was not adequately satisfied  that  the
             relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting  and  invited  the
             parties to the marriage to a marriage interview  at  Liverpool
             on 15th May 2015.

         8.   It is said that in the course  of  that  interview,  following
             responses, the Secretary of State was not satisfied  that  the
             relationship was genuine and subsisting.  The Respondent  then
             goes on to cite some differences as  between  the  Appellant's
             responses and questions and that of his wife  as  regards  the
             background of Ms [K]'s family and  how  she  obtained  British
             citizenship.

         9.   The Appellant confirmed that he knew his wife had been born in
             Nigeria but could not say where. He said that he knew his wife
             had a sister in the UK called Rose.   Ms  [K]  said  that  the
             Appellant had a sister in the UK called Louise,  but  she  did
             not know if the Appellant contacts his parents or family  back
             home.  She "thinks" he speaks to his mother but could not  say
             when he had last contacted her.

         10.  As regards how they had met, information  was  given  by  both
             that they had met at Ms [K]'s birthday party, a few days later
             they exchanged  numbers  and  a  relationship  commenced.  The
             Appellant had said that the relationship started within a  few
             days of the party in July 2007, Ms  [K]  said  this  was  more
             likely August or September 2007, and she was not aware how the
             Appellant came to be in the UK at the  time  of  the  meeting,
             whereas the Appellant  had  confirmed  he  had  entered  as  a
             visitor with a valid visa.

         11.  The Appellant said he had gone back to  Nigeria  in  2007-2008
             before the visa expired, but Ms [K] said  that  the  Appellant
             had returned in November 2009 because  his  (the  Appellant's)
             father had passed away.

         12.  A  number  of  questions  also  followed  in  connection  with
             children that they have.  It is submitted that  all  of  these
             points  submit  that  the  relationship  is  not  genuine  and
             subsisting.  A copy  of  interview  is  available  within  the
             bundle of papers."

17. The claimant and his wife each gave written and  oral  evidence  before
    the FtT, both adopting witness statements drawn  on  30  January  2018.
    The FtT observes, at [15], that the witnesses were  extensively  cross-
    examined and that they gave similar answers to each  other  when  asked
    where they had met and in what circumstances, this  being  despite  the
    fact that they were recalling events going back to 2007.  Evidence  was
    also given in relation to the children, and an explanation provided  as
    to why there were a number of withdrawals from a  bank  in  Wood  Green
    rather than the home area in which the claimant purported to live.

18. As already indicated, the FtT allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  on  the
    basis that the SSHD's decision leads to a breach of Article 8; the core
    finding in relation to which was the genuine and subsisting  nature  of
    this relationship with his wife.  The reasons for  this  decision  are,
    for the most part, to be found within paragraphs  25  to  32  of  FtT's
    decision, which read as follows:

         "25. The burden of proof is with the Appellant and the standard  of
             proof is the civil standard.

         26.  On the totality of the evidence and applying  the  appropriate
             standard, I find for the Appellant in terms of the appeal  and
             that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  are  in  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship for the purposes  of  the  Immigration
             Rules cited by the Respondent above.

         27.  I make such finding because; I have heard both  the  Appellant
             and his wife extensively cross-examined and have to  say  that
             the upshot of that was, if anything, I could  understand  that
             the passage of time memory may fade as to whether somebody met
             in July 2007 or August/September 2007  when  describing  their
             relationship ten years on.

         28.  I found that a number of the issues raised have been explained
             quite plausibly and openly by the Appellant, who has  outlined
             his knowledge of his wife's children and  her  family  to  the
             best of his ability, though he was extremely nervous at times.

         29.  His wife explained when she  did  not  know  things  and  also
             sought  to  deal  tactfully  with  the  issue  concerning  the
             Appellant not seeing his children, it being a difficult matter
             to discuss and that is why her knowledge as to his children is
             very limited.

         30.  I found that I could attach little weight  to  the  suggestion
             made that an analysis of the Appellant's cash withdrawals near
             his sister's in Wood Green in 2015/16 would  suggest  that  he
             was living there and not with his wife.  I found the Appellant
             withstood close cross examination on the matter and I accepted
             what he said against the appropriate  standard.   The  parties
             themselves had openly explained, when asked,  that  there  had
             been a short period of time when Ms [K]'s children had visited
             and he, effectively, had gone to an address not very far  away
             for a short period, returning.  There  is  ample  evidence  of
             utility bills, bank statements relating to Mr [N] being at the
             same address as Ms [K].

         31.   Applying  the  appropriate  standard,  and  in  all  of   the
             circumstances, for these reasons, having seen  and  heard  the
             parties, who I felt stood up well to  extensive,  careful  and
             probing cross-examination, it is such that I find for them.

         32.  Following the decision in Mostafa  [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC),
             when considering the appeal, brought as it  must  under  human
             rights provisions, it can  be  said  following  this  decision
             there can be "little offence" in terms of the public  interest
             being addressed (in  terms  of  the  Respondent's  lawful  and
             legitimate  aim  of  effective  immigration  control)  if  the
             Immigration Rules are met.  In these circumstances it is  such
             that I find that they have  and  when  determining  the  human
             rights appeal, I accordingly  find  that  the  proportionality
             balance following this decision-making falls in favour of  the
             Appellant rather than Respondent."

19. The FtT's initial task was to consider the  evidence  before  it  as  a
    whole and come to a conclusion - on the appropriate standard  -  as  to
    whether  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  wife  is
    subsisting (it being said to now be of some 12 years  standing)  -  see
    paragraph 287(a)(ii) of the Immigration Rules relied upon by  the  SSHD
    at page 1 of the decision letter.

20. The FtT had the benefit of hearing the claimant and his wife give  oral
    evidence. It viewed such evidence  in  the  context  of  the  available
    documentary evidence, which included copies of the records of interview
    and a significant number of other documents referring to the  names  of
    either  the  clamant  or  his  wife  and  the  address  that  each  was
    purportedly living on specified dates since 2013.

21. The FtT was undoubtedly entitled to take account of the fact that  part
    of the evidence given by the claimant and his wife  related  to  events
    which took place in 2007 or shortly thereafter, and that the memory  of
    such events would have faded as a consequence of the passage  of  time.
    The FtT accepted that the couple provided plausible explanations for  a
    number of the discrepancies raised by the SSHD and it was not  required
    to spell out the approach it took to each and every alleged discrepancy
    and assertion of implausibility. The FtT did identify  that  particular
    consideration  had  been  given  to  the  evidence  dealing  with   the
    discrepancies relating to the children, and also the  evidence  as  why
    the claimant had made cash withdrawals near to  his  sister's  home  in
    Wood Green in 2015/16 rather than near the home he  purportedly  shared
    at that time with his wife  -  the  explanations  being  accepted.   In
    short, looking at all of the evidence in the round  the  FtT  concluded
    that the appellant had made out his case that his relationship with his
    wife is genuine and is subsisting.

22. The reliance by the SSHD on events which took place during  the  course
    of the hearing  is  misplaced.  It  is  not  asserted  that  there  was
    unfairness towards the SSHD at the hearing before the FtT,  nor  is  it
    claimed that the purported events which took place at the  hearing  led
    to any procedural unfairness - Ms  Jones  specifically  accepting  that
    this was so at the hearing.  In any event,  the  SSHD  has  chosen  not
    produce witness evidence in relation to such claimed events and the two
    documents that have been belatedly produced are  of  little  assistance
    for the reasons highlighted above. The  SSHD  has  not  sought  to  put
    forward  evidence  of  specific  discrepancies  in  the  couple's  oral
    evidence which it is said the FtT did not address, indeed not  only  is
    there no evidence to support such a contention but  the  SSHD  has  not
    even sought to identify such discrepancies by way  of  submissions.  As
    already indicated, the record of proceedings authored by the presenting
    officer  before  the  FtT  (if  that  it  what  it  is)  has   numerous
    deficiencies. It is not known whether  it  was  made  contemporaneously
    and, even if it is to be assumed that it was,  it  does  not  obviously
    record the entirety of the evidence given and does  not  refer  to  the
    purported interjection of the FtT judge identified in the minute  dated
    a day after the hearing.

23. In the particular circumstances of this case, I conclude that the  SSHD
    has not established that the  reasoning  in  the  FtT  decision  is  so
    inadequate so as to amount to an error of law. The SSHD  knows  why  he
    lost the appeal, that is because the  FtT  believed  the  core  of  the
    evidence given by the claimant and his wife as to the nature  of  their
    relationship.  The  FtT's  conclusion  was  not  irrational  given  the
    evidence available to it.

24. I therefore dismiss the SSHD's appeal. The decision of the FtT stands.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:

Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor       Date: 26 April 2019

