
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23519/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 March 2018                          |On 12 April 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              DEVJI MURJI patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Counsel, instructed by Fernandes Vaz
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Malley (the judge), promulgated on 26 September  2017,
    in which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's
    refusal of entry clearance dated 13 September 2016.

 2. The Appellant, a national of  India,  had  sought  entry  clearance  to
    rejoin  his  British  citizen  spouse  in  the  United   Kingdom,   the
    application having been  made  on  7  July  2016.   The  Appellant  had
    previously resided in the United Kingdom but had  left  voluntarily  in
    2008 before the expiry of his leave.  His  departure  also  followed  a
    conviction of sexual assault against a minor, for which he was given  a
    sentence of two years' imprisonment, suspended for four  years,  and  a
    consequent requirement to sign the Sex Offender's Register.

 3. In refusing the Appellant's application to re-enter the United  Kingdom
    the Respondent relied on a single ground under Appendix FM,  namely  S-
    EC.1.5. of the suitability provisions.  This requirement states:-

         "... that the exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive
         to the public good because, for example,  the  applicant's  conduct
         (including convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paragraph  S-
         EC.1.4.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance".

The judge's decision

 4. Having confirmed that there was a single issue in  the  appeal,  namely
    that of the particular suitability requirement, the judge  goes  on  to
    make a number of findings adverse to the Appellant.  These are set  out
    in [39]-[55].  In essence the judge finds that: the  Appellant  had  in
    fact been convicted of indecent assault against a minor;  that  on  the
    basis of a pre-sentence report the Appellant  had  displayed  attitudes
    and behaviours giving rise to real concerns; that  there  had  been  no
    material rehabilitative steps undertaken by the Appellant; that he  had
    failed to sign the Sex Offender's Register before  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2008; that his conviction was not spent; and  that
    certain other aspects of the evidence were found to be wanting.

 5. The  judge  goes  on  to  look  at  the  Appellant's  overall  personal
    circumstances and finds that the Appellant had  lived  apart  from  his
    wife for a significant period of time, that the couple's three children
    were all adults, and that  there  were  no  exceptional  or  compelling
    factors in the case.

 6. In making his findings and in reaching  his  overall  conclusions,  the
    judge on a number of occasions stated that the burden of  proof  rested
    with the Appellant.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. As I noted at the hearing, and with due respect to  their  author,  the
    grounds are in places intemperate in their use of language.   It  seems
    to me as though however much one disagrees with a decision there is  no
    need to use terms such  as  "arrogance",  "pomp",  and  "comical"  when
    describing any judge or their approach to a case.

 8. Putting that  to  one  side,  the  substance  of  the  grounds  can  be
    summarised as follows.  First, it is  said  that  the  judge  erred  in
    reversing the burden of proof.  Second,  it  is  said  that  the  judge
    should not have placed significant weight on  the  pre-sentence  report
    and should not have purported to put himself in  the  position  of  the
    sentencing judge.  Third, the judge was wrong to have asserted that the
    Appellant's Counsel had  provided  information  about  the  Appellant's
    failure to have signed the Sex Offender's Register.  Fourth, the  judge
    failed to have regard to a wider balancing exercise  under  Article  8,
    having regard to all relevant factors in the Appellant's case.  At  the
    end  of  the  grounds  it  is  suggested  that  certain  findings  were
    irrational.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 7 November  2017.   Upon  renewal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley
    granted permission on 16 January 2018.

The hearing before me

10. Having regard to the assertion in the ground  that  the  judge  wrongly
    attributed a submission to Counsel, Mrs H Price,  who  had  represented
    the Appellant before  the  judge,  has  provided  a  witness  statement
    confirming her recollection of the hearing.   Mrs  Price  attended  the
    hearing before me and I am grateful to her for that.  In the  end  this
    point has been rendered immaterial.  Mr Claire  (now  representing  the
    Appellant) confirmed at the  outset  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  the
    Appellant had not signed the sex offenders  register  between  May  and
    September 2008.  Insofar as what the judge has said in paragraph 45  of
    his decision, this was accurate.  The judge had not suggested that  Mrs
    Price had provided any further information by way  of  explanation  for
    the Appellant's failure.

11. The representatives provided me with additional materials.   Mr  Clarke
    gave me a copy of  the  suitability  requirements  under  Appendix  FM,
    together with the Respondent's guidance on exclusion  from  the  United
    Kingdom, dated 13 April 2017,  which  had  been  apparently  relied  on
    before the judge and  cited  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Mr  Claire
    provided me with the Respondent's guidance on the general  grounds  for
    refusal, dated 11 January 2018.  Mr  Clarke  helpfully  confirmed  that
    there had been no changes in this  guidance  since  the  version  which
    would have been in existence at the time  of  the  hearing  before  the
    judge.  I raised a concern that this particular guidance had apparently
    not been brought to the judge's attention by the Home Office Presenting
    Officer, as it should have been.  Mr Clarke acknowledged that this  was
    regrettable.

Submissions

12. As regards the burden of proof issue, Mr Clarke rightly  accepted  that
    the judge had erred by apparently reversing it.  It was clear  that  in
    fact the burden of making out the suitability assertion rested with the
    Respondent.  However, Mr Clarke  submitted  that  this  error  was  not
    material to the outcome.

13. Given Mr Clarke's position, I asked Mr Claire to address  the  question
    of the materiality of the error.  He  submitted  that  if  the  correct
    approach had been adopted it was clear that the Respondent  would  have
    failed to discharge even the initial  evidential  burden  resting  upon
    her.  With reference to pages 70, 73, and 76  of  the  general  grounds
    guidance, Mr Claire submitted that the suspended sentence imposed  upon
    the Appellant should be treated as non-custodial.  In turn, this  would
    not have engaged S-EC.1.5 in respect  of  criminality.   Therefore  the
    Respondent's case would not have got off the ground,  as  it  were.   I
    asked Mr Claire to make submissions on the hypothetical basis that  the
    evidential burden  had  been  discharged  by  the  Respondent,  as  the
    question would then arise as to whether the Appellant  had  provided  a
    plausible rebuttal.  Mr Claire acknowledged  that  a  number  of  facts
    found by the judge were not disputed, including those contained in [49]
    (relating  to  the  lack  of  evidence  of  rehabilitative   programmes
    undertaken by the Appellant, either before he left the  United  Kingdom
    or in India).

14. Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  evidential  burden  would  have  been
    discharged.  I was asked to consider the way in which  the  Appellant's
    case had in fact been put before the judge.  The exclusion guidance was
    inappropriate.  In  respect  of  the  general  ground  guidance  I  was
    referred back to page 73.  Mr Clarke  suggested  that  the  Appellant's
    situation would have come under the ambit of "Unacceptable  Behaviours"
    in general terms, and not simply based on the fact of  the  conviction.
    I was then referred to page 74 of the guidance.  This was  said  to  be
    highly relevant.  Mr Clarke submitted that the scope  of  S-EC.1.5  was
    intentionally broad.  The matters set out in the guidance were  by  way
    of example only.  The judge had been entitled to place  weight  on  the
    pre-sentence report (a point which at that point was recognised  by  Mr
    Claire).  The sexual assault was clearly a very  serious  matter.   The
    judge was entitled to find that the Appellant had presented no evidence
    to suggest that any steps had been taken  to  rehabilitate  himself  or
    allay  concerns.   Although  Mr  Clarke  acknowledged  that  there  had
    apparently been no evidence about the processes relating to signing the
    Sex Offender's Register, this was not  strictly  speaking  relevant  in
    this case: it was a fact that  the  Appellant  had  not  signed  before
    leaving the United Kingdom.  Taken as a whole, Mr Clarke submitted that
    the Appellant had simply failed to provide any  plausible  rebuttal  to
    the reasonable prima facie case raised by the Respondent.

15. By way of reply Mr Claire submitted that the types of behaviours  cited
    at page 87  of  the  general  grounds  guidance  did  not  include  the
    Appellant's circumstances.  It was submitted that the judge would  only
    have been entitled to go against the  Respondent's  guidance  if  clear
    reasons had been given, and this had not been done.

16. I then asked for some additional observations from the  representatives
    on the general grounds guidance.  On one view it would appear as though
    the guidance narrowed down the scope of S-EC.1.5.  Mr Clarke  submitted
    that this would not be the intention and that the specific  points  set
    out were indicative only.  Mr Claire submitted that  the  guidance  was
    very significant.  He submitted that good reasons would  be  needed  if
    reliance was being placed only  on  a  single  non-custodial  sentence.
    Having asked the representatives about the appropriate course of action
    should I find there to be material errors of law, Mr  Claire  suggested
    that I should allow the appeal outright because  the  Respondent  could
    not discharge the  evidential  burden  resting  upon  her.   Mr  Clarke
    submitted that I should remake the decision on the evidence  before  me
    and dismiss the appeal.

17. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Decision on error of law

18. Having given very careful thought to this case I  conclude  that  there
    are no material errors of law.

19. It is clear that the judge was wrong to have placed the legal burden of
    proof upon the Appellant.  This  error  has  been  acknowledged  by  Mr
    Clarke.  The real question is whether this error  is  material,  having
    regard to the evidence as a whole and the judge's findings thereon.

20. As a matter of pure fact-finding, I conclude that the judge  was  fully
    entitled to find as she has done  at  [38]  to  [55].   None  of  these
    findings are in any way close to being perverse, and it is quite  clear
    that the judge was faced with  unreliable  evidence  and,  to  a  large
    extent, a complete lack of relevant information  from  the  Appellant's
    side.  The judge was fully entitled to place  significant  weight  upon
    the pre-sentence report and its contents.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    find that the Appellant had not, in fact,  signed  the  Sex  Offender's
    Register and that he had provided no explanation  for  this.   She  was
    entitled to find that the conviction was not spent for the purposes  of
    the entry clearance application and the appeal.  It was clearly open to
    her to find that there was no evidence of any rehabilitative activities
    having been undertaken by the Appellant at any  time.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that no weight should be placed upon  the  Appellant's
    assertion that he would in fact sign the Sex Offender's Register if  he
    did re-enter the United Kingdom.  It is also clear that the judge  took
    account of wider circumstances  relating  to  Article  8  such  as  the
    Appellant's relationship with his wife and  the  couple's  three  adult
    children.

21. Having regard to the findings, the relevant guidance, and  the  natural
    and ordinary meanings of the words used in S-EC.1.5, it is clear enough
    to me that the judge would have, on  any  view,  found  the  evidential
    burden to have been discharged.  This is so for three primary reasons.

22. First, neither the Entry Clearance Officer nor  the  judge  had  relied
    solely upon the fact of the conviction, although  this  was  clearly  a
    significant factor.

23. Second, as S-EC.1.5 itself states,  important  considerations  include,
    "for example", conduct,  character  and  any  other  relevant  reasons.
    "Unacceptable behaviours" would be an example of a relevant  factor  to
    be considered.  On the simple basis of the nature  of  the  conviction,
    the failure to have signed the Sex Offenders  Register  before  removal
    without any explanation whatsoever would of itself in my view discharge
    the relatively low evidential burden resting upon  the  Respondent.   I
    say this even bearing in mind the fact that the  sentence  imposed  was
    suspended, that being an indication that the offence  was  not  at  the
    higher end of the relevant scale.

24. Third, in cases such as this the Respondent's  guidance  is  of  course
    relevant.  The judge was unfortunately not provided with a copy of  the
    guidance in question (an all too common occurrence).  Even if  she  had
    been, the general grounds for refusal guidance makes it very clear that
    the contents of the relevant section provides a  "non-exhaustive"  list
    of factors (page 73).  At page 87, the particular bullet points  listed
    are expressly said to be "indicative rather than exhaustive".  It seems
    to me that this is entirely consistent with  the  broad  ambit  of  the
    wording of the provision itself, and to this extent  I  agree  with  Mr
    Clarke's position.  The term "conducive to the public good" is  linked,
    by way of  example  only,  to  conduct,  character  or  other  reasons.
    Therefore, even within the body of the particular  provision  its  non-
    exhaustive nature is made explicit.  Given the content and scope of the
    judge's findings of fact (all of which were open  to  her),  she  would
    have been bound to have concluded that the evidential burden  had  been
    discharged.  Thus, Mr  Claire's  principle  submission  on  materiality
    fails.

25. The next  question  is  whether  (on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    approached the burden issue correctly) the  Appellant  had  provided  a
    plausible rebuttal of the concerns raised.   Again,  in  light  of  the
    judge's findings I conclude that she would have almost certainly  found
    that no such rebuttal had been advanced.

26. The absence of relevant evidence from the Appellant (all,  or  much  of
    which, could have quite reasonably have been  obtained  in  preparation
    before  the  appeal)  was  clearly  very  significant  in  the  judge's
    assessment, as was the Appellant's attitude towards the sentence itself
    (in particular the signing of the Sex Offender's Register) and her view
    as to what he would do  if  he  re-entered  the  United  Kingdom  (with
    particular reference to [52]).  All of this, combined with the contents
    of the  pre-sentence  report,  and  notwithstanding  the  fact  of  the
    suspended statement (which is acknowledged at [48]), goes to show  that
    the Appellant would simply not have met, even to a plausible threshold,
    the serious concerns raised by the Respondent.  In  the  absence  of  a
    plausible rebuttal, the Respondent would have been  able  to  discharge
    the legal burden resting upon her by default, as it were.

27. Even if it could be said that a plausible rebuttal could or would  have
    existed, I nonetheless conclude that the judge would have  gone  on  to
    find that the Respondent had discharged the legal burden upon her.  All
    of the factual findings made would have been taken  into  account:  the
    nature of the offence itself;  the  deep  concern  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant would even comply  with  his  obligations  to  sign  the  Sex
    Offender's Register if he returned  to  the  United  Kingdom;  and  the
    inherently serious nature of the offence itself. On a cumulative  view,
    this would have been  more  than  sufficient  for  the  judge  to  have
    concluded that the  Respondent  had  made  out  her  case  against  the
    Appellant.

28. Although the grounds raised other matters (as  summarised  previously),
    there is nothing of substance to them whatsoever. The sole focus of the
    submissions before me has been on the burden issue. There has  been  no
    suggestion by Mr Claire that the judge should have allowed  the  appeal
    notwithstanding  the  suitability  issue.  In  summary,  there  are  no
    additional errors of any kind in the decision.

29. In light of the above, there are no material errors and the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

30. If it were thought that I have  been  too  generous  to  the  judge  in
    concluding that the  agreed  error  is  immaterial,  I  would  add  the
    following observations. On the alternative  scenario  that  I  had  set
    aside the decision and re-made it for myself (as  both  representatives
    suggested that I should if the error was material),  I  would  have  no
    hesitation in adopting the judge's findings of fact and concluding that
    the Respondent had discharged the evidential burden. I would then  have
    concluded, based both on the judge's findings and my own judgment as to
    how they  sat  within  the  overall  Article  8  assessment,  that  the
    Appellant had been wholly unable to provide a plausible rebuttal of the
    suitability concerns raised. His character and  conduct  clearly  bring
    him within the scope of S-EC.1.5 and,  in  my  view,  the  Respondent's
    guidance.  In this way, the Respondent would have discharged the  legal
    burden by default.

31. For the sake of completeness, I would have also considered the position
    if the Appellant had  been  able  to  shift  the  burden  back  to  the
    Respondent. My conclusion would be that on the totality of the evidence
    and the findings  made  thereon,  the  legal  burden  would  have  been
    discharged in any event.

32. It is unarguable (and has not in fact been argued) that there  are  any
    remotely  compelling  or  particularly  significant  factors   in   the
    Appellant's case which could permit him to succeed  in  the  Article  8
    notwithstanding the suitability issue.

Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of law in the judge's decision.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 10 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 10 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor








