
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23109/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th May 2019                     |On 10th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           SANKAR RAMASAMY PILLAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman of Counsel instructed by Paul John &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ruth promulgated on 26 February 2019.  The  Appellant's  appeal  before
    Judge Ruth was linked to that of his wife [KS] (d.o.b. 28 October 1982)
    (ref. HU/18522/2018).  The appeal of the Appellant's wife was  allowed,
    but the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.


2.   The respective immigration histories  are  helpfully  set  out  in  the
    preliminary paragraphs of the Decision of Judge Ruth.


3.   Before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant's wife essentially  relied
    upon an assertion that she was  entitled  to  leave  to  remain  having
    completed ten years' continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom.
     The Appellant had been included as a dependant in an application  made
    to the Respondent on such a basis.


4.   It  appears  that  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Counsel  for  the
    Appellants, Mr Coleman, relied  upon  a  single  submission:  paragraph
    39E(2)(b)(ii) of the Immigration  Rules  operated  in  respect  of  the
    period of time between 2 May 2018  when  the  Appellant's  wife  having
    become 'appeal rights exhausted' pursuant to  an  earlier  application,
    and 14 May 2018 when she made the  application  the  refusal  of  which
    became the subject of the appeal.  The Appellant's wife fell  short  of
    the ten year period when she had become appeal rights exhausted  having
    been in the UK for 9 years and 7 months; however, it  was  argued  that
    the period of overstaying was essentially to be disregarded  by  reason
    of paragraph 39E.  The argument was  successful,  and  the  Appellant's
    wife's appeal was allowed on that basis.


5.   As regards the Appellant, it appears that his case was conceded  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Paragraph  9  records  this  in  its  opening
    sentence:

         "Mr Coleman for the appellants submitted that it was  accepted  the
         second appellant could not succeed and he would be  making  another
         application as the dependent of his wife in due course."

    I note that the Record of  Proceedings  in  this  regard  confirms  the
    essential fact set out at paragraph 9, and adds  the  detail  that  the
    concession appears to have been made on the basis  that  the  Appellant
    had not yet obtained the necessary English language certificate.


6.   For the avoidance of any doubt, it seems clear to  me  that  in  making
    the concession it was not being suggested that if the Appellant's  wife
    should succeed in her appeal that the Appellant should also succeed 'in
    line'; rather it was expressly indicated that the plan was  to  make  a
    further application as a dependant - necessarily on  the  premise  that
    she succeeded in her appeal.


7.   Mr Coleman, who appears again for the Appellant, acknowledged  this  to
    have  been  the  position  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    More
    particularly for present purposes, Mr Coleman also acknowledges that in
    circumstances where the Appellant's case was conceded before the First-
    tier Tribunal, he is in very  serious  difficulties  in  advancing  any
    arguments that the First-tier Tribunal may have fallen  into  error  in
    the way that it approached the Appellant's case.  In my judgement those
    difficulties are insurmountable: in such circumstances I  can  find  no
    basis to criticise the approach of the First-tier  Tribunal.   This  is
    adversely determinative of the challenge before the Upper  Tribunal:  I
    find no error of law and the appeal is dismissed accordingly.


8.   Had it been otherwise I would still have been minded not  to  interfere
    with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to the discretion
    in section 12(2)(c) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007.
    This is because the single basis upon which the Appellant's wife's case
    was put to the First-tier Tribunal was, in my judgement,  misconceived.
    Paragraph 39E of the Rules does not have the  effect  contended  by  Mr
    Coleman and accepted by Judge Ruth.


9.   Paragraph  39E  of  the  Immigration  Rules  comes  under  the  heading
    'Exceptions  for  overstayers'.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mr
    Coleman was correct to identify that the terms  of  39E(2)(b)(ii)  were
    indeed engaged.  However, what seems to  have  been  missing  from  the
    submission - and in turn the analysis of the First-tier Tribunal -  was
    due and proper  consideration  of  how  that  circumstance  was  to  be
    factored  into  consideration  of  paragraphs  276A  and  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In defining the meaning of  'continuous  residence'
    under paragraph 276A(a), and the meaning of  'lawful  residence'  under
    276A(b), there is no role for the 'exemption for overstayers'  pursuant
    to paragraph 39E.  The significance of paragraph 39E is in the  context
    of further requirements under paragraph 276B, and in particular that of
    276B(5) which is in these terms:

         "The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration  laws
         except that where paragraph 39E of these Rules applies any  current
         period of overstaying will be disregarded."


10.  In short, the significance of paragraph 39E is that  an  applicant  who
    promptly makes a further application for leave to remain having  become
    'appeal rights exhausted', is exempted from the  requirement  that  she
    must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws  -  notwithstanding
    that she is technically an overstayer.  Paragraph  39E  does  not  mean
    that the applicant thereupon acquired  any  form  of  lawful  residence
    within the meaning of paragraph 276A(b).


11.  In such circumstances, it seems to me that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    initial decision that the Appellant's wife had not completed a ten year
    period of continuous lawful residence was the correct position; it  was
    not remedied in any way by the  operation  of  paragraph  39E.   It  is
    unfortunate that the submission was not more closely considered  before
    it was made. It is unfortunate that the submission was not more closely
    considered by  the  Secretary  of  State's  Presenting  Officer  -  who
    seemingly made no express submissions on the matter but simply  invited
    the  Tribunal  Judge  to  determine  it  (paragraph  10).  And  it   is
    unfortunate that the submission was not more closely considered by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.


12.  Be that as it may, I do not have any jurisdiction  in  respect  of  the
    appeal of the Appellant's wife.  She was successful in her appeal,  and
    the Secretary of  State  has  not  sought  to  challenge  the  outcome.
    Indeed, I am told that since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    she has now been granted indefinite leave to remain.


13.  It is of course now open to the Appellant to consider what  application
    he may make in light of  the  circumstance  of  his  wife  having  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain. I am told that he has now  obtained
    the necessary certification in English language / life in the UK tests.
     The position is essentially that which was indicated before the First-
    tier Tribunal - the Appellant "would be making another  application  as
    the dependent of his wife in due course".


14.  In summary: whilst it seems  to  me  that  the  basis  upon  which  the
    Appellant's wife succeeded was misconceived, I have no jurisdiction  to
    interfere with the decision in her appeal; however, I would  have  been
    minded  to  the  view  that  such  a  circumstance  would  justify  not
    interfering in the adverse decision in the Appellant's appeal; but,  in
    the event, the matter does not arise because there is no  substance  to
    the Appellant's challenge, his case having  been  conceded  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and accordingly stands.


16.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


17.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
