
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/23948/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre, Priory Courts                |                                     |
|On 5th February 2020                 |On 4 March 2020                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Manjit singh
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss H Masih (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bristow, promulgated on 23rd July 2019, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  Civil  Justice  Centre  on  15th   July   2019.    In   the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 28th April
    1982.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  10th
    October 2018, refusing his application for leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his  relationship  with  his  wife,  a  British
    citizen, who is present and settled in the United Kingdom.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had regard to the fact that the appeal before him involved  a
    person who had entered the UK clandestinely in around 2005 or 2007.  He
    was then arrested on 3rd December 2009 and granted temporary admission.
     He was subject to a deporting condition.  He failed to report.  He was
    listed as an absconder.  On 9th January 2013, he sought  to  regularise
    his stay when he applied for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his first wife.  This was  refused  on  4th  December
    2013.  He did not depart the UK.  The following year  on  3rd  December
    2014, the Appellant made a further application for leave to  remain  on
    the basis of his relationship with his former wife.  This was  refused.
    He appealed.  The appeal was dismissed.  On 28th April 2016, he applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of his relationship with  his  current
    wife.  This was rejected.   He  was  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  5th
    January 2017.  He then made a couple of applications  which  failed  to
    get a proper consideration, in circumstances where he was  not  himself
    beyond reproach.  He then voluntarily departed the UK on 15th  November
    2017 after having been in the UK for ten years without leave.   He  now
    sought to re-enter on the basis of his relationship  with  his  current
    partner.  He met the eligibility requirements for the English language.
     He met the financial eligibility requirements as  well.   He  did  not
    fall for refusal on the ground set out in S-EC.2.2.(a) of Section S-EC,
    given the suitability requirements set out for entry clearances  there.
    The only issue, as the  judge  properly  identified,  was  whether  the
    Appellant's entry clearance refusal was properly made  under  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The judge had regard to the fact that the  decision  in  PS  (paragraph
    320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440, made  it  clear
    that the refusal for entry clearance in a case such as this is not  one
    that leads to an automatic prohibition on the grant of entry clearance,
    as is the case with paragraph 320(7)(b).  The refusal in this case  was
    a "discretionary" matter.  In exercising such a discretion "great  care
    in assessing the aggravating circumstances  said  to  justify  refusal"
    must be taken and that the decision maker  "must  have  regard  to  the
    public interest in encouraging those lawfully in the United Kingdom  to
    leave and seek to regularise their status by an application  for  entry
    clearance" (see paragraph 23 of the judge's determination).  The  judge
    expressly stated that "this makes it clear that it is  a  discretionary
    grant" (paragraph 24).

 5. In this case, however, the Appellant did not depart  the  UK  in  2017,
    remained unlawfully for ten years, and "observed the Immigration  Rules
    but very late in the day".  His  "immigration  history"  is  a  further
    factor.  It is an immigration history which, I have found,  means  that
    he is properly refused  entry  clearance  on  the  basis  of  paragraph
    320(11)" (see paragraph 44 of the determination).

 6. The appeal is dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge had erred in law  in  a
    number of respects.  First, whilst it was the case that  the  Appellant
    did not dispute the immigration history set out by the Respondent,  the
    refusal of entry  clearance  certificate  on  the  basis  of  paragraph
    320(11) was unwarranted if it was stated that the  Appellant  had  made
    frivolous applications and that he had absconded, because these matters
    had not been  particularised  in  the  allegation  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  The judge erred in finding (at paragraph  25)  that
    he was satisfied that the Appellant did abscond and at least one of the
    aggravating features was present.  The initial burden of proof is  upon
    the Respondent Secretary of State.  She has  to  establish  that  there
    were aggravating circumstances (see paragraph 10 of JC (Part 9 HC 395 -
    burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT  00027).   The  decision  of  Judge
    Bristow was silent on whether the Respondent had discharged the  burden
    of proof.  The issue had not been advanced by  the  Presenting  Officer
    and it was not open to the judge to find that there was a  presence  of
    this aggravating feature which engaged paragraph 320(11).  The decision
    of Judge Bristow was silent on whether the  Respondent  had  discharged
    the burden of proof.  The issue had not been advanced by the Presenting
    Officer and it was not open to the judge  to  find  that  there  was  a
    presence of this aggravating feature which engaged  paragraph  320(11).
    The judge's conclusion (at paragraph 25)  that  the  applications  were
    made by  the  Appellant  in  circumstances  which  were  frivolous  and
    tantamount to a further aggravating feature, without providing  reasons
    for finding the same, was an error.

 8. Secondly, the judge also misdirected himself in law by double  counting
    against the Appellant.  It was true that the Appellant  had  overstayed
    by  ten  years,  but  this  cannot  be  categorised  as  "one   further
    significant aggravating circumstance", as the  judge  purports  to  do,
    because the overstaying is the  entry  point  for  the  application  of
    paragraph 320(11), and it is not  specifically  an  aggravating  factor
    that is so listed in the Rules.

 9. Third, having made the errors above, the judge then failed to undertake
    a  balancing  exercise,  to  evaluate  the  Appellant's  family   right
    interests against which the paragraph  320(11)  discretion  was  to  be
    exercised.  The case of PS (cited above) made it clear that, given that
    refusal under this paragraph  was  only  "discretionary",  that  "great
    care" had to be exercised", before it  was  decided  that  family  life
    rights should be subjugated to the public  interest  in  maintaining  a
    refusal.  The fact that the Appellant had departed the  UK  voluntarily
    was a specific factor that went in his favour, as was made clear in the
    case of PS itself.   It could not be used against him, as the judge had
    done.

10. Fourth, insofar as the judge  did  consider  the  family  life  of  the
    Appellant, he had done so "outside the Immigration Rules", by  applying
    Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.  The judge had  stated  (at  paragraph
    29) that he "can attach little weight to that relationship as a  result
    of the operation of Section 117 of the  2002  Act",  but  this  was  an
    entirely separate and distinct (statutory) consideration and should not
    encroach on the evaluative exercise that was required  under  paragraph
    320(11).  The effect of the judge adopting this erroneous approach  was
    to discount the weight to be given to the strength of  the  Appellant's
    family life with his partner when assessing how  the  discretion  under
    paragraph 320(11) was to be exercised.  This was a  material  error  of
    law.  The Immigration Rules were met.  If they were met then there  was
    no public interest in exclusion or removal.

11. On 28th October 2019, permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal
    on the basis that the judge's  findings  in  relation  to  "aggravating
    circumstances", and in particular in the assertion that  the  Appellant
    had absconded, in circumstances where there was an absence of  evidence
    to support this, could not be upheld (paragraph 25).  There was also an
    inadequacy  of  reasoning  on  material  maters  in  relation  to   the
    application of paragraph 320(11), given that this was  a  discretionary
    basis for refusal and the decision  disclosed  "tautological  reasoning
    and failure to determine whether  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the
    evidence or burden of law when relying upon 320(11)".   The  judge  had
    also wrongly given weight to immaterial matters.  He had further failed
    to look at the Appellant's human rights appeal in the  proper  context,
    relying upon the position outside the Immigration Rules  under  Section
    117B(4) of the 2002 Act.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me, Miss Masih relied upon the  detailed  grounds
    of application.  She submitted that there  had  been  no  evidence  put
    before the Tribunal that the Appellant had  absconded.   There  was  no
    evidence that he had  made  frivolous  applications.   In  his  witness
    statement he had made it  quite  clear  that  he  was  advised  by  his
    solicitor to make the applications, and that is what he had done.   The
    making of applications per se did  not  amount  to  those  applications
    being necessarily treated as being frivolous.

13. Secondly, and in any event, even if all these matters  were  true,  the
    judge had to demonstrate that in exercising the discretion accorded  to
    him under paragraph 320(11) that  the  family  life  matters,  and  the
    Appellant's human rights,  had  been  specifically  considered  in  the
    context of paragraph 320(11).   Instead,  he  had  drawn  attention  to
    Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.

14. For his part, Mr Howells submitted that neither the issue of absconding
    nor of the Appellant having made frivolous applications was conceded by
    the Presenting Officer.  First, as far  as  the  making  of  "frivolous
    applications" was concerned, the judge had stated  that  the  Appellant
    had made an application  on  28th  April  2016,  which  was  inevitably
    rejected  because  his  appeal  was  still  pending  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and could not be  considered.   This  in  itself  made  it  a
    frivolous application.  Moreover, when he made his section  application
    on 18th January 2017,  he  failed  to  pay  the  fee  and  provide  his
    passport, so that this application too was inevitably  rejected.   This
    too was a frivolous application.

15. Second, insofar as the Appellant having absconded  was  concerned,  the
    judge  had  pointed  out  that,  "at  least  one  of  the   aggravating
    circumstances in the list, that of absconding, is  present"  (paragraph
    25).  He had then gone on to say  that  the  Appellant  had  also  made
    "frivolous applications" and that this was a second aggravating  factor
    (paragraph 25).  However, Mr Howells also stated  in  the  same  breath
    that, "we accept that  the  judge  erred  in  treating  the  length  of
    overstaying as an aggravating circumstance because overstaying  is  the
    entry point for paragraph 320(11)".  Mr Howells also stated  that,  "we
    accept that at paragraph 29, the judge looks as the Appellant's  family
    life outside the Immigration  Rules  and  not  within  the  Immigration
    Rules".  However, Mr Howells then ended by stating that at paragraph 44
    of the determination the judge was quite clear that the  Appellant  was
    unable to refer to the fact that his partner was severely ill,  or  was
    taking prescribed  medication,  in  circumstances  where  she  actually
    worked two  jobs,  and  where  the  Sponsor  herself  could  visit  the
    Appellant in India should she wish to do so.

16. In reply, Miss Masih submitted that  the  matters  referred  to  by  Mr
    Howells did not show a proper exercise of discretion in any event.   It
    was suggested that the judge had drawn attention to the fact  that  the
    Sponsor was not severely ill, or subject to prescribed  medication,  or
    that she could visit the Appellant in India, were not matters that went
    to the merits of family life, which is what the judge had to  consider.
    Secondly, if one looks as the skeleton argument of Miss Masih, she sets
    out (at paragraph 12) the guidance that is provided by the Home  Office
    to its staff, being dated 11th January 2018, which sets out the  manner
    in which paragraph 320(11) is to be applied.  The applicant has  to  do
    one or more of the following, and here it is made clear that he or  she
    has to be "an illegal  entrant",  to  have  "overstayed"  and  to  have
    engaged in "employment".  If these factors are present then this is the
    entry point for the application of paragraph 320(11).  However, insofar
    as "aggravating circumstances are  concerned,  the  guidance  makes  it
    quite clear that this includes "absconding" and making "troublesome  or
    frivolous applications".  There is  no  mention  here  whatsoever  that
    overstaying is an aggravating factor or that taking  employment  is  an
    aggravating factor.  Yet,  this  is  how  the  judge  appears  to  have
    approached the matter.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that I should set  aside
    the decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First,  there  is  no  doubt
    that the judge has  employed  tautological  reasoning  and  has  double
    counted the matters that are to be taken against the Appellant.  It  is
    quite clear, as Mr Howells has properly accepted  that  the  judge  has
    used the length of overstaying, of ten years by  the  Appellant,  as  a
    matter that is "aggravating".  Yet, that is plainly not how  the  Rules
    are meant to be interpreted.  What is aggravating is the Appellant  had
    "absconded".  Yet, if one looks at the determination itself, whether or
    not it is the case  that  this  matter  was  conceded  or  not  by  the
    Secretary of State, it is plain that there is no  evidence  put  before
    the Tribunal.  All that the judge can state is that, "at least  one  of
    the aggravating circumstances in  the  list,  that  of  absconding,  is
    present" (paragraph 25).  Yet, no reference is made to any evidence put
    forward by the Respondent in this regard at all.

18. Secondly, insofar as the judge states that  "the  refusal  letter  only
    identifies making frivolous  applications"  (paragraph  25).   However,
    this is again a matter which is not made good.

19. Finally, there is a stark absence of consideration by the judge of  the
    Appellant's family rights.  This is a serious omission.  It has  to  be
    recognised, in circumstances where paragraph 320(11) is a discretion of
    provision, that potentially, if this line of logic is  pursued  to  its
    ultimate  extent,  it  is  possible  to  refuse  entry  to   a   person
    indefinitely, quite  simply  because  they  have  overstayed  and  then
    decided to return back to their home country to make an application  in
    a proper manner to join their partner.  Yet,  that  cannot  be  in  the
    public interest because as PS makes quite clear a decision maker  "must
    have regard to the public interest in encouraging those  unlawfully  in
    the United Kingdom to leave and to seek to regularise their  status  by
    an application for entry clearance".  Accordingly, that which ought  to
    have been very firmly in the Appellant's favour, had been taken  to  be
    against him, when the judge states that, "He observed  the  Immigration
    Rules but very late in the day" (paragraph 44).

20. In normal circumstances, having made a finding of an error  of  law  of
    this extent by the decision maker below, I would  have  been  happy  to
    have remade the decision.  However, given that the Appellant's  witness
    statement  is  very  brief  and  only  maintains  that   no   frivolous
    applications were made, I do not have the evidence before me to  remake
    the  decision  in  a  proper  manner  which   this   appeal   warrants.
    Accordingly, the proper course of action  is  for  this  appeal  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Bristow.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the judge below amounted to an error  of  law.   I  set
    aside of the decision of the judge below.  I remit the case back to the
    First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  practice  statement  7.2(a)  of  the
    Practice Direction for the reasons that I have given above.

22. This appeal is allowed.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    15th February 2020
