
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/23406/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd October 2018                         |On 6th November 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                              Safura Haji Gajia
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Charlton, Counsel, instructed by Bhogal
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  permission  to
    return to the United Kingdom as a returning resident on 24th June 2016.
     Her appeal against this was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frazer ("the judge") following a hearing at Newport  on  20th  February
    2018.

 2. The history summarised by the judge is that the Appellant came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 1985 and was granted indefinite leave to remain  here
    on 15th March 2001.  She left the United Kingdom on 2nd June  2012  and
    has not returned since that date.   Accordingly,  her  application  for
    readmission was rejected under [18(2)] of the Immigration Rules.

The Grant of Permission

 3. Judge McWilliam granted permission to appeal (18th September  2018)  on
    the ground that;

         "Notwithstanding the lack  of  medical  evidence  relating  to  the
         relevant two year period of absence, it is arguable that the  judge
         did not consider the  evidence  given  by  the  Sponsor,  that  the
         Appellant (aged 82  at  the  date  of  hearing)  was  uncomfortable
         because of pain in her  legs  which  arguably  prevented  her  from
         flying during the period.  This was arguably capable of  explaining
         the excessive absence from the UK.  It is arguable that  the  judge
         did not consider the strength of the Appellant's family  ties  here
         in the UK.

         It is expected  that  the  Respondent  attends  the  hearing  in  a
         position to advise the UT about any relevant  policies/Home  Office
         guidance."

Respondent's Position

 4. No Rule 24 notice was filed.  Ms Pal submitted that the judge  properly
    considered the facts of the case and took into account her  reason  for
    remaining outside the United Kingdom.  The  judge  did  an  appropriate
    proportionality balancing exercise which was summarised in [19] of  the
    decision and looked at the circumstances the Appellant found herself in
    India.  The grounds were merely a disagreement  with  findings  of  the
    judge.  At [17] the judge referred to the Appellant's family life  here
    in that it was stated "whilst  the  Sponsor  has  ties  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the form of her son and acquaintances and  friends  she  had
    during the time that she was here, she also has family in India."  This
    was an adequate assessment of her family life here.

Appellant's Position

 5. Ms Charlton  submitted  that  new  evidence  had  come  to  light  from
    obtaining the file from those who previously represented the  Appellant
    regarding when the relevant  two-year  period  commenced.  Ms  Charlton
    accepted that this was not a material error of law  because  the  judge
    determined the evidence on the basis of the evidence presented, but she
    indicated that if a material error of law was found elsewhere then this
    was a reason for remitting the whole of  the  case  because  it  was  a
    different factual scenario than the judge considered.

 6. The evidence showed that the Sponsor was too unwell to visit  India  to
    bring her back to the United Kingdom and that the judgment made  little
    reference to the pain the Appellant was in.  The assessment  of  family
    life in India was inadequate and there were no findings as to  how  her
    absence would impact on the family here.



Discussion

 7. The judge cannot be criticised for considering the case on the basis of
    the evidence presented.   The  statement  that  was  submitted  by  the
    Sponsor in relation to the appeal was that the Appellant went to  India
    on 2nd June 2012.  That was the commencement  of  the  two-year  window
    ending on 2nd June 2014.  The evidence that was supplied as to the fall
    the Appellant had on 5th June 2014 as being a reason for her not coming
    to the United Kingdom earlier was  entirely  irrelevant.   The  medical
    note of 5th  June  2014  refers  to  severe  spondylitis.  The  fitness
    certificate of 6th June 2015 refers to sciatica. Neither says  she  had
    been unfit to travel in the period 2nd June 2012 to 2nd June  2014  due
    to those ailments.

 8. The evidence to which I was pointed in relation to the Appellant's ill-
    health in the  period  June  2012  to  2014  is  contained  within  her
    Sponsor's unsigned and undated statement at [12].   It  refers  to  the
    injury from a fall and the fact that she has suffered from  severe  and
    chronic backache.  Her conditions were severe and getting worse despite
    treatment. It said she did not intend not to return to the UK when  she
    left the UK.  She was forced by inadequate conditions to stay living in
    India longer than two years.

 9. The written evidence the judge had in relation to  her  connections  is
    found in [13/14] of the Sponsor's  statement.   She  lived  continually
    here from 1985 to 2012.  She worked and remained deeply connected here.
     She has a substantial number  of  friends  here  and  has  established
    strong community  connections.   She  has  received  and  continues  to
    receive important emotional support from his  friends,  colleagues  and
    the people she remained connected to.  She has developed a  quality  of
    family and private life here and is best known in the UK  socially  and
    culturally.  She has integrated and developed her own networks and deep
    bonds of friendship with community members who she considers to be  her
    family and friends.  She has a  strong  family  relationship  with  her
    Sponsor and his family.

10. The judge considered the evidence and makes  findings  and  conclusions
    from [12 to 19].  To summarise that, in [12] the judge noted  that  the
    Appellant has two daughters who are married with children and  live  in
    India and a brother who is married and lives in India.  The judge notes
    at [13] that she is now  82  and  worked  whilst  here.   She  received
    financial support from her Sponsor.  She returned to India in  2012  to
    visit friends.  She only intended to be away  for  three  months.   She
    lives independently in a property near her daughter.  The judge  states
    "the Sponsor's evidence was that  after  the  three  month  period  the
    Appellant developed pain in her leg which put her off travelling as she
    was uncomfortable.   She  did  not  seek  treatment  for  this  ailment
    however."  The judge noted at [14] the ailments  after  2nd  June  2014
    where she fell and injured herself.  The  judge  identified  [15]  that
    there was no evidence to indicate she had been unfit to  travel  before
    she had the fall and within the two year period.  The  judge  noted  at
    [16] the discretionary element of the Immigration Rules at available to
    the Respondent.  The judge noted  the  Home  Office  guidance  and  the
    factors to consider in relation to the Rules.  At [17] the judge  noted
    the ties she had  here  which  included  her  sons,  grandchildren  and
    greatgrandchildren.  The judge noted that she had worked here.

11. The medical evidence in relation to her Sponsor being unable to  travel
    to India to accompany her on return is dated 10th June 2018. It  refers
    to her various health conditions, and states that his wife passed  away
    in May 2015 and due to his illness and bereavement he was not  able  to
    travel since 2014.  He states that prior to 2014 he had been travelling
    to India to escort his mother to the UK.

12. The judge found having considered all of this that;

         "There is nothing compelling before me which gives a good reason as
         to why she did not travel back to the  United  Kingdom  before  the
         expiry of the two year period.  The  Sponsor  stated  under  cross-
         examination that although the doctor declared  that  she  may  have
         been fit to travel in 2013 she did not feel comfortable to  travel.
         There is nothing before me to say that she was unable to travel  at
         that stage however.  I heard evidence that she had pain in her legs
         but she was not seeking treatment for it."

13. That finding was available to the judge.  There was no  material  error
    of law in relation to the judge's consideration of the reason  why  the
    Appellant had not returned within the relevant two-year window  of  2nd
    June 2012 to 2nd June 2014.  The judge considered the evidence provided
    by the Sponsor and rejected it.

14. The judge considered  the  discretion  available  within  [19]  of  the
    Immigration Rules that the Respondent had if [18]  of  the  Immigration
    Rules was not met and made a decision available to him/her in  relation
    to the exercise of that discretion.

15. The grounds simply amount to a disagreement with findings the judge was
    entitled to make on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Date 26 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer




FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Date 26 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
