
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/23532/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1 March 2018                         |    On 12 March 2018                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (VAC), IRAQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     BAKHTIYAH MUSTAFA MOHAMMED MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by  the  applicant  against
      the decision made on 31 August 2016 refusing him entry clearance as  a
      partner.  In this decision I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
      before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and the
      Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

Background

2.   The applicant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1  July  1957.   He  married
      his wife, his sponsor, in Kirkuk, Iraq on 25 December  2008.   He  was
      granted entry clearance following a  successful  appeal  in  September
      2012 and entered the UK in October 2012.  His leave to remain  expired
      in December 2014 and he left the UK on 22 January 2015,  returning  to
      Iraq.

3.   He applied for entry clearance to re-join his wife but  the  respondent
      was not satisfied with his explanation for leaving  the  UK.   He  had
      said that he had to leave the  UK  as  his  visa  had  expired  on  13
      December 2014 but added that he had been in the  process  of  applying
      for naturalisation as a British citizen. If that was the case, it  was
      the respondent's view that he would not have had to leave the UK  when
      he had a pending application.  He also said that he had  to  leave  as
      his passport was about to expire and because his mother was ill.   The
      respondent commented that he had not explained why he had had to leave
      the UK to obtain a new passport when there was  an  Iraqi  embassy  in
      London offering a renewal service for its citizens.

4.   It was the respondent's conclusion that the appellant had left  the  UK
      as his relationship with the sponsor had broken down and he wished  to
      resume his  life  in  Iraq.   He  noted  that  amongst  the  documents
      submitted was an eligibility and assessment summary  for  the  sponsor
      dated 25 November 2015  from  the  local  authority  which  under  the
      section entitled "Carer views" stated that "Mrs Mohammed's partner was
      her main carer but they have separated.  She is having  to  depend  on
      her family for support."  The respondent was accordingly not satisfied
      that there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
      appellant and his wife.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge said  that  the
      appellant's case was set out in the bundle of documents  paginated  1-
      120, which contained a detailed explanation from the appellant and his
      wife together with subjective  information  and  details  about  their
      current status.  The appellant had explained that he had  to  go  home
      for his  mother's  illness,  he  made  three  applications  for  entry
      clearance and it had taken a significant amount of time for them to be
      dealt with [14]. He said that he regularly contacted his wife by phone
      using Viber and social media and his wife eventually came to visit him
      in Iraq on 27 January 2017, leaving on 8 February 2017 [16].

6.   At [17] the judge said that there was no challenge to this evidence  by
      the Home Office Presenting Officer before him or when the case was put
      by the appellant, his wife and his  step-daughter  who  had  confirmed
      that her relationship with her step-father was continuing and that she
      had attended the wedding in Iraq when  her  mother  married  and  they
      started living together.

7.   At [18] the judge said that there was overwhelming evidence before  him
      that the rather ambiguous entry by the care provider stating that  the
      parties were "separated" was taken far too literally by the respondent
      and it was abundantly apparent from the papers that  this  had  always
      been a genuine subsisting marriage and that  the  parties  had  always
      intended to continue to live together as husband and wife.  The  judge
      commented that  it  was  unfortunate  that  there  had  been  repeated
      refusals when there was overwhelming evidence to the contrary  and  he
      expressed concern about the care with which the application  had  been
      considered.  He allowed the appeal.

The Grounds

8.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that
      the judge had allowed his personal opinions about the conduct of  this
      application to affect his decision.  It  is  further  argued  that  he
      failed to deal adequately with the issues relied on by the respondent.
       Permission to appeal was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
      granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that there was an  arguable
      failure to give adequate reasons.  When granting permission, the judge
      added that it would be helpful if a rule 24  response  could  set  out
      with precision the issues which were in dispute at the hearing,  given
      the observation that at least some of the evidence  was  unchallenged,
      and what issues continued to be in dispute in the  light  of  all  the
      evidence available.

9.   No rule 24 response has been filed by the respondent.  At  the  hearing
      before me there was appearance or  representation  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant.  I am satisfied that the notice of hearing has been  served
      both  on  the  sponsor  and  on  the  representative.   There  is   no
      explanation for the failure to appear and  I  am  satisfied  that  the
      proper course to proceed with the hearing.

10.  Mr Nath submitted that the judge had failed to deal adequately  in  his
      decision with the issues arising in the appeal and had failed to  give
      adequate reasons.   However,  he  accepted  that  there  had  been  no
      challenge by the respondent, whether in a rule 24 notice or otherwise,
      to the judge's comment in [17] about there being no challenge  to  the
      evidence.

Assessment of the Issues.

11.  Permission to appeal has been granted on  the  sole  issue  of  whether
      there has been an arguable failure to give adequate reasons.  In order
      to succeed on a challenge based on a claimed inadequacy of reasons, it
      has to be shown there is a real cause  for  concern  that  a  relevant
      matter has not been properly taken into account in the  assessment  of
      the appeal and that, if it  had,  there  was  a  real  prospect  of  a
      different decision being reached: per Elias J in  Atputharajah  [2001]
      Imm AR 566.

12.  The issue of fact the judge had to consider was  whether  there  was  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
      wife.  He had a statement from the appellant dated 12 September  2017,
      which confirmed that the relationship was  subsisting  and  explaining
      the circumstances in which he returned to Iraq.  It  asserts  that  he
      and his wife were not separated and had never been so.  The time spent
      apart was caused by factors beyond their control, his mother's illness
      and the subsequent refusal of his applications for entry clearance and
      the time taken to deal with them.  His statement was  supported  by  a
      statement from his wife also dated 12 September 2017  which  sets  out
      the background to their marriage and  at  [20]  the  circumstances  in
      which she obtained the letter from the local authority in which it was
      said that she and  her  husband  had  separated.   Their  evidence  is
      further supported by the statement from  his  step-daughter  dated  14
      September 2017 and there is further support in  the  letter  from  the
      appellant's two other step-children dated 14 September 2017.

13.  In the light of the fact firstly, that the substance  of  the  evidence
      relied on at the hearing was  not  challenged  before  the  judge  and
      secondly, that the respondent has  not  subsequently  sought  to  take
      issue with the judge's record that there was no challenge,  I  am  not
      satisfied that there is any substance in the argument that  the  judge
      failed to give adequate reasons.  As there was  no  challenge  to  the
      evidence before him, there was no need for him to set the  matter  out
      at any  greater  length  than  he  did  in  [14]-[18].   There  is  no
      inadequacy of reasons to suggest that the judge had failed to take any
      relevant matter into account.   It  is  clear  that  he  accepted  the
      evidence adduced by on behalf of the appellant and there was  no  need
      for him to say any more than he did.  There is  no  substance  in  the
      respondent's appeal.

Decision

14.  The First-tier Tribunal not err in law and the decision  to  allow  the
      appeal stands.





Signed        H J E Latter                       Date:     9 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

