
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23783/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On January 18, 2018                          |On January 22, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [D A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is a Nigeria national.  The appellant applied on June 14,
    2016 for entry clearance as the daughter  of  the  sponsor,  [JB].  The
    respondent refused her application on September 21, 2016 as she was not
    satisfied the appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph 297  HC
    395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  October  18,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The
    entry clearance manager reviewed the grounds of appeal on  January  16,
    2017 but upheld the original decision. Her appeal came before Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Housego (hereinafter  called  "the  Judge")  on
    September 28, 2017 and in a decision promulgated on  October  11,  2017
    the Judge refused her appeal on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on November 7, 2017. Permission  to
    appeal was granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Boyes  on
    November 17,  2017.  In  giving  permission  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Boyes found the Judge may have erred by failing to  deal  with
    all the evidence that had been submitted.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date. Notice of the hearing  had
    been sent out in accordance with the  Rules  and  to  the  parties  and
    addresses advised by the parties. In this case the address for  service
    for the appellant and sponsor was the solicitors' address.  On  January
    17, 2018 the solicitors sent in a bundle containing all papers from the
    previous hearing.  Neither  the  sponsor  nor  the  representative  had
    attended at 11.10 when I called the case on. The  clerk  contacted  the
    solicitors who advised they were no longer acting as they had a lack of
    instructions.

 6. Under Rule 36 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the
    Upper Tribunal must give  each  party  entitled  to  attend  a  hearing
    reasonable notice of the time  and  place  of  the  hearing.  This  had
    clearly been done as notice had been sent to  all  interested  parties.
    Rule 13(5) of the 2008 Rules states-

         "The Upper Tribunal and each party  may  assume  that  the  address
         provided by a party  or  its  representative  is  and  remains  the
         address to which  documents  should  be  sent  or  delivered  until
         receiving written notification to the contrary."

 7. In the absence of any written notice from the parties to the contrary I
    was satisfied the appellant  and  sponsor  had  been  notified  of  the
    hearing and having taken oral submissions from Ms  Pal  I  reserved  my
    decision.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. The written grounds of appeal challenged the Judge's  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

      a) The Judge failed to properly engage with paragraphs 297(i) or (iii)
         HC 395 and had made inadequate findings of  fact  as  to  what  the
         appellant's circumstances were  and  had  overlooked  the  mother's
         statement.

      b) The Judge failed  to  give  consideration  to  section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 9. Ms Pal submitted there was no error in law. The decision  was  detailed
    and the Judge had set out in some detail the law and Rules.  The  Judge
    considered the evidence both of the sponsor and the appellant  together
    with the statements from other witnesses. The Judge made clear findings
    that led him to conclude that the appellant had failed  to  demonstrate
    her mother had sole responsibility.  Having  rejected  that  claim  the
    Judge concluded that family life for the purposes of article 8 was  not
    engaged. She invited me to uphold the decision.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

10. The appellant was seventeen years of age when her  appeal  came  before
    the Tribunal. She  had  applied  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 297 HC 395. In particular, she argued  that  her  application
    should have been granted on the basis her mother had  demonstrated  she
    had sole responsibility of her.

11. The grounds of appeal highlighted the Judge's approach  to  subsections
    (i) and (iii) HC 395 but in truth subsection (iii)  would  only  be  of
    relevance if the appellant demonstrated compliance with subsection (i).



12. The grounds argued the Judge failed to make adequate findings  of  fact
    about the appellant's circumstances and  had  overlooked  the  mother's
    statement.

13. The Judge's decision perhaps  unnecessarily  contains  almost  thirteen
    pages of law and Rules and it is not until page 17 of the decision that
    the Judge considers the evidence. However, between paragraphs [29]  and
    [35] the Judge set out the appellant's claim. Whilst the grounds argued
    the Judge made no reference to the evidence I am satisfied that  anyone
    reading those paragraphs would have been left  in  no  doubt  what  was
    being argued. The Judge made reference to both the  appellant's  mother
    and step-father being  cross-examined  and  to  having  regard  to  the
    witness statements that were contained in the  bundle.  Thereafter  the
    Judge recorded, again in sixteen separate paragraphs,  the  submissions
    of both advocates.

14. From [43] onwards the Judge made  findings.  The  Judge  concluded  the
    appellant's mother came to this country  as  a  visitor  and  chose  to
    overstay from 2007 onwards rather  than  returning  to  her  family  in
    Nigeria. She left the appellant in the sole control of her brother  and
    the  Judge  concluded,  with  reasons,  that  the  brother   had   sole
    responsibility for her until two years ago. The Judge noted the sponsor
    sent money but rejected her claim that  money  was  for  the  appellant
    exclusively. The Judge commented that the appellant's elder sibling was
    also now looking after her and the appellant's mother sent the money to
    this daughter. The Judge considered the evidence about the  appellant's
    schooling and concluded the sister controlled that  and  the  level  of
    contact between the appellant and sponsor was minimal.

15. Whilst permission to appeal was given I am satisfied the Judge did have
    regard to all the evidence. The findings made were open to  the  Judge.
    Between [50]  and  [63]  the  Judge  gave  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim her mother was solely responsible for her. The  Judge
    rejected other  aspects  of  the  claim  and  gave  reasons  for  those
    conclusions. Importantly, the  Judge  found  there  was  no  supporting
    evidence of telephone contact between the appellant and sponsor and the
    sponsor and the school. At [59] the Judge made the  damning  conclusion
    that at no time had the appellant's mother had sole responsibility  for
    her daughter and that it was the appellant's uncle who brought her up.

16. The Judge was entitled to reject the appellant's claim that she met the
    Immigration Rules. Having made that finding the  Judge  considered  the
    position  on  human  rights  grounds.  From  [67]  onwards  the   Judge
    considered proportionality and noted his obligations under  section  55
    of the 2009 Act. For the reasons spelt out in [69] the Judge  concluded
    refusing the application would not breach section 55.

17. I am satisfied there is no error in law in the decision.

    DECISION

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.


Signed                              Date     02/01/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





TO THE RESPONDENT the appellant
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date     02/01/2018


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





