
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/23416/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre     |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 10 July 2019                              |On 17 July 2019          |
|                                             |                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL



                                   Between

                                     M J

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Mottershaw Counsel instructed by Dickson
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS




Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dearden promulgated on 11 February 2019 which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of a human rights claim on all
    grounds.

 3. It is not in dispute that the Appellant applied for leave to remain  as
    a spouse which was refused under Appendix FM on the basis that she  did
    not  have  the  necessary  language  certificate.  The  refusal  letter
    considered EX.1 but while noting that the Sponsor was in receipt of DLA
    found that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in China.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Dearden  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge noted that this was an appeal under  a
    new  system  whereby  all  the  papers   were   sent   to   the   Judge
    electronically. However the Judge notes at paragraph 4 that he did  not
    receive a copy of the grounds of appeal only the notice  of  appeal  or
    any other documents for either the Appellant or  the  Respondent  other
    than the  refusal  letter.  He  found  against  the  Appellant  on  the
    challenges raised in the refusal letter.

 5. Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  arguing  procedural  unfairness  and
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 30 May 2019.

Discussion

 6. Mr Tan conceded that there was procedural unfairness in proceeding when
    the Judge was aware he was not in possession of the relevant papers. It
    was material because even if she had still not  obtained  the  language
    certificate the grounds of appeal had made reference to the  fact  that
    the Sponsor was profoundly deaf and this was clearly relevant to EX.1.

Finding on Material Error

 7. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

 8. The Judge was aware that he  had  no  papers  other  than  the  refusal
    letter. He should have been aware that the  Procedural  Rules  required
    the Appellant to lodge Grounds of Appeal as well as a Notice of  Appeal
    and therefore there were papers that existed that were not before  him.
    I am satisfied that he should have made additional enquiries to  obtain
    those papers. Those papers revealed two issues  that  could  have  been
    material to the outcome of the case  both  by  reference  to  EX.1  and
    Article 8: the Appellant's partner was profoundly deaf which could have
    made a difference to the assessment under EX.1 and the  Respondent  was
    in possession of the Appellants passport and therefore  while  she  was
    subsequently unable to take the test required for the visa  application
    prior to the appeal date she was actually enrolled on a language course
    at a higher level.

 9. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and  determine  these
    issues constitutes a clear error of law. This error I  consider  to  be
    material since had the Tribunal conducted  this  exercise  the  outcome
    could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct  test  to
    apply.

10. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety. All matters to be re-determined afresh.

11. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that  'the  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of
    a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
    and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.'

12. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to procedural unfairness.
    In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and  the  matter
    will be a complete re hearing.

13. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me. I noted that
    Mr Tan gave the Appellant her passport back. I indicated  if  she  took
    the approved test before the date of the resumed hearing it may well be
    that the Respondent will withdraw the decision.



    Signed
    Date 12.7.2019
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
