
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23248/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 September 2018                         |On 25 September 2018          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MR MALIK SALMAN IDREES
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel, instructed by  Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lyndsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity order is made.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.   The  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on February 8, 2011 with leave to  enter  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student. That leave was subsequently extended until April 19,
    2015.

 3. On March 18, 2015 the appellant married the sponsor and  on  April  18,
    2015 he applied for leave to remain as a spouse. The respondent refused
    that application in a decision dated October 4, 2016.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His appeal  came  before
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Graves  (hereinafter  called  "the
    Judge") on February 2, 2018 and in a decision promulgated  on  February
    22, 2018 the Judge allowed his appeal on the basis article 8  ECHR  was
    engaged and that requiring the appellant and sponsor to relocate abroad
    would amount to a disproportionate interference in the sponsor's family
    and private life which outweighed the public interest in removal.

 5. The respondent appealed this decision on February 28, 2018.  Permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Holmes  on
    June 4, 2018.

 6. The matter came before me on July 13, 2018 and on  that  date  I  found
    there was an error in law because  whilst  I  accepted  the  Judge  was
    entitled to look at the appeal under article 8 I found that in carrying
    out the proportionality assessment in paragraph 49 of the decision  the
    Judge did not attach any weight to the  fact  the  appellant  had  used
    deception, in  2012,  to  extend  his  stay.  This  was  a  significant
    deception as without it the appellant  would  not  have  been  able  to
    remain in this country.

 7. In adjourning the matter to today's date,  I  preserved  the  following
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Judge:

      a) The appellant is in a genuine relationship with his wife.

      b) When submitting his  2012  application  for  leave  to  remain  the
         appellant used a fraudulent TOEIC certificate.

      c) The appellant could  not  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  because
         section S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules applies.

      d) The appellant gave vague and shifting evidence and  discussions  he
         had with his family about his marriage.

      e) The Judge did not accept the appellant's family  had  rejected  his
         marriage.

      f) There was little  evidence  about  ties  either  the  appellant  or
         sponsor had in the United Kingdom  as  there  were  no  letters  of
         support and minimal photographs.

      g) The appellant's wife has no  cultural,  religious,  educational  or
         linguistic ties to Pakistan.

      h) The appellant's wife  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  is
         independent and self-supporting. She does not speak Urdu.  She  has
         continuing relationships with family in the United Kingdom.




 8. Additional material was lodged by the  appellant's  representatives  on
    July  6,  2018  and  September  14,  2018  consisting  of  evidence  of
    cancellation of the appellant's Nepalese  passport  from  the  Nepalese
    Embassy, a copy of the Nepal Citizenship Act 2063 (2006) together  with
    statements from appellant and sponsor dated September 9, 2018.

 9. I was also  handed  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Pakistan:
    Interfaith Marriage, January 2016 Report which both parties  wished  to
    refer to.

10. It was common ground that the issue for this  Tribunal  to  decide  was
    whether it would be disproportionate to require the appellant  and  his
    wife to leave the United Kingdom to go and live in either  Pakistan  or
    Nepal or in the alternative to  require  the  appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and reapply for entry clearance.

    SUBMISSIONS

11. Mr Lyndsay acknowledged the new  evidence  that  had  been  served  but
    referred to Section 11 of  the  Nepal  Citizenship  Act  which  clearly
    enabled the appellant's wife to reapply for citizenship of Nepal albeit
    she would have to relinquish her British citizenship. He  submitted  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect her to do so.

12.  Mr  Lyndsay  submitted  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules because Section S-LTR 1.6 applied. He  submitted  the
    appellant could return to Pakistan either on his own and make  a  fresh
    entry clearance application or alternatively return with  his  wife  to
    live in Pakistan.

13. He invited the Tribunal to take into account the following:

      a) The deception had been significant and there was a public  interest
         in maintaining immigration control.

      b) The appellant's immigration status had always been  precarious  and
         this was a factor known to both the appellant  and  his  wife  when
         they began their relationship.

      c) Little weight should be attached to any private life created  at  a
         time when the appellant's immigration status was precarious.

      d) The policy document on interfaith marriages  demonstrated  that  it
         was not illegal for the appellant to marry a non-Muslim woman. Even
         if there was  discrimination  he  submitted  there  was  protection
         available and there would be no  requirement  for  the  appellant's
         wife to convert. Section 5.1.2 made  clear  that  intermarriage  in
         Pakistan was common place and that whilst there were  problems  for
         Muslim  women  wanting  to  marry  non-Muslim  men  there  were  no
         reciprocal problems when a Muslim man wanted to marry a  non-Muslim
         woman. The Judge had previously rejected the appellant's claim that
         his family were against his marriage  and  he  therefore  submitted
         that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant
         returning.

14. Mr Khan invited me to find that there had been insurmountable obstacles
    and that section EX.1 of Appendix FM was  engaged  albeit  he  accepted
    that as there had been a finding of deception the appellant could never
    succeed under this section in this application.

15. Mr Khan accepted that some interfaith marriages were legal but  pointed
    out that as the appellant's wife was a Hindu their  marriage  would  be
    deemed  unlawful  and  the  appellant's  wife  would  face  significant
    problems due to deep seated discrimination and societal  prejudice.  In
    such circumstances internal relocation would not be possible.  Mr  Khan
    submitted the appellant and wife would be unable to settle in Pakistan.

16. Mr Khan further argued that because of the new evidence that  had  been
    submitted the appellant and his wife would be unable to settle in Nepal
    because  his  wife  no  longer  had  Nepalese  citizenship  unless  she
    renounced  her  British  citizenship  which  he  submitted   would   be
    unreasonable bearing in mind she had lived here since 2005.

17. Finally, he argued that any independent entry clearance application was
    bound to fail because it would be refused because  of  the  appellant's
    earlier deception.

    FINDINGS

18. This is a matter whereby the facts  were  properly  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and at  paragraph  28  of  my  earlier  decision  I
    preserved certain findings which I have set out at paragraph 7 above.

19. Both representatives agreed that this Tribunal  would  have  to  decide
    whether it was disproportionate to require the appellant (a) to  return
    alone to Pakistan and make an entry clearance application; (b) and  his
    wife to live their lives in Pakistan or (c) and his wife to go and live
    in Nepal.

20. It has been accepted that this is an appeal outside of the  Immigration
    Rules under article 8 ECHR and in  considering  whether  article  8  is
    engaged I have had regard to  the  principles  of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    00027, subsequent case law on family life and section 117B of the  2002
    Act.

21. Mr Khan submitted that to require the appellant to Pakistan and  submit
    an appropriate entry clearance application was disproportionate because
    the appellant would receive a mandatory refusal under paragraph 320(11)
    HC 395.

22. Part 9 of the Immigration Rules deals with general grounds for refusal.
    Rule A320 states-

         "Paragraphs 320 (except subparagraph (3), (10) and (11)) and 322 do
         not apply to an application for entry clearance, leave to enter  or
         leave to remain as a Family Member under Appendix FM...."

23. Paragraph 320(11)(iv) HC 395 states:


         "Where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant way
         to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by using deception in an
         application for entry clearance, leave to enter or remain or in
         order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third
         party required in support of the application (whether successful or
         not);
         and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,
         not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail
         conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple identities,
         switching nationality, making frivolous applications or not
         complying with the re-documentation process."

24. The appellant clearly would fall with in  subsection  (iv)  but  unless
    there are other aggravating circumstances paragraph 320  HC  395  would
    not mean an automatic refusal.

25. I have also considered whether the option of living in Nepal  would  be
    available to the parties. Section 11 of the Nepal Citizenship makes  it
    clear the appellant's wife has the option of  reapplying  for  Nepalese
    citizenship.

26. The third possibility would be for the appellant and his wife  to  both
    relocate to Pakistan.  Mr  Khan  has  submitted  that  this  is  not  a
    possibility  because  the  appellant's  wife  is  a  Hindu  and  whilst
    interfaith marriages are common in Pakistan a marriage between a Muslim
    male and a Hindu female he submitted  such  a  marriage  would  not  be
    viewed as legal as they  would  face  significant  problems.  Contained
    within the Country Information and Guidance report January 2016 is  the
    approach decision-makers are invited to take when considering whether a
    person who has entered and interfaith marriage  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution.

27.  Section  1.1.2  of  that  document  states  that  interfaith  marriage
    "includes a marriage between a Sunni Muslim and a Hindu. Section  2.2.1
    makes it clear that marriages between different  faiths  and  sects  in
    Pakistan are not uncommon although not all are considered legal. Muslim
    men can marry other Muslim, Christian or Jewish women but according  to
    section 7.1.1 Islamic law does not recognise Muslim marriages to Hindus
    although there were reportedly cases of such  marriages  occurring  and
    there were allegations of Hindu women and girls forcibly  converted  to
    Islam and married to Muslim men.

28. At section 3.1.2 of  that  document  it  is  recognised  that  not  all
    interfaith marriages are legal and this could  make  it  difficult  for
    women in such marriages to access services but this treatment would not
    reach a level of severity to amount to  persecution  or  serious  harm.
    Section 3.1.3 highlights the fact that in individual cases there may be
    a specific risk but as the First-tier Tribunal concluded, and it  is  a
    preserved finding,  the  appellant's  family  had  no  issue  with  his
    marriage, so this potential risk would not apply in this case.

29. The guidance does not  say  that  Islamic  law  does  not  recognise  a
    marriage between a Muslim male and a Hindu woman but such marriages are
    not illegal.  There  is  a  difference  between  a  marriage  not  been
    recognised and a marriage being illegal as evidenced by the fact that a
    marriage between a Muslim woman and a  non-Muslim  male  is  considered
    illegal.

30. I am therefore satisfied that in principle it would be possible for the
    appellant and his wife to relocate to Pakistan.

31. Having considered the possible alternatives in this appeal (as distinct
    from allowing the appeal) I now turn to the practical  consequences  of
    these on the appellant and his wife.

32. I am not required to make a specific  finding  under  section  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  because  this  appellant  cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules for the reasons set  out  above.  Section
    EX.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  defines  "insurmountable
    obstacles" as "very significant difficulties which would  be  faced  by
    the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

33. There would be no insurmountable obstacles to family life either taking
    place in either Pakistan or Nepal so even if I was tasked with making a
    finding under the Rules the appeal would fail.

34. The appellant and his wife married  in  March  2015.  They  have  lived
    together since and I accept  they  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship. If the appellant was required to leave the United Kingdom
    there would be an interference with that family life  and  any  private
    life the appellant had built up at that stage. However, such a decision
    to require the appellant to leave would be in accordance with  the  law
    and for the purposes of maintaining immigration control.

35. The issue ultimately is one of proportionality namely whether it  would
    be disproportionate to require the appellant (and his wife if she  were
    to accompany him) to leave the United Kingdom.

36. Dealing firstly with a possible life in Nepal whilst I accept there are
    no insurmountable obstacles to them enjoying  a  family  life  together
    there I am satisfied that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's wife to relinquish her British citizenship in light of  the
    fact she has lived in this country for the  last  13  years.  Whilst  I
    accept she spent a considerable time living in Nepal, before  she  came
    here, I accept she has no direct ties to Nepal and more importantly she
    is not entitled to return to live there because  she  is  no  longer  a
    citizen of that country. I therefore find this is not an option open to
    the Tribunal.

37. The remaining options, other than for the appellant to remain here, are
    for the appellant to return to Pakistan either on his own or  with  his
    wife.

38. The appellant can make an entry clearance application in the  knowledge
    that there is  no  mandatory  refusal  in  his  case.  The  suitability
    requirements under section S-EC of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules
    do not prevent the appellant being granted entry clearance unless it is
    refused under section S-EC 1.5 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
    I accept that it is possible  the  respondent  could  refuse  a  future
    application under that section but that  would  be  a  matter  for  the
    respondent to consider in a subsequent application.

39. The third option is for the appellant to return to  Pakistan  with  his
    wife. I have already addressed the issue  of  whether  there  were  any
    insurmountable obstacles to this taking place I am satisfied there  are
    none.

40. In assessing the proportionality  of  such  a  decision,  I  take  into
    account  the  preserved  findings.  Whilst  the  appellant's  wife  may
    experience some practical difficulties due to the  fact  she  does  not
    speak Urdu this is a case where both she  and  the  appellant  speak  a
    common language. There would be no reason why the appellant  could  not
    obtain work especially as it has previously  been  found  that  he  has
    retained family ties.

41. The appellant and his wife married in full knowledge that the appellant
    did not have leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.  They  would  have
    been aware that there was every possibility the appellant would have to
    leave the United Kingdom when  his  leave  expired,  and  I  note  they
    married shortly before the expiry of his leave.

42. Even if they are financially independent  and  able  to  speak  English
    these are neutral factor.

43. However, when considering the background to this relationship I  cannot
    overlook the fact that  this  relationship  was  formed  following  the
    appellant's use of deception in 2012. Without that deception  he  would
    not have extended his stay and his relationship would  have  then  been
    formed whilst here unlawfully.

44. Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act makes it clear that the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest. I am  required
    by statute to give this significant weight.

45. In considering whether it  would  be  reasonable  or  proportionate  to
    require the appellant to leave this country, either with or without his
    wife, I have had regard to all matters set out above and have concluded
    that despite the matters  highlighted  by  Mr  Khan  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to require him to leave the United Kingdom and  return
    either with or without his wife.

46. There are no dependent or qualifying children  in  this  case  and  the
    appellant cannot benefit from the  respondent's  February  2018  family
    migration policy or section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.  Without  any
    exceptional or compelling circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  the  public
    interest requires the refusal of this application.







    DECISION

47. I have previously set aside the First-tier Judge's decision on July 13,
    2018. I remake the decision and dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Signed                              Date     21/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     21/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
