
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/23455/2016
                                                               HU/23462/2016
                                                               HU/23464/2016
                                                               HU/23469/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2018                     |             On 29 March 2018        |



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     O A
                                    B O A
                                     D A
                                     D A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Izevbizua
For the Respondent:    Mrs Obomi


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. An anonymity order was made in respect of these  Appellants  and  shall
    continue.

 2. To avoid confusion the parties are referred to  as  they  were  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Somal promulgated on 12 June 2017, which  dismissed  the
    Appellants appeals for leave to  remain  on  family  and  private  life
    grounds.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Somal ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision.

 5. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the  Judge  failed  to  take
    into account that A3 and 4 met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE the
    Immigration Rules and therefore all should be allowed  to  remain;  the
    Judge failed to recognise that there were particular circumstances that
    being  twins  would  present  very  significant   obstacles   to   them
    reintegrating in Nigeria; the Judge failed  to  properly  consider  the
    best interests for the children; the Judge failed  in  accordance  with
    the Respondents own policy to identify the very strong reasons  why  it
    was reasonable for children who had lived in the  UK  at  the  time  of
    hearing for 9 years should leave.

 6. On 8 December 2017Judge Keane gave permission to appeal.

 7. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Izevbizua on behalf  of  the
    Appellants that :

 8. He relied on the skeleton argument. The childrens' best interests  were
    to remain in  the  UK  given  their  length  of  residence:  while  not
    determinative this is a  very  strong  factor.  The  children  will  be
    qualified to register as British in 9/10 months.

 9. The parents' circumstances cannot be used against the children.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mrs Abomi submitted that :

11. The Judge made adequate  findings  about  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and the issue of  reasonableness.  Being  a  qualifying  child
    under s 117B6 was not determinative and the Judge considered all of the
    relevant factors. There was nothing to outweigh the public interest  in
    immigration control.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. Contrary to what was asserted in the grounds at paragraph 3  there  was
    nothing in the evidence before the Judge to suggest that being  a  twin
    in any way impacted on the family's ability to reintegrate  in  Nigeria
    or would present insurmountable obstacles.

14. Contrary to what was asserted in paragraph 2 and 4 of the  Grounds  the
    Judge did not  find  that  A3  and  A4  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, specifically paragraph 276ADE (iv) : what  she  said
    at paragraph 16 was that the children  were  ''qualifying  children  in
    that they had accrued 7 years residence but the provision also required
    her to consider if they had 7 years residence whether it was reasonable
    for them to return to Nigeria with their parents which is what she did.

15. It is asserted that the Judge did not consider the  best  interests  of
    the children although she specifically refers to the importance of this
    at paragraphs 16 17 18 19 24 25 and 26. She also notes at paragraph  24
    that the best interests of the children are not  determinative  of  the
    appeal and can be outweighed by other factors.

16. The Judge at paragraph 16 correctly identified  based  on  Azimi-Moayed
    and others (decisions affecting children;  onward  appeals)[2013]  UKUT
    197(IAC) (Blake J) that the starting point for the  best  interests  of
    the  children  was  that  they  remained  with  their  parents   before
    identifying those other factors set out in the case as relevant to  the
    issue of their best interests. She also went  on  in  paragraph  17  to
    consider the medical evidence, their young age, their ability to  speak
    the main language of Nigeria and would have the help of  their  parents
    in settling in Nigeria.

17. The Judge properly identifies that the children's  best  interests  and
    the significant weight (paragraph 20) to be attached to their length of
    residence can be outweighed by the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
    immigration control coupled with the  Appellants  immigration  history.
    The caselaw of R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  UT
    (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 while not referred  to  by  the  Judge
    makes clear at paragraph 47 that even if the childrens  best  interests
    were to remain in the UK this was not determinative " If Parliament had
    wanted the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of  the  leave
    application, it would have said so." Moreover  the  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of return must not focus on the position of the children
    and this has been made clear in MA referred to above  and  also  in  AM
    (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180 . The Judge was  therefore  entitled  to
    take into account that both adult Appellants had  been  in  the  UK  as
    overstayers since 2007 and 2005 and while not explicitly  referring  to
    this they had accessed public services in the UK they were not entitled
    to.

18. The decision when considering the interrelationship of  rules,  statute
    and case law, the reasoning might be described  as  rather  circuitous,
    but there is no doubt, reading the decision as a whole, that the  judge
    has correctly self-directed  and  reached  a  conclusion  open  on  the
    evidence and within the assessment thresholds.

CONCLUSION

19. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20. The appeal is dismissed.

21. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008 9as
    amended) the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.

   Signed                                                              Date
   27.3.2018
