
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
hu/23509/2018

                                            hu/23512/2018

                                            hu/23518/2018

                                            hu/02893/2019

                                            hu/02895/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 June 2019                      |    On 16 July 2019                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                     mrs salema begum (first appellant)
                  mr Tarek Ahmed Tanvir (second appellant)
                   mr Taher Ahmed fahad (third appellant)
                    miss Kolsuma begum (fourth appellant)
                   miss Shamima sultana (fifth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Wilford of Counsel, DJ Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO





                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants have been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant dismissing  their  appeals  against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse them  leave  to  remain  under
    Appendix FM.

2.   The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  They are a mother  and  her
    four adult children.  The children are dependent on the first appellant
    for the outcome of their appeals.

3.   The first appellant entered the UK with a  spouse  visa  valid  from  9
    February 2013 until 9 April 2015.  The children came in  as  dependants
    on the same visa.  On 2 April 2015  the  first  appellant  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a spouse and this was granted until  29  May
    2017.  She then made a further application for leave to remain but  was
    refused because she did not supply the evidence demonstrating that  she
    has a sufficient knowledge  of  the  English  language  and  sufficient
    knowledge  about  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance   with
    paragraphs 2.2 and 2.3 of Appendix KoLL.

4.   The first appellant had requested that  she  be  given  exemption  from
    this requirement and had provided a letter from  her  GP  which  states
    that she is suffering from bilateral cataracts and dry eyes.  This  can
    be rectified through surgery.

5.   It is the respondent's case that the first appellant has not been  able
    to provide sufficient evidence  with  her  application  to  satisfy  an
    exemption from the KoLL requirement.  In  reaching  this  decision  the
    respondent relied upon the UK guidance  about  knowledge  of  life  and
    language in the UK.  Accordingly, the application for leave was refused
    along with those of the adult children as her dependants.

6.   In addition to all the medical evidence in the appellants' bundle,  the
    first appellant relied on the Killick Street Health Centre letter  from
    Dr Polly Wootton her GP which said as follows:

         "I am writing as Ms Begum's General Practitioner  to  confirm  that
         she suffers from significant bilateral cataracts which obscure  her
         vision and significantly reduce her ability to read.  She has  been
         referred to the Ophthalmology Outpatients who are not  prepared  to
         do an operation until she is able  to  lie  still.   Unfortunately,
         several  conditions  preclude  her  from  being  able  to  do  this
         including lower  back  pain  and  chronic  cough  (which  is  under
         investigation by Respiratory Outpatients).  For the medium to  long
         term she is unable to  have  an  operation  on  her  cataracts  and
         therefore is unable to read and study.  Mrs Begum is  dependent  on
         her husband Mr  Muhammad  Mukhtar  Ali  for  emotional  and  mental
         support.  Her children  support  her  by  taking  her  to  clinical
         appointments and assisting her with cooking.  If Mrs Begum were  to
         be separated from her husband and  children,  this  would  cause  a
         drastic deterioration in her mental health as she  would  not  have
         the emotional and physical support that she  requires  on  a  daily
         basis."

7.   It was the appellants' case that the evidence from her GP could not  be
    clearer.  She is not able to use the computers during the speaking  and
    listening test because the cataracts in  her  eyes  have  impaired  her
    vision.  She is also unable to undergo  surgery  at  the  present  time
    because of her other ailments in particular, a  chronic  cough  due  to
    asthma.  Her poor vision has made it difficult to perform most  of  the
    basic chores in the home, such as cooking and cleaning and she  can  no
    longer enjoy reading the Quran  nor  can  she  sit  or  stand  for  any
    extended periods.

8.   She does not wish the family to be  divided.   They  are  a  close-knit
    family and the children all help her and  her  husband.   She  and  her
    husband are suffering from challenging health issues and  are  able  to
    maintain themselves financially through her husband's income and  their
    children's contributions from their  earnings.   Notwithstanding  their
    difficult circumstances, the appellant is happy to be with her  husband
    and children, without which she would not be able to cope.   She  knows
    that if they were to be separated this  will  have  a  serious  adverse
    effect on both her and her husband's mental and physical health.

9.   The appellant's husband gave evidence and confirmed that he  had  first
    arrived in the UK in 1999 to build a better life for  himself  and  his
    family members once he was able to bring them to the UK.  Eventually on
    2 November 2010 he was granted indefinite leave to  remain.   His  wife
    Salema and the two eldest children called Kolsuma and Tarek entered the
    UK on 2 February 2013.  The youngest children Taher and Shamima  joined
    the family on 29 March 2014.

10.  Mr Ali suffers from bilateral  glaucoma,  chronic  obstructive  airways
    disease, mobility issues, difficulty swallowing and depression.  He was
    also quite forgetful.  As a result, he  cannot  do  basic  things  like
    changing  his  clothes,  making  food  or  moving  around  without  the
    assistance of his wife and children.

11.  Taher's witness statement states  that  he  received  an  unconditional
    offer at Goldsmiths College to study computer science, but he has  been
    unable to take up his place because he does not  meet  the  eligibility
    criteria for a student loan while his application is pending  with  the
    Home Office.  His offer of a place has been deferred for one year so he
    can commence the course in the Autumn of  2019  if  he  is  allowed  to
    remain in the UK.

12.  Tarek, in his witness statement, said he has recently  started  working
    as a part-time Tandoori chef in a  restaurant.   The  purpose  of  this
    employment was to contribute towards the family's living expenses.   He
    works sixteen hours a week so that he can also be available at home  to
    assist his parents with their care.

13.  The judge considered the first appellant's explanation in her  evidence
    that she can speak English, but because of her eyesight she is not able
    to study for any test.  Equally, because of her  eyesight  she  is  not
    able to take any test at a computer terminal.  The judge observed  that
    she gave her evidence through an interpreter and not in English.

14.  The judge noted that the first appellant is supported in her appeal  by
    a letter from her  general  practitioner  who  has  explained  why  her
    eyesight cannot be resolved through a medium  to  long-term  timeframe.
    This is because she suffers from asthma which causes her to  cough  and
    therefore she cannot lie still for the ophthalmologists  to  carry  out
    the operation.  The judge made an observation at this point  by  saying
    that the first appellant did not cough at all  during  the  proceedings
    before the Tribunal.  The judge went on to say  that  cataract  surgery
    does not take a long time.  She said there  was  no  evidence  provided
    from the ophthalmologists who are required to treat her to  state  that
    she is an unsuitable candidate for the surgery, and if she is unable to
    have surgery under a  local  anaesthetic,  whether  or  not  some  mild
    sedation could be given to enable her to lie still while the  procedure
    is carried out.  Consequently, the judge was  not  satisfied  that  the
    first appellant has shown that she has a physical  condition  which  is
    permanent which exempts her from taking the test.

15.  The judge suggested that even with cataracts, the first  appellant  can
    study for the test by having one of her children read out the  material
    to her for her to learn and recite back.   The  judge  said  the  first
    appellant could also ask the test centre to make  special  arrangements
    for her under the provisions of the Disability Discrimination Act,  for
    her to have special arrangements for the taking of the test which might
    be someone to read the questions to her for her to reply to and for the
    person assisting her to type any answers the appellant wishes to  give.
    In the light of these suggestions, the judge was  not  satisfied,  even
    with bilateral cataracts that there are no  special  arrangements  that
    can be made.  In other words, she found  that  the  appellant  has  not
    shown that she is permanently unable to take the test.

16.  Consequently, the judge found that the first appellant could  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules for the reasons set out by the respondent in  the
    refusal, a decision which she upheld.

17.  The judge found that none of the appellants can meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE  because  she  was  satisfied  that  there  are  no
    significant difficulties to relocation back to Bangladesh  and  to  the
    family home in which they all resided together prior to  their  arrival
    in the UK to join the sponsor.

18.  The judge did not accept that the family are required to  be  separated
    as suggested in the evidence before the Tribunal.  She noted  that  the
    sponsor is now in receipt of a  pension  which  will  be  paid  to  him
    whether he is in the UK or Bangladesh.   She  was  therefore  satisfied
    that he could return to Bangladesh to remain with the  family  who  can
    continue to care for him and the first appellant  there  just  as  well
    they could in the UK.  Therefore, she did not accept that any right  to
    respect for family life with  the  sponsor  will  be  breached  by  the
    decision of the respondent to require the first appellant and her  four
    adult children to return to Bangladesh because he can return  with  his
    family and there seems no good reason why he should not do so.

19.  In terms of Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules, the judge  said
    that neither Kolsuma or Shamima provided any  evidence  in  support  of
    their appeals as to the private life they enjoy in  the  UK.   She  was
    aware that Taher's immigration status has prevented  him  commencing  a
    degree course.  She was satisfied that he can study computer science in
    Bangladesh.  The judge considered that Tarek works part-time because of
    the caring requirements for both parents.  The judge was satisfied that
    he can replicate this lifestyle in Bangladesh.

20.  The judge accepted that the sponsor has been in the UK a long time  and
    has waited a long time for his family to be able to join him.  However,
    on the evidence there was no good reason why family life could  not  be
    enjoyed as a family of six in Bangladesh  where  there  is  a  home  to
    return to and where the sponsor's pension can continue to be  paid  and
    where the children can find work.  Save for the sponsor, the appellants
    have not been in the UK for any significant period of time.

21.  The judge held that the right  to  respect  for  family  life  was  not
    engaged in  this  appeal  for  the  reasons  already  given.   She  was
    satisfied that the right to respect for private life was engaged.   She
    gave little weight to the private life established in  the  UK  by  the
    appellant and her four adult children, because she was  satisfied  that
    the private  life  is  of  a  nature  that  can  be  re-established  in
    Bangladesh.

22.  The judge took into account the public interest considerations set  out
    in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    She noted that the four adult children speak English but held that this
    is a neutral factor.  She noted that with  the  earnings  of  the  four
    adult children the appellant can meet the financial requirements of the
    Immigration Rules, but again found that this is a neutral factor.   She
    noted that the first appellant is a  burden  on  the  public  purse  in
    relation to her NHS treatment and that  is  likely  to  continue.   She
    noted that the first appellant has not shown that she can speak English
    (although she claimed that before the Tribunal) which is a factor  that
    militates against her.  All the appellants have been  in  the  UK  with
    precarious immigration status because they have not had permanent leave
    to remain, consequently little weight should be given to their  private
    lives established in the UK.  The  judge  gave  weight  to  the  public
    interests  in  the  effective  immigration  control  and  the  economic
    wellbeing of the UK.

23.  The judge relied on GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 which makes it  clear
    that the fact medical treatment might be of a lesser  standard  in  the
    country of origin is not grounds for allowing an appeal under Article 3
    or Article 8 grounds.  The judge was satisfied that there are hospitals
    and doctors in Bangladesh and that the first appellant and her husband,
    if he chooses  to  return  to  Bangladesh  with  the  family  can  seek
    appropriate treatment for their various conditions in Bangladesh.

24.  Taking account of the factors in favour of appellants  and  factors  in
    favour of the respondent the judge was satisfied that  the  balance  of
    proportionality lay in favour of the respondent.

25.  In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge C J Gumsley held  that
    it is arguable that the judge did "insert"  an  additional  requirement
    for a person to be able to show  that  they  have  permanent  condition
    which prevented them from taking the ELT, which is not contained in the
    Rules.  In addition, and although matters of weight to be  attached  to
    evidence produced, and the sufficiency of that evidence, are  generally
    for the judge, Judge Gumsley held that it is arguable that the  judge's
    decision in relation to the Immigration Rules was  not  sustainable  on
    the evidence before her.  Consequently, it is also  arguable  that  the
    judge's approach to the assessment of any  Article  8  claim  was  also
    flawed.

26.  Mr Wilford submitted that the issue in this case is whether or not  the
    first Appellant is entitled to an exemption  to  the  English  language
    test ("ELT") and to the knowledge about Life in the UK Test.

27.  Mr Wilford submitted that the judge applied an  elevated  threshold  by
    requiring the appellant to show that she has a physical condition which
    is permanent, and which exempts her from taking the test.   Mr  Wilford
    submitted  that  neither  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  nor  the
    Immigration Rules, as expressed in paragraph 284,  makes  reference  to
    the requirement of permanent inability on medical grounds to  avail  an
    applicant of the exemption.

28.  Mr Wilford relied on paragraph 13 of the grounds  where  he  cites  the
    Respondent's policy as follows:

         "This exemption would only apply where the applicant has a physical
         or mental condition which prevents them from  learning  English  or
         taking an approved English  language  test  at  the  required  CEFR
         level.  This is not a blanket exemption.  Some disabled people  are
         capable of learning English and taking  an  approved  test  at  the
         required level and some will not."

29.  Mr Wilford submitted that it is evident from the evidence  provided  by
    the appellant's GP that the first appellant falls into the category  of
    those who "will not" be capable of learning English accommodated by the
    policy.

30.  Mr Wilford submitted that the judge made reference  to  the  Disability
    Act and relied on irrelevant observations that the first appellant  was
    able to take the exam absent the  operation.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge's observation that the appellant did not cough was an observation
    made during the relatively short hearing.

31.  Mr Wilford submitted that the judge's suggestion of  potential  methods
    the first appellant could take the test were immaterial.  There was  no
    suggestion that the judge has any medical expertise on this matter.

32.  Mr Wilford submitted that the judge erred in finding that  family  life
    was not engaged in this appeal.  He submitted that this  was  not  made
    with reference to Kugathas v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  31  which  requires
    there to be "something more than normal emotional ties",  as  clarified
    in Gurung.  He submitted that the judge failed  to  take  into  account
    that the first appellant's husband is dependent on the support  of  the
    children.

33.  He submitted that in conducting the proportionality exercise the  judge
    failed to take into account that the  first  appellant's  eyesight  had
    deteriorated since she had initially obtained leave to  remain  in  the
    UK.

34.  Mr Avery submitted that in using the  word  permanent,  the  judge  was
    looking at whether or not there was any  medium-term  solution  to  the
    first appellant being able to take the test.   There  was  no  evidence
    from an ophthalmologist and the first appellant had given weak  reasons
    as to why she could not  take  the  test.   Consequently,  the  judge's
    conclusions on this issue were valid.  In the  alternative,  the  judge
    made suggestions at paragraph 24 as to the first appellant  asking  the
    test centre to make special arrangements for her under  the  provisions
    of the Disability Discrimination Act.

35.  Mr Avery referred to the Knowledge of  language  and  life  in  the  UK
    Guidance: Exemption  because  of  physical  or  mental  condition.   He
    submitted that this guidance gives instances  where  the  Secretary  of
    State can exercise discretion, where the applicant is suffering from  a
    long-term illness or disability that severely restricts  their  ability
    to learn English or prepare for the Life in the UK Test or has a mental
    condition.  The Secretary of State is  required  to  consider  how  the
    condition would prevent the applicant from taking the test in instances
    where an applicant is deaf, without speech or has a  speech  impediment
    which limits their ability to communicate in a relevant  language.   Mr
    Avery submitted that the judge's suggestion that  the  appellant  could
    ask the test centre to make special  arrangements  for  her  under  the
    provisions of the Disability Discrimination Act  was  relevant  to  the
    exercise of discretion.  He submitted that the burden was on the  first
    appellant and she could not meet this requirement.

36.  In respect of the Article 8 issue, Mr Avery submitted  that  the  judge
    took account of all the evidence.  Her Article 8  findings  were  sound
    and sustainable.

37.  Having considered the arguments by both parties, I accept Mr  Wilford's
    submission that the judge applied an erroneous test  by  requiring  the
    first appellant to satisfy her that she has a physical condition  which
    is "permanent" and exempts her from taking  the  English  language  and
    Life in the UK Test.  The word  "permanent"  does  not  appear  in  the
    policy that was cited by Mr Wilford or in the  Rules  as  expressed  in
    paragraph 284.   As a consequence, I find that the judge erred  in  law
    by applying an elevated threshold requiring the  appellant  to  satisfy
    that she had a permanent inability to take that test.

38.   I  further  find  that  the  judge  took   into   account   irrelevant
    considerations  in  determining  the  exemption  issue.   The   judge's
    observation that  the  appellant  did  not  cough  at  all  during  the
    proceedings before her, should have included the fact that the  hearing
    was of short duration.  I find that the judge also speculated as to the
    potential methods for operating on the first appellant  and  the  other
    ways she could  improve  her  English  or  facilitate  her  ability  to
    undertake the test.

39.  I also find that the judge's conclusion that family life did not  exist
    between the  appellants  and  their  father  was  unsustainable.   This
    finding was made without relevance to the test  in  Kugathas;  and  the
    fact that the first appellant's eyesight had deteriorated since she was
    granted leave to remain in the UK.

40.  For these reasons I find that the judge's  decision  cannot  stand.   I
    set it aside and remake it.

41.  I find that the respondent's exemption applies to the first  appellant.
     The letter from her GP indicates that she  has  a  physical  condition
    which prevents her from taking the English language test.   The  letter
    from the GP is cited at paragraph  9  of  the  judge's  decision.   The
    pertinent extract states as follows:

         "I am writing at Ms Begum's General Practitioner  to  confirm  that
         she suffers from significant bilateral cataracts which obscure  her
         vision and significantly reduce her ability to read.  She has  been
         referred to the Ophthalmology Outpatients who are not  prepared  to
         do an operation until she is able  to  lie  still.   Unfortunately,
         several  conditions  preclude  her  from  being  able  to  do  this
         including lower back pain and  a  chronic  cough  (which  is  under
         investigation by Respiratory Outpatients).  For the medium to  long
         term she is unable to have an operation on  her  cataracts  and  is
         therefore unable to read and study."

42.  In the light of this evidence,  I  find  that  the  appellant  was  not
    required to produce a further letter from an Ophthalmologist.   I  find
    that the GP was relying on what the Ophthalmologist had  told  her.   I
    find that  this  was  sufficient  to  enable  the  first  appellant  to
    discharge the burden upon her to show that she is not able to take  the
    test for the reasons given by her GP for the medium to long-term.

43.   Consequently,  I  find  that  the  first   appellant   satisfies   the
    Immigration Rule on this matter.

44.  With respect to Article 8, I find on the evidence before  me  that  the
    appellant and her children have established a family  life  with  their
    sponsor.  The GP in  her  letter  said  that  the  first  appellant  is
    dependent on her husband, Mr Mukhtar  Ali,  for  emotional  and  mental
    support.   Her  children  support  her  by  taking  her   to   clinical
    appointments and assisting her with cooking.  The GP said if the  first
    applicant were to be separated from  her  husband  and  children,  this
    would cause a drastic deterioration in her mental health as  she  would
    not have the emotional and physical support  that  she  requires  on  a
    daily basis.

45.  The evidence before the judge was that Mr Ali  suffers  from  bilateral
    glaucoma,  chronic  obstructive  airways  disease,   mobility   issues,
    difficulty swallowing and depression.  He is also quite forgetful.   As
    a result, he cannot do basic things like changing his  clothes,  making
    food or moving around without the assistance of his wife and  children.



46.  I find that  this  evidence  goes  beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties
    between adults and satisfies the Kugathas test.

47.  I take into account the  public  interest  considerations  set  out  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  I
    accept that  because  the  appellant  and  her  children  do  not  have
    permanent leave to remain  in  the  UK,  their  immigration  status  is
    precarious.  Nevertheless, there are public consideration factors  that
    lie in their favour.   The judge accepted that the four adult  children
    speak English.  Although the  first  appellant  said  she  could  speak
    English, she gave her evidence through an interpreter.   I  have  found
    however that the first appellant satisfies  the  exemption  to  provide
    evidence of her ability to speak English. The judge accepted that  with
    the earnings of the four adult children, the  appellant  can  meet  the
    financial requirement.  They  are  therefore  financially  independent.



48.  I find that there are exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case  which
    would render the respondent's decision in breach of Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Their father and sponsor has been in the UK since 1999.  He  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in November 2010.   He  now  suffers
    from various ailments and as a result requires assistance from his wife
    and children to do basic  things  for  himself.   The  first  appellant
    herself also suffers  from  various  ailments  and  also  requires  the
    assistance of the children to do basic things for herself.  This  is  a
    family which is dependent on each other and are not reliant on  welfare
    benefits in the UK. They are financially self-sufficient.

49.  While the first appellant and the children were  separated  from  their
    husband and father for many years, they were given a chance to join him
    in the UK and live together as a family.   I  find  that  it  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh to require their husband and father, who has  spent
    a substantial part of his life in the UK, worked and earned a  pension,
    to now leave the UK and re-establish life with them  in  Bangladesh,  a
    country which he has been away from for about twenty years.

Notice of Decision

50.  On the evidence before me I find that it would be  disproportionate  to
    require this family to leave the UK.

51.  Accordingly, their appeals are allowed.

52.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  10 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
