
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23669/2018
                                                               HU/23673/2018
                                                               HU/23678/2018
                                                               HU/23683/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 22 January 2021                   |On 8 February 2021                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 BEGUM SADIA
                                ROSHIA BEGUM
                                 HAMDU MIAH
                              MUJAKKIR HUSSAIN
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan, instructed by Aubrey, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and the  respondents
    as the 'appellants', as they appeared respectively  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh. The first and
    the third appellants are wife and husband. The appellants  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 8 November 2018 refusing their  human  rights  applications.  The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  28  November  2019,
    allowed the appeals. The appellants now appeal, with permission, to the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. During the course of the application and appeal, 20 years elapsed  from
    the date (September 1999) the third appellant  had  first  entered  the
    United Kingdom. The judge acknowledged [42] that the appellant had  not
    completed  20  years  continuous  residence  from  the  date   of   his
    application to the Secretary of State (28 February 2018) so  could  not
    in consequence meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of HC 295  (as
    amended). The judge also found as a fact that the appellants would  not
    encounter very significant obstacles on return to Bangladesh  [46].  In
    the conclusion of his analysis [55], the judge highlighted  the  length
    of residence of the third appellant and to his finding that  the  first
    and fourth appellants had spent the Immigration Rules 'formative years'
    living in the United Kingdom. He  found  that  the  appeals  should  be
    allowed on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds.

 3. In essence, the  Secretary  of  State  grounds  take  issue  with  this
    conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal. First, the third  appellant  had
    entered the United Kingdom using  deception  and  had  also  failed  to
    report; it was likely that he would be denied  discretionary  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence on the basis of unsuitability  so
    the judge had placed improper weight on a factor which was by no  means
    certain as seemed to accept. Secondly, it was also unclear why the fact
    that two of the appellants had  spent  their  formative  years  in  the
    United  Kingdom  should   be   accorded   such   weight   given   that,
    notwithstanding that fact, the judge had found   there  exist  no  very
    significant obstacles to their re-integration into Bangladesh. Thirdly,
    there was nothing in the judge's analysis to show  that  he  had  given
    adequate regard to application of section 117B of  the  2002  Act.  The
    judge had referred to these statutory provisions in  general  terms  at
    [47] but he had not applied the provisions to the  facts  as  he  found
    them or expressly considered how the provisions  might  impact  on  the
    proportionality assessment. Finally, the judge had failed  to  consider
    the precarious nature of any award of  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    which  the  third  appellant  might  obtain  on  account  of  his  long
    residence.

 4. Mr Khan, who appeared for the appellants, submitted that the judge  had
    before him 'massive' evidence of the educational  achievements  of  the
    second and fourth appellants. There had been no need for the  judge  in
    his analysis to refer to all the evidence of which he had taken account
    whilst the decision he had reached had manifestly been available to him
    on the evidence.

 5. The judge's conclusions at [55] not unreasonably highlight a couple  of
    factors which he found played a decisive part in his decision. I accept
    that he did  not  err  in  law  simply  because  he  did  not  set  out
    exhaustively in this conclusion all the  various  issues  or  items  of
    evidence which he had considered, some of which are  addressed  earlier
    in the decision. Having said that, it  is  clear  that  the  prominence
    given to two factors (the 'formative years' of the  second  and  fourth
    appellants and the third appellant's long residence) is problematic.  I
    agree with Mr Bates that the judge has not reconciled the weight  which
    he has given to the time the  younger  appellants  have  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom with his finding that they could, without  meeting  very
    significant  obstacles,  return  to  Bangladesh.  Indeed,  he  has  not
    considered at all the fact that the family as a whole  could  chose  to
    pursue their family life together in  Bangladesh  irrespective  of  the
    either of the factors which the judge highlights. I agree also with the
    respondent that the judge has rather paid lip service  to  the  Section
    117 provisions  without  actually  applying  them  to  the  facts.  For
    example, the judge makes nothing of his finding that the family  cannot
    support itself financially.  As  regards  the  third  appellant's  long
    residence, I agree with the respondent that the  judge  has  failed  to
    consider whether the appellant might,  notwithstanding  his  length  of
    residence, still fail to achieve a  grant  of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain  on  suitability  grounds  and  that  he  has  also  failed   to
    acknowledge the relevance in the proportionality assessment of the fact
    that, even if granted discretionary leave to  remain,  his  immigration
    status would remain precarious.

 6. The two factors highlighted by the judge at [55] whilst not necessarily
    determinative of the  appeal  in  the  judge's  mind,  plainly  figured
    prominently in his reasoning. For the reasons given by the  respondent,
    neither factor is entitled to carry the weight which the judge  assigns
    to it. In addition, other relevant factors have not been  brought  into
    the analysis at all. In consequence, I agree with  Mr  Bates  that  the
    judge has failed to provide adequate reasons to the Secretary of  State
    to explain why she lost. This is not say that the appeal could not,  on
    these facts, have succeeded; the judge's error is one of process rather
    than perversity. Whilst I set  aside  the  decision  for  legal  error,
    therefore, I shall not simply reverse the outcome. I  accept  that  the
    circumstances of the appellants may have altered  over  the  period  of
    more than a year which has elapsed since the promulgation of the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision; indeed,  Mr  Khan  told  me  that  the  third
    appellant has suffered a heart attack  in  recent  months.  Given  that
    there may need to be further fact-finding, I return the appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to  remake  the  decision  at  or
    following a hearing de novo.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Cameron; first available  date;  Taylor  House;  no
    interpreter; 1.5 hours; First-tier Tribunal to determine  whether  face
    to face or remote hearing) for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at
    or following a hearing de novo.




    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
    22 January 2021
