
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23143/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|On 1st September 2020                |On 6th October 2020                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    YAAM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Buchanan promulgated on the 17 June 2019  following  a
       hearing at Belfast [Laganside Court] in which the Judge dismissed the
       appellants appeal against the refusal of her application for leave to
       remain on human rights grounds.
    2. Following  permission  to  appeal  being  granted  to  the  appellant
       directions were sent to the parties  indicating  a  preliminary  view
       that the issue of whether the First-tier Tribunal had made  an  error
       of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal could  be  made
       without a hearing, inviting submission on this point,  and  providing
       the  opportunity  to  provide  further  material.  The  parties  have
       responded, and their observations taken into account.
    3. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    4. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    5. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34. -


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when  deciding  whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision  which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
                Tribunal to-


                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)     make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

    6. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to  exercise  the
       discretion provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of law  question
       to be determined on the papers. Nothing on the facts  or  in  law  is
       made out that makes consideration of the issues on the papers not  in
       accordance with overriding objectives at this stage.

Background

    7. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23 June 1991.
    8. The Judge, having considered the  evidence  made  available  in  both
       written and oral form, sets out his findings of fact from [38] of the
       decision  under  challenge  by  reference  to  a  number  of   headed
       paragraphs dealing with  those  issues  considered  relevant  to  the
       appeal.
    9.  The  Judge  concludes  the  appellant  is  not  able  to  meet   the
       requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at  either  the  date   of
       application or date of appeal. Thereafter  the  Judge  considers  the
       merits of the claim outside the Rules, from [79], concluding at [139]
       that having regard to findings set out in  the  preceding  paragraphs
       the respondent had satisfied the Judge that any interference  in  the
       family and private life relied upon was a proportionate response  for
       the purposes of maintaining an effective immigration  policy  in  the
       United Kingdom; leading to the appeal being dismissed on all grounds.


   10. The appellant sought permission to appeal  asserting  the  Judge  had
       made a material error of law.  Permission to appeal  was  refused  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal and  renewed  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal where it was granted on 16 January 2020, the operative  part
       of the grant being in the following terms:

           "1.    A key feature of the appellants case was that she enjoyed
                "family live" for the purposes of Article 8 EC HR  with  her
                two nieces, the children of her brother and sister  in  law.
                The judge found that family life did not  exist.  At  [120],
                the judge said that no explanation had been provided  as  to
                why the mother of the nieces, the appellant's sister-in-law,
                had not participated in the proceedings. In her statement at
                [37], the appellant wrote that her brother had forbidden her
                sister-in-law  from  participating   the   proceedings,   or
                providing any help to the appellant. An extensive background
                of alleged controlling and abusive behaviour on the part  of
                the brother is set out in the appellants witness  statement.
                It is arguable that the judge fell into error  when  stating
                that the absence of the  appellants  sister-in-law  had  not
                been justified or otherwise explained to  the  tribunal,  in
                light of the appellants statement. It is arguable  that  the
                judge  held  her  absence  and   nonparticipation   in   the
                proceedings against the appellant  when  concluding  against
                the appellant that family life for the purposes of Article 8
                did not exist between the  appellant  and  the  nieces.  The
                evidence of the children's mother arguably could  have  been
                key  to  that  finding.  It  is  arguable  that  the   judge
                approached this issue pursuant to an error of  fact,  which,
                under R [Iran] [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [9(vii)] was  arguably
                material.


           2. Although the claimed background of abuse features extensively
                in the appellants witness  statement,  the  judge  does  not
                appear  to  have  referred  to  it  in  his  proportionality
                assessment. Arguably,  that  was  a  failure  to  take  into
                account  a  material  factor.  I  grant  permission  on  all
                grounds."


Grounds and submissions

   11. The appellant asserts the error of fact arises  where  at  [120]  the
       Judge recorded that the appellant had been told that  her  sister  in
       law and mother of her nieces "could not write a statement  or  attend
       the hearing" but the Judge went on to state "no explanation is  given
       to explain why the children's mother might not have been able to  say
       that directly to the appellant's representatives".
   12. The grounds assert that the appellants statement sets out  in  detail
       her allegation regarding her brother's behaviour.  At  [37]  of  that
       document the appellant stated:

           "I have asked [L] if she would  provide  me  with  a  letter  of
           support for my appeal. She told me she wants to help  and  asked
           my brother if she could write a letter. He told her no, that she
           could not write a statement or attend  the  hearing.  This  also
           applies to my  nieces.  It  makes  me  angry  to  think  of  him
           controlling them, but I do not want to push  [L].  She  has  her
           children and her own problems with my brother to worry about."

   13. It is asserted this should be classed as a failure of  the  Judge  to
       take into account a material matter predicated upon an assertion that
       there was no reference to  the  background  of  abuse  including  the
       evidence the appellant was a victim of domestic abuse at the hands of
       a brother, as set out in her  statement,  when  concluding  that  the
       interference with the  appellants  family  and  private  life  was  a
       proportionate response. It is also asserted that the Judge  erred  in
       law in failing to take into account and assess the best interests  of
       the appellant's nieces.
   14. The grounds also assert the Judge erred in law in relation to section
       55 Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in  concluding  there
       had been no breach as it is claimed there is no evidence to show that
       the respondent had discharged her duties under section 55 in  respect
       of the children. The grounds assert that pursuant to JG v  The  Upper
       Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber if it was found a breach  of
       section 55 had occurred, that was relevant to  the  consideration  of
       article 8 as to whether the  best  interests  of  the  children  were
       properly taken into account.
   15. The respondent has filed a response to the submissions dated 17 April
       2020 in which it is submitted the Judge made no error of law material
       to the decision to dismiss the appeal.

Error of law

   16. This is a detailed decision in which  the  judge  clearly  took  into
       account all the evidence provided with the required degree of anxious
       scrutiny.
   17. In relation to paragraph 37 of the appellant's witness statement  the
       Judge specifically writes at [120]:

           "120.   In  relation  to  matters  concerning  the  welfare   of
                children, I note that the appellant does not  have  children
                of her own; but the appellant has nieces in the UK  who  are
                children of the appellant's brother. There  is  no  evidence
                before me on appeal from either parent of the  two  children
                who the appellant  discusses  in  her  evidence.  There  is,
                however, positive evidence from the appellant  that  she  is
                not sure whether the father is aware of  the  contact  which
                the  appellant  claims  to  have  exercised  with  his   two
                children. At WS29, the appellant states that "I am not  sure
                whether or not my brother was ever aware  that  I  meet  the
                girls".  In oral evidence, the appellant said that  she  did
                not know whether her brother was aware of her visits to  see
                his daughters. At WS37, the appellant states  that  she  has
                spoken to the children's mother; but has been told that  the
                mother "could not write a statement or attend the  hearing".
                No explanation is given to explain why the children's mother
                might not have  been  able  to  say  that  directly  to  the
                appellant's representatives."

   18. The Judge was clearly aware of the appellant's  explanation  for  why
       her sister-in-law had not provided a written statement or attended to
       give oral evidence and it is not made out the Judge did not take  the
       appellant's  explanation  into  account.   The  statement  there   no
       explanation had been given as to why the mother might not  have  been
       able to say that directly to the representatives, which  one  assumes
       could have occurred by way of a telephone call, is not challenged  as
       being factually incorrect. What  the  Judge  was  recording  in  this
       paragraph is that the only source of the claim the sister-in-law  was
       unable to support the  appellants  account  was  from  the  appellant
       herself in her written and oral evidence.
   19. The Judge was also aware of the judgement in JG, which  is  mentioned
       at [121], confirming that where possible the wishes and feelings of a
       particular child are obtained and taken into account  but  the  Judge
       finds that contrary to that decision, in this  appeal,  there  was  a
       solid evidential foundation to conclude that communication  with  the
       children, whether direct or otherwise, would not have been  feasible.
       This is further recognition by the  Judge  of  recognition  that  any
       attempt to secure support would not have being possible as  a  result
       of the appellant's brother's attitude.
   20. The Judge clearly refers to section 55  at  [122]  referring  to  the
       guidance referred to by the appellant  at  [123].  That  guidance  is
       referred to in detail leading to the finding by the Judge at [133] in
       the following terms:

           "133.  On the available evidence to me: (1) each child's welfare
                is appropriately safeguarded and promoted  by  remaining  in
                the day to  day  care  of  their  parents:  I  reached  that
                conclusion primarily because there is no suggestion from any
                source  that  the  children's  welfare  is  not   adequately
                protected by their parents; (2)  It  is  not  necessary  for
                either child's welfare that there be direct personal contact
                with the appellant; I reached that  conclusion  because  the
                appellants evidence  about  her  nieces  is  unsupported  by
                evidence from those having parental responsibility for their
                care; neither parent has  made  any  representation  in  the
                appeal that it is in their children's interests  that  there
                be continuing direct contact with the  appellant;  there  is
                insufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that  there   is   any
                dependency between the appellant and  her  nieces  in  their
                relationships; the evidence of contact is of little  detail;
                there is little evidence of any consequence to either  child
                if visits with the appellant were  to  stop;  the  assertion
                that the  children  would  be  devastated  is  made  without
                reference to  enough  detail  to  give  the  assertion  much
                weight; and the appellants witness at appeal has never  seen
                the appellant in the company of the appellant's nieces."

   21. Contrary to the assertion in  the  grounds  this  is  not  the  Judge
       punishing  the  appellant  for  failing  to  provide   evidence   but
       recognition that as a result of  the  parents  of  the  children  not
       cooperating with the appellant in the appeal the  only  evidence  the
       Judge had available to him was that set out in the determination.  It
       was for the Judge to assess section 55 and the best interests of  the
       children for himself and he could only do that on the  basis  of  the
       evidence that had been made available in both written and oral  form.
       It is  not  established  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  best
       interests of the children did not require the appellant to remain  in
       the United Kingdom and that the best interests of the children are to
       remain with their parents who will provide adequately for their needs
       irrespective of the appellants removal,  is  a  finding  outside  the
       range of those available to the Judge on the evidence. Nothing in the
       grounds or further submissions supports a finding to the contrary.
   22. No error of fact material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is
       made out.
   23. In relation to Ground 2, the alleged failure to take into  account  a
       material matter, it is asserted the Judge failed  to  mention  within
       the proportionality assessment  the  background  of  abuse  that  the
       appellant had suffered at the hands of her brother.
   24. The issue being considered by the Judge was the  proportionality  the
       appellant's removal from the United Kingdom to  Nigeria.  It  is  not
       made out  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  appellants  evidence
       concerning her experiences at the hands of her brother.  As noted  by
       the respondent's representative this issue was  specifically  covered
       by the Judge between [84-88] of  the  decision.  At  [88]  the  Judge
       writes:

           "88.   At 171, the expert opines that "[YM] is an unmarried, who
                has experienced domestic violence in the hands of her family
                member. This further validates the  position  of  the  above
                report". The report "above" is entitled Domestic Violence in
                Nigeria, the British Council/DFID gender in Nigeria  report"
                which discusses that "Women in urban areas [ of Nigeria] are
                also more likely to have experienced violence than those  in
                rural  areas.   The  highest   proportion   of   women   who
                experienced physical violence is found in the South-west and
                South-south." It is plain from the excerpt lifted  expressly
                by the expert and repeated at 170 that the report  is  about
                violence  in  Nigeria.  However,  the  appellant  does   not
                complain about domestic  violence  having  been  perpetrated
                against her in Nigeria. The appellant  complains  about  her
                brother's conduct in the UK. I am at a loss as  to  why  the
                expert considers that the appellants circumstances  "further
                validates the position of the above report"  when  in  fact,
                the appellants abuse was in the UK rather than  in  Nigeria.
                In these  circumstances,  I  attach  little  weight  to  the
                expert's commentary on this issue."

   25. The grounds claimed the judge did not factor this  element  into  the
       proportionality assessment but fail to identifying what way the Judge
       should have including  an  aspect  of  the  appeal  relating  to  ill
       treatment by the appellants brother in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
       assessment to the proportionality of return  to  Nigeria;  especially
       when there was insufficient evidence before the Judge of any  adverse
       impact upon the appellant of the treatment experienced at  the  hands
       of her brother sufficient  to  be  relevant  to  the  proportionality
       exercise or, which had it been taken into account, may  have  made  a
       material difference. The Judge was clearly aware of this  element  of
       the appellants claim but did not find it relevant to the  ability  of
       the appellant to return to Nigeria. It is  not  made  out  the  Judge
       forgot or failed to factor this element into an aspect of the  appeal
       where it should have been property included.
   26. Under the Immigration Rules the Judge concluded there will be no very
       significant obstacles to integration into Nigeria on return  at  [90]
       which is a finding not challenged by the appellant in the application
       for permission to appeal. Indeed, the rejection of the  appeal  under
       the Rules does not appear to have been challenged at all. It is quite
       clear that any issues relating to gender-based violence either in the
       UK or in Nigeria, or issues of FGM, were not made out  sufficient  to
       warrant a finding in the alternative. There is merit in the assertion
       by the respondents representative that given the Judge  found  gender
       based violence would not be a  risk  element  for  the  appellant  on
       return and  that  the  appellant  would  not  face  very  significant
       obstacles to her reintegration it was impossible  to  understand  the
       relevance of a history of domestic violence in the UK in the  article
       8 assessment. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  is
       made out in respect of this ground.
   27. Ground 3 asserts the Judge erred  in  the  conclusion  there  was  no
       breach of section 55. This matter has been commented upon  above  and
       is a claim without merit.
   28. The issue before the Judge was whether there was any entitlement made
       out enabling the Judge to allow the appeal either within  or  outside
       the Immigration  Rules.  Whilst  the  appellant  disagrees  with  the
       Judge's conclusion there was not it has not been  shown  the  finding
       the appellant could not satisfy the Rules is a  finding  outside  the
       range of those available to the Judge on the evidence. The assessment
       of article 8 ECHR has been conducted in a properly structured  manner
       as evidenced by the Judge setting out the Razgar test  at  [97].  The
       Judge concludes that there will be no interference with  respect  for
       family life with the nieces as the  relationship  the  appellant  has
       with her nieces  did  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  family  life
       protected by article 8. That is a fact specific assessment. The Judge
       clearly  considers  the  evidence  regarding  the   nature   of   the
       relationship between the appellant and the nieces  before  concluding
       at [101-102] the following:

           "101   In my judgement, in this  appeal  there  is  insufficient
                evidence of dependency between the appellant and her  nieces
                to constitute "family life". The high point in the  evidence
                before me about the aunt/niece relationship  came  when  the
                appellant  said  in  oral  evidence  that  "we  do  have  an
                emotional need  for  one  another";  but  there  was  little
                evidence in appeal of  what  that  actually  means  for  the
                appellant or the  children.  The  appellant  said  that  her
                nieces were able to  question  her  about  their  mixed-race
                background; but I am far from persuaded that  that  sort  of
                discussion could only be undertaken with the  appellant.  In
                any event, I do not consider that that  sort  of  discussion
                amounts to "an emotional need" between the appellant and her
                nieces. Although the appellant may  visit  her  nieces:  (i)
                there was no detail about regularity or duration of  visits;
                and (ii) there was insufficient evidence of  any  dependency
                between them.


           102    I am not persuaded that the appellant has  "family  life"
                with her nieces."

   29. The Judges primary finding is therefore that article 8 is not engaged
       in relation to family life which is a finding  within  the  range  of
       those available to the Judge on the evidence.    In  the  alternative
       (my emphasis), from [103], the Judge considers the Razgar  questions.
       Best interests of the children are referred to from  [104]  in  which
       the Judge considers in detail the evidence received  in  relation  to
       the appellants relationship with her nieces and the evidence from the
       witness in relation to this issue. The Judge considers the  judgement
       in JG.  The Judge records at [115]  discussing  with  the  appellants
       counsel what the First-tier Tribunal ought to do in  the  event  that
       the reasons for refusal  letter  was  properly  to  be  construed  as
       failing to make it clear that the substance of any  section  55  duty
       had been discharged. The Judge records  it  was  submitted  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal ought to make a declaration to  the  effect  that
       the section 55 duty had not been discharged  by  the  respondent  and
       that the Tribunal ought to make a finding that the decision  made  in
       the reasons for refusal letter is unlawful. The Judge finds,  however
       that such an approach would amount to him determining the  matter  as
       though he was judicially reviewing the reasons for refusal letter  in
       relation to which he did not have jurisdiction by  reference  to  the
       decision of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali.
   30. The Judge considers relevant case law before concluding at [119]:

           "119.  In my judgement, though the respondent might be argued to
                have failed to comply with the duties set out in section  55
                of the 2009 act, I am not persuaded that  the  decision  set
                out in the RFR is not "in accordance with the law"  as  that
                phrase  is  to  be  applied  in  assessing  the  article   8
                questions; because there is a legislative framework in place
                for the decision which has purportedly interfered  with  the
                appellants family and private life;  and  the  framework  is
                published in a form which is accessible  to  those  who  are
                likely to be affected, such as the  appellant.  In  applying
                the approach set out in the case of Charles: I conclude that
                the "proposed  interference"  (here  refusal  of  the  human
                rights claim) has a proper basis  in  domestic  law  and  is
                accessible and foreseeable as to its effects."

   31. The Judge properly notes in relation to welfare of the children  that
       the appellant does not have any children of her own but  relies  upon
       the relationship with her nieces who are the children of her brother.
   32. Having considered the competing arguments which are set out in detail
       in the decision, including section 117 Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act  2002  the  Judge  concludes  any  interference  with  any
       protected right is proportionate.
   33. Whilst the appellant disagrees with  this  and  raises  a  number  of
       issues in contest it is not made out the decision  of  the  Judge  is
       outside the range  of  those  reasonably  available  to  him  on  the
       evidence. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required
       degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons in  support
       have the findings made.  Even  taking  the  appellants  case  at  its
       highest, as the Judge did on one occasion, it is  not  made  out  the
       conclusions reached are not ones properly available to the Judge.  It
       is not made out there is anything arguably unfair  or  irrational  in
       the findings and decisions arrived at by the Judge  having  carefully
       considered the evidence made available.
   34. I therefore find the appellant fails to establish the Judge has erred
       in law in a manner material to the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
       sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any  further  in
       this matter.

Decision

   35. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.
   36. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 1 September 2020
