
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/23623/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 October 2019                    |On 11 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                  AHSAN [D]
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, of Counsel, instructed by Sky
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by both First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes (on limited grounds)
         and Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede (on the  remaining  ground)  on  22
         August  and   17   September   2019   respectively,   against   the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie, promulgated on
         14 June 2019 following a hearing at Taylor House on 26 April 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 6 September 1983.  He
         entered the UK as a student on 31  October  2006  and  subsequently
         obtained leave as a  Tier  1  as  a  post  study  migrant  until  9
         September 2010. Thereafter, all attempts to  obtain  further  leave
         failed and on 29 July 2015 he was served with  enforcement  papers.
         On 26 August 2015, he made a family/private life application  which
         was refused, and his appeal rights were  exhausted  on  7  November
         2016. On 8 February 2017, he  then  made  a  further  human  rights
         application based on his relationship with  a  Pakistani  woman  he
         claimed to have known since childhood, whom he  re-met  in  January
         2013 and with whom he entered into an Islamic marriage in September
         2013. The marriage was registered in Pakistan  by  the  appellant's
         wife in August 2015. On 8  February  2017  the  appellant  and  his
         partner married  at  Redbridge  Register  Office.  The  appellant's
         partner has two  children  from  a  previous  relationship  (it  is
         unclear if she was previously married) and  has  limited  leave  to
         remain until 27 April 2021 as the primary carer of those  children.
         Both children were born in the UK (in December 2010 and  May  2012)
         and are British nationals. The appellant  was  previously  married,
         but that marriage ended in 2009.

      3. The application was refused under S-LTR 1.6 on the basis  that  the
         appellant had not  met  the  suitability  grounds  because  of  his
         undesirable conduct. It is maintained by the  respondent  that  the
         appellant obtained a TOEIC certificate from ETS by  using  a  proxy
         test taker.   The  application  was  also  refused  on  eligibility
         grounds because of his partner's immigration status, because he was
         not a parent as defined by paragraph 6 of Appendix FM  and  because
         he had been in the UK without leave for six years. Further, he  had
         not lived here for 20 years or more, had not shown there  would  be
         very significant obstacles to re-integration into Pakistan, and the
         decision did not result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
         him, his partner or  any  children.  A  s.55  assessment  was  also
         carried out.

      4. The appeal was heard by Judge Devittie. He noted that the appellant
         had claimed to have been a victim of identity fraud,  that  he  had
         never taken the test and, indeed, had not known about  it  and,  as
         far as he had been concerned, his passports (current  and  expired)
         had been with the Secretary of State when the test had  been  taken
         in  July  2012.  The  judge  rejected  that  explanation.  He  also
         considered the argument that the claim of deception  was  not  made
         out on the basis that the appellant had never used the  certificate
         in support of any application, but he found that it was not for him
         to speculate on why it had not been used. He considered  the  claim
         of family life but found that the biological father of the children
         was in the UK and  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a  genuine
         parental relationship with his partner's children.  He  found  that
         the appellant's removal would not require the children to leave the
         UK and  that  interference  with  family  life  was  proportionate.
         Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

         The Hearing

      5. Mr Haywood relied on and expanded the grounds in his submissions at
         the hearing on 3 October 2019.

      6. Three grounds are put forward. First, it is argued that  the  judge
         failed  to  engage  with  the  respondent's  policy  guidance  with
         reference to S-LTR 1.6. It  is  argued  that  the  policy  guidance
         stated that an individual had to actually deceive or  be  dishonest
         with a government department for the allegation of deception to  be
         made out. In this case, the appellant had not used the  certificate
         to support any application. It had only  come  to  light  when  the
         Secretary of State received a number of cancelled test results from
         ETS. The grounds argue that the  judge  did  not  explain  why  the
         submissions on the policy had been rejected.

      7. The second ground is  much  wider  and,  in  fact,  covers  several
         complaints.  It  is  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
         arguments and evidence. The first part of this assertion focuses on
         the issue of whether the appellant had his passports  at  the  date
         the  test  was  taken  (July  2012).  It  is  maintained  that  the
         respondent's evidence on whether the passports were returned to the
         appellant was wholly unclear. The CID notes refer to the return  of
         two passports, the decision letter refers to one  and  there  is  a
         contradiction over whether they were sent to the  appellant  or  to
         his representative or, indeed, sent out at all. It is  also  argued
         that, contrary to the directions issued by the judge, there was  no
         witness statement from the respondent and no proof  of  posting  of
         the passport(s). It is argued that the  judge  failed  to  properly
         grapple  with  these  inconsistencies  and  difficulties   in   the
         evidence.

      8. As part of this point, it is also argued that it  was  unusual  for
         the respondent to return passports to an  appellant  after  refusal
         where he would become liable for removal (s. 17 of the  Asylum  and
         Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants)  Act  2004)  and  that  the
         passports  would,  in  any  event,  have  been   needed   for   the
         reconsideration of the application, which was then refused again in
         December 2013. It is also argued that the respondent was  wrong  to
         have stated that the passports were issued in  Pakistan  when  they
         were issued in London and that there was evidence to show that  the
         respondent  was  known  to  lose  important   documents   including
         passports.

      9. It is argued that S-LTR 1.6 is a discretionary  ground  of  refusal
         and there was no indication in the decision letter that  discretion
         had been applied as part of the decision-making process. There were
         several issues that should have been taken into account such as the
         appellant's period of residence in the UK,  his  family  life,  the
         best interests of his step children, the passage of time since  the
         alleged deception and his ability to speak English.  It  is  argued
         that the judge did not take this argument into account and that  he
         relied on matters on which there had been no oral  examination.  It
         is maintained that the judge had been factually wrong to  say  that
         there had been an appeal against the October 2010 refusal when  the
         only appeal had been in respect of the 2015 decision.

     10. Thirdly, it is argued that the judge was procedurally unfair as  he
         went behind a concession given by the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
         hearing as to there being a genuine parental  relationship  between
         the appellant and his step children. It is argued  that  the  judge
         made erroneous findings  about  the  children's  relationship  with
         their biological father as there had been no evidence taken on that
         and indeed the evidence all pointed to the fact that the  appellant
         was responsible for their daily care.

     11. For the respondent, Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He
         submitted that the first argument was without merit as  the  policy
         referred to by the appellant related  to  the  general  grounds  of
         refusal under paragraph 322 and not to Appendix FM. The refusal  on
         suitability grounds was a mandatory refusal and  not  discretionary
         so it was difficult to see  what  relevance  the  submissions  made
         about the policy had to do with this appeal. He also made the point
         that the decision was not just based on suitability grounds but was
         made on parent and partner eligibility as well as  on  private  and
         family life grounds. As the partner only  had  limited  leave,  the
         appellant could not meet the requirements of the rules.

     12. Mr Melvin stated that there was no note on the Home Office file  as
         to any concession made on parental relationship. He referred to the
         decision in Ortega [2018] UKUT 00298 (IAC) which held that: "It  is
         unlikely that a person will be able to  establish  that  they  have
         taken on the role of a parent when the biological parents  continue
         to be  involved  in  the  child's  life  as  the  child's  parents"
         (Headnote 3).

     13. With regard to the complaint over the failure of the respondent  to
         comply fully with the Tribunal' s direction,  Mr  Melvin  submitted
         that after so many years it was not possible for the respondent  to
         prepare a witness statement on events from 2010. The respondent had
         done the best possible and had adduced all the records she had that
         were pertinent to the matter at hand.

     14. In response, Mr Haywood relied on Balajigari [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673
         which emphasised the need to have regard to  several  factors  when
         assessing the issue of discretion and set out the correct  approach
         to be followed. He submitted that the burden was on the  respondent
         to demonstrate that the appellant's passports had been returned  to
         him and that he had them at the time the test was taken. On Ortega,
         he submitted that there was a need for "all the  circumstances"  to
         be taken into  account  when  deciding  the  issue  of  a  parental
         relationship and this had not been done. The decision should be set
         aside and the matter remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
         fresh decision to be made.

     15. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         indicated that I would be setting aside the decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal. I now give my reasons for so doing.

         Discussion and Conclusions

     16. Having considered all the evidence and the submissions made, I find
         that  there  are  the  following  difficulties  with  the   judge's
         determination.

     17. Although I take Mr Melvin's point that the policy guidance referred
         to by the appellant related to grounds of refusal  under  paragraph
         322 and not section S-LTR,  the  policy  was  referred  to  at  the
         hearing, the principle to be applied is arguably the  same  and  it
         was for the judge  to  engage  with  the  submission  and  reach  a
         reasoned conclusion, even if it was that the policy did  not  apply
         and the submission was without merit. He failed to do so.

     18. The next submission related to the matter of the language test  and
         whether the appellant had his passports in July 2012 when the  test
         was taken. The judge was asked to find that  due  to  the  lack  of
         clarity in the respondent's evidence, it had not been  demonstrated
         that the appellant had received both passports in 2010 or  that  he
         had them in 2012 when the test was taken. The  judge  does,  it  is
         fair to say, make a valid point about what the benefit would be  to
         a third party  to  arrange  a  proxy  test  using  the  appellant's
         identity, pay the course fee and follow the course of  studies  (at
         14(3)(a)). He also properly observes (at 14(3)(b)) that the absence
         of one or more passports from the envelope containing the  decision
         letter would surely have been queried  by  the  appellant  who  did
         indeed receive the letter itself (the appellant confirmed before me
         that he had received the  letter  but  astonishingly  done  nothing
         about the missing passport(s)).  He  also  correctly  rejected  the
         appellant's argument  that  he  had  no  need  to  obtain  a  TOEIC
         certificate, noting that the October 2010 decision had been  solely
         based on the lack of evidence to show a proficiency in the  English
         language (at paragraph 14(1) and 14(3)(c)). However, the judge does
         not adequately deal with the submissions made as  to  the  apparent
         contradiction in the respondent's evidence about how many passports
         were returned and to whom they were sent.  Further,  he  makes  the
         finding that the appellant had practised deception  as  alleged  by
         the respondent (by using a proxy test taker, at paragraph  13)  but
         confusingly also finds that the appellant had sat the test  himself
         (at  paragraph  15(a)).  These  issues,  therefore,  require  fresh
         consideration and decision making.

     19. I accept Mr Melvin's  submission  that  the  respondent  cannot  be
         criticised for not fully  complying  with  the  issued  directions.
         Given the many years that have passed since the time the  passports
         were allegedly returned, I accept that it would not be possible for
         the respondent to provide proof of posting and a witness statement.
         I do  not  see  that  anything  would  be  achieved  by  re-issuing
         directions to the respondent to produce any more than she has done,
         and I do not propose to make any.

     20. I find there is nothing helpful in the appellant's submission about
         section 17  as,  at  its  highest,  that  section  only  gives  the
         respondent the option of retaining passports by referring to  "may"
         and not "shall". It, therefore, takes matters no  further  for  the
         appellant. It is also relevant, in my view, that the appellant  was
         not immediately liable to removal, having been given an in  country
         right of appeal (as the decision letter of October 2010 confirms).

     21. It is also argued that the Secretary of State would  have  required
         the appellant's passport in order  to  reconsider  her  refusal  of
         October 2010. I have not been provided with any evidence as to  the
         nature of the request for consideration of that decision  (made  on
         23 February 2012, according  to  the  respondent)  or  whether  the
         matter of a passport was referred to within that request. Nor was I
         referred to anything in support of the contention that  a  passport
         would have been required at that stage. Indeed, if  anything,  this
         argument goes against the appellant as if it is  the  case  that  a
         passport had to be adduced, then the appellant would have  produced
         one at that time (or else  his  application  would  not  have  been
         entertained) which rather defeats his argument  that  one  or  both
         passports had not been returned to him in 2010 or at any subsequent
         date.

     22. The place of issue of the passports has no bearing on any  material
         issue. The Secretary of State is criticised  for  maintaining  that
         the passports were issued in Pakistan when in fact it is said  they
         were issued in London but   the  relevant  pages  of  the  A7634523
         passport shows the issuing authority to be "Pakistan"  (at  p.4  of
         the respondent's supplementary bundle) and the KC860931 passport is
         "given at Gujranwala" (at p.10). I accept that the  endorsement  on
         the earlier KC passport shows that passport AH7996761 was issued at
         the Pakistan High Commission in London (at p.10) but without a copy
         of that passport  it  is  not  possible  to  see  who  the  issuing
         authority is said to be. A copy of passport AH7996762 appears at p.
         61 of the respondent's appeals bundle. It is unclear  whether  this
         is the passport incorrectly referred to at p.10  above  or  another
         document. Indeed, AH7996761 and not AH7996762 is the passport given
         on the ETS  Look  Up  Tool.  However,  this  confirms  the  issuing
         authority to be Pakistan.  In his application form,  the  appellant
         confusingly, gives the country of issue of his  passport  AH7996762
         as Pakistan, London (at p. 47 RB). Passports are, of course,  often
         returned to the country of origin for issue/renewal  by  diplomatic
         departments even if the application is made  in  the  UK.  For  the
         respondent to record that the passports  were  issued  in  Pakistan
         shows no error, in my view. The  confusion  over  the  two  similar
         passport numbers is, however, a matter that does not appear to have
         been addressed by either  party  and  may  be  relevant.  AH7996761
         appears to be the passport allegedly returned by the respondent  to
         the appellant (at 14(3)).

     23. Nor was I referred to anything to support the claim that there is a
         "policy document and objective evidence which  indicates  that  the
         respondent is known to lose important documents". I  find  that  in
         the absence of such  evidence,  this  point  does  not  assist  the
         appellant either.

     24. Likewise, the contention that two passports  would  not  have  been
         required by ETS for the language  test  is  not  supported  by  any
         authority or evidence. It is not for me to speculate  but  possibly
         the expired passport was adduced to show  that  previous  leave  to
         enter/remain had been granted. I do not consider that this argument
         assists the appellant in any way.

     25. There is also no merit in the criticism of the judge's reference to
         an appeal following the October 2010 decision. It is maintained the
         judge was factually incorrect to have said there had been an appeal
         but the evidence supports his statement.  The  decision  letter  of
         October 2010 makes it clear that an in country right of appeal  was
         given to the appellant (at p. 30 of the respondent's  supplementary
         bundle). The decision letter notes that an appeal was lodged  on  8
         November 2010, that  it  was  dismissed,  and  that  the  appellant
         eventually withdrew his application for  permission  to  appeal  in
         November 2011 (at p.104). This  is  confirmed  in  the  immigration
         history set out in the respondent's appeals bundle  and  indeed  in
         the  grounds  of   appeal   prepared   by   the   appellant's   own
         representatives on 20 November 2018 (at  6).  The  appellant's  own
         evidence in his witness statement (at paragraph  9)  was  that  his
         appeal against the October 2010 decision had been  dismissed  (also
         at paragraph 5(1) of the determination) and he gave  oral  evidence
         to Judge Devittie that he had appealed but had later withdrawn  his
         appeal (at paragraph 14(2)). Plainly, given the evidence above,  he
         was in the latter instance  referring  to  the  withdrawal  of  the
         application for permission to appeal. It would,  therefore,  appear
         that Counsel was mistaken on this point and not the judge.

     26. The judge was also criticised  for  procedural  unfairness.  It  is
         alleged that he went behind the concession made at the  hearing  by
         the  Presenting  Officer  that  there  was   a   genuine   parental
         relationship between the appellant and his  partner's  children.  I
         indicated to the parties at  the  hearing,  that  the  'concession'
         described in the grounds as an  acceptance  by  the  PO  "that  the
         relationship between the appellant  and  his  partner  was  not  in
         dispute and the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his  two
         minor step-children was not in dispute" did  not  necessarily  mean
         that the appellant had  proved  that  he  had  a  genuine  parental
         relationship with his partner's children to  the  extent  that  the
         requirements  of  s.117B(6)(a)  had  been  met.   However,   having
         considered the matter further and  having  had  the  time  to  read
         through all  the  evidence  and,  most  importantly,  the  decision
         letter, I am inclined to agree with Counsel's contemporaneous notes
         and the submissions made by Mr Haywood and  in   the  grounds  that
         this concession was consistent with the decision letter  where  the
         appellant's claim to be "the step father of  two  British  children
         living in the UK...has been carefully considered".

     27. Although Mr Melvin stated that he had no record on the Home  Office
         file of the PO's concession, Counsel's Record of  Proceedings  show
         that the PO's acceptance of the relationships and  the  absence  of
         any cross-examination on this matter was in line with the  approach
         that the requirements of s.117B(6)(a) had been met,  and  the  fact
         that the appellant's partner had not been  required  to  leave  the
         hearing during the appellant's evidence further confirmed that  the
         genuineness  of  the  relationships  were  not  an  issue.   I   am
         reinforced in this view by the absence  of  any  reference  in  the
         decision letter to there being an issue over whether  there  was  a
         genuine parental relationship. Certainly, there was  no  suggestion
         by the respondent that because the children had a biological father
         in the UK, and because the appellant did not meet the definition of
         a parent under paragraph 6 of Appendix FM, that there was  no  such
         relationship between the appellant and the children.  I  also  note
         that the only basis on which this limb of the application had  been
         refused (under the exceptional circumstances sub-heading) was  that
         it had not been established that the children would have  to  leave
         the UK.  I  can  see  no  consideration  of  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect them to leave the UK (s. 117B(6)(b)).

     28. In these circumstances, I agree with Mr Haywood and the  author  of
         the grounds that the judge erred in raising the issue of a  genuine
         parental relationship without alerting the parties to the fact that
         he intended to do so and without giving  them  the  opportunity  to
         call evidence and/or make submissions on the matter.  I  also  find
         that the judge erred in the findings he did make about the children
         and their biological father. No evidence on this point  was  called
         and there was little, if any, positive documentary  evidence  about
         that  relationship.  As  such  the  findings  he   did   make   are
         unsustainable as they are not based on any evidence.

     29. Finally, on the issue of whether the respondent considered applying
         her discretion when refusing the application, I note that  although
         there was consideration of whether the appellant should be entitled
         to leave outside  the  rules  (at  paragraph  61  of  the  decision
         letter), all the factors raised on his behalf were  not  considered
         and the judge did not engage with this issue adequately or at all.

     30. For all these reasons,  therefore,  I  conclude  that  the  judge's
         determination  contains  material  errors  of  law  such  that  the
         decision cannot be saved. It is set aside in its entirety except as
         a record of proceedings and summary of the paper evidence.

     31. I preserve the representative's concession that the  appellant  has
         met the terms of s. 117B(6)(a).

     32. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh
         findings on all other matters. The observations I have made earlier
         in this determination may assist the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  its
         future assessment and decision making.

         Decision

     33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The matter is
         remitted for a fresh hearing to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Taylor
         House or Hatton Cross at a date to be arranged.

         Anonymity

     34. No request for an anonymity order was made.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 7 October 2019
