

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23449/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 13 September 2019                         |on 18 September 2019          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              JULIAN DELA CRUZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Shah of 76 Law Associates.
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Onoufriou promulgated on 25 June 2019 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born  on  18  October
        1956 who applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the
        basis of his family life with his partner pursuant to  Appendix  FM
        and paragraph 276ADE(1) of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant
        asserts his removal from the United Kingdom will breach  his  human
        rights pursuant to ECHR.
     3. The Judge noted the appellant claimed to have entered the UK  on  4
        October 2002 using an Italian passport which was a false  document.
        The applicant claimed to have made an application in or about  2010
        in order to regularise his status under the  Overstayer  Concession
        but claims  to  be  unaware  of  the  outcome.  The  appellant  was
        encountered by Immigration Authorities on 8 October 2017  during  a
        random visit to the family home following which he was served  with
        a Notice of Removal dated 8 October 2017. A fresh  application  was
        filed on 4 December 2017 based on his long-term  relationship  with
        his wife.
     4. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [32] in  which  the  Judge
        notes there was no dispute that the appellant is in a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with his partner, at least since he arrived
        in the UK in 2002, and probably since before then from  their  time
        together in Saudi Arabia.
     5. The Judge accepts the appellant had not completed  his  application
        form correctly, as contended  by  the  respondent,  who  found  the
        applicant unable to meet the suitability requirements for leave  to
        remain pursuant S - LTR.2.2.(b) and 4.2 of Appendix FM as a  result
        of a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in  relation  to  the
        application.
     6. The  Judge  finds  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  eligibility
        immigration status requirements at E-LTRP.2.1. to 2.2  as  he  does
        not currently have leave to remain in the United Kingdom [33].
     7.  Having  concluded  the  appellant  was  unable  to   satisfy   the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules the Judge considers article 8
        ECHR between [35 - 33] in relation to which the following  findings
        are made:

             "35.     It therefore  remains  to  consider  the  appellant's
                  application in respect of family life under Article  8  of
                  the ECHR, outside the Immigration Rules. I do not consider
                  that there are exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case.
                  Both the appellant and his partner are Filipinos.  Neither
                  of their medical conditions are such that they  would  not
                  be able to obtain satisfactory medical  treatment  in  the
                  Philippines and this is  accepted  by  the  appellant.  Ms
                  Laguerta was fully aware of  the  appellant's  immigration
                  status when she resumed their relationship when he came to
                  the United Kingdom and was apparently complicit  with  his
                  intention to remain  here  illegally.  She,  herself,  has
                  visited the Philippines according to the  appellant  every
                  year since 2002 for some two months to visit  her  family.
                  Therefore, she would not be returning to an alien culture.


             36.  The appellant has admitted that if  he  returned  to  the
                  Philippines, although he might not be able  to  stay  with
                  either  his  family  or  Ms  Laguerta's  family  with   Ms
                  Laguerta, his sons would support him financially to obtain
                  accommodation and provide for his maintenance. Ms Laguerta
                  also receives a pension which she would  clearly  continue
                  to receive in the Philippines. Both she and the appellant,
                  despite their respective ages, continue  to  do  part-time
                  work,  which  they  will  be  able  to  continue  in   the
                  Philippines. They are obviously  both  familiar  with  the
                  language and the culture and in respect of the  appellant,
                  this is despite the  fact  that  he  apparently  left  the
                  Philippines  aged  29.  Tagalog  still  remains  his  main
                  language as he needed  to  give  his  evidence  through  a
                  Tagalog interpreter.


             37.  I therefore find there are no  exceptional  circumstances
                  which would render the interference with his  family  life
                  with Ms Laguerta disproportionate to the need to  maintain
                  effective immigration control. I also do not consider that
                  there are either insurmountable obstacles  to  his  return
                  with Ms Laguerta in the event that  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM
                  applied and there are no significant  obstacles  regarding
                  the  interference  with  his  private  life  either  under
                  paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) or under  Article  8  outside  the
                  Rules."

     8. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge erred
        in failing to grant the adjournment requested by the appellant  who
        had been told by his previous representatives one day prior to  the
        hearing of the need for him to find a new  representative  as  they
        were no longer willing to attend  court.  The  grounds  assert  the
        appellant was struggling with English but that the Judge  erred  by
        not appointing an interpreter  but  in  deciding  to  complete  the
        hearing which the grounds claim is contrary to  the  principles  of
        fairness.
     9. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal who found it arguable that there may have been an error of
        law as identified in the application on the basis of  a  procedural
        irregularity.



Error of law


    10. Two issues arise in relation to this challenge. The first  is  that
        relating  to  the  appellant's  language   abilities   specifically
        challenged in the grounds seeking permission to appeal, the  second
        relating to the fairness of  the  Judge,  when  it  transpired  the
        appellant was in the building but had not been called, hearing  and
        relying upon the submissions from the Presenting Officer  of  which
        the appellant had no notice as he did not hear the same and/or have
        the chance to respond to them. There is no evidence in the decision
        that the Judge acquainted the appellant with the specific nature of
        those  submissions  or  if  any  effort  was  made  to  recall  the
        Presenting Officer to enable  him  or  her  to  take  part  in  the
        proceedings.
    11. In a Rule 24  response  dated  11  September  2019  the  Respondent
        writes:

             "2.  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's appeal  on
                  procedural grounds and submits that the appeal  should  be
                  remitted to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
                  afresh.


             3.   The Respondent does not require an oral hearing."

    12. In light of it being accepted the Judge erred in law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal the  decision  under
        challenge is set aside. In light of the  procedural  irregularities
        noted above, sufficient to amount to a material error of law, there
        shall be no preserved findings.
    13. Having considered the Presidential Guidance regarding  remittal  of
        appeals to the First-Tier Tribunal and in light  of  the  fact  the
        appellant has not had the opportunity of a fair hearing before  the
        First-Tier Tribunal and in light of the fact findings of fact  will
        be required on all relevant aspects of this claim by the  Tribunal,
        it is appropriate  in  the  circumstances  for  the  appeal  to  be
        remitted to Hatton Cross to be heard by a judge  other  than  Judge
        Onoufriou nominated by the Resident Judge of that hearing Centre.


Decision

    14. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the decision to  Hatton
        Cross.


   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 September 2019












