
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23390/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2020                            |On 2 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     MP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R.    Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Childs, instructed by Greystone Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe.   Her  date  of  birth  is  24
    September 1999.  She entered the UK in 2014.  On 24 August 2015 she was
    granted discretionary leave for a period of 30 months until 23 February
    2018.  This was granted on the basis that she was then 15 years old and
    there was no-one who could be traced in  Zimbabwe  to  whom  she  could
    return.  On 18 January 2018 she applied for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  She was aged 18 by this time and had resided in the UK
    for a period of three years and seven months.  The Secretary  of  State
    refused the  application  in  a  decision  that  was  received  by  the
    Appellant on 6 November 2018.

 2. I have made a direction anonymising the Appellant in accordance with
    the Upper Tribunal Guidance Note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders and Rule
    14 (7) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    found the judge made a material error of law.  I set aside the decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  error  of  law  decision  reads  as
    follows:-

         "Error of Law

         10.  I conclude that the judge materially erred in  the  assessment
             of  family  life.   He  attached  significant  weight  to  the
             Appellant's age at the date of the hearing (she was then  aged
             19) without consideration of other material factors which were
             capable of  establishing  additional  elements  of  dependency
             sufficient to establish family life between the Appellant  and
             her father.

         11.  I have sympathy with the challenge to the  judge's  assessment
             of  the  evidence  of  abuse.   There  is  reference  in   the
             Appellant's witness statement to her having been abused  which
             is contrary to what the judge stated  at  paragraph  12.   The
             findings reached by the judge about abuse are not sustainable.

         12.  In the light of the above errors, I set aside the decision  of
             the judge to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

         Family Life

         13.   No  further  evidence  was  served  in  compliance  with  the
             directions of the Upper  Tribunal.   I  went  on  to  consider
             family life.  The Appellant came to the UK aged 15.   She  has
             lived with her father since then.  At the date of the  hearing
             she was aged 19.  The evidence before the Tribunal established
             that she was a student and dependent on  her  father.   Having
             heard submissions from both parties, I am in no doubt that  in
             this  case  the  evidence  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal
             establishes that there is something more than normal emotional
             ties between a parent and adult  child.   I  accept  that  the
             Appellant  is  dependent  on  her   father   financially   and
             emotionally.  She has only just reached adulthood  and  is  in
             education.  I communicated my decision to the parties.

         14.  Ms Child's requested an adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the
             Appellant wished to produce further evidence.  I was concerned
             about the failure by the Appellant's solicitors to comply with
             the directions of the Tribunal  relating  to  the  filing  and
             service of further evidence.  Ms Childs asked for time to make
             contact with those instructing her.  Accordingly,  I  put  the
             matter back to the end of the list.  When the hearing  resumed
             Ms Childs was  not  able  to  explain  the  failure  of  those
             instructing her to comply with directions.  She indicated that
             the Appellant and her father were in attendance at the hearing
             and would not be able to give up-to-date  oral  evidence.   Mr
             Lindsay indicated that he did not have a file.  He said  that,
             in any event, he would prefer there to be  witness  statements
             from the Appellant  and  her  father  before  they  gave  oral
             evidence.  I reluctantly adjourned the matter  to  enable  the
             Appellant to file and serve further evidence.

         15.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett did not consider the appeal
             under the Immigration Rules.  This is not something raised  in
             the grounds of appeal.  The Appellant did not advance her case
             before the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that she meets the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules (276ADE or Appendix FM).
              The UT will adopt  a  properly  structured  approach  to  the
             proportionality assessment.

         16.  I make the following directions."

 4. The hearing was resumed to 4 February 2019 for the Tribunal to consider
    proportionality having found that there  is  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and her father in the Kugathas sense (Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31).

The Evidence

 5. Following my directions, the Appellant's solicitors made an application
    pursuant to Rule 15(2A) to adduce further  evidence.   The  application
    was made on 15 January 2020.  The evidence consists of a  supplementary
    bundle which contains 50 pages and includes further witness  statements
    and letters in support of the Appellant.  In  addition,  the  Appellant
    relies on the preliminary observations of the  United  Nations  Special
    Rapporteur on the right to food, following the author's, Ms Hilal Elva,
    visit to Zimbabwe from 18 to 28 November 2019.  This evidence postdates
    the Appellant's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  At the  hearing
    Ms Child's indicated that the Appellant had not been able to  obtain  a
    report from the counsellor.  However,  she  submitted  evidence  of  an
    appointment for a telephone consultation on 24  January  2020  for  the
    Appellant to speak with someone who  can  assess  her  suitability  for
    treatment from Bedfordshire Wellbeing  Services.   There  was  evidence
    relating  to  the  Appellant's  grandmother's  health.  There  was   no
    objection to the further evidence being  admitted  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's appeal.

The Appellant's evidence

 6. The Appellant's supplementary statement is dated 14 January 2020.   Her
    evidence is that  she  left  Zimbabwe  because  of  the  abuse  of  her
    stepfather.  She felt at the time that Zimbabwe was not safe  for  her.
    Her father in the UK was not aware of the extent of the abuse until the
    Appellant told her grandmother who in turn told her father.

 7. The Appellant has close family here.  She has made friends  at  school,
    college, church and within the community.  In oral  evidence  she  said
    that she is studying and will complete a BTEC this year. She  hopes  to
    become a physiotherapist. This has  helped  her  to  forget  about  the
    negative experiences in Zimbabwe.  She is very close to her grandmother
    here who she considers a mentor.  However, sadly her grandmother is now
    very unwell having suffered a severe stroke.   The  family  is  united.
    Since her grandmother was admitted to  hospital  in  January  2019  the
    Appellant has "relapsed" because of the stress.  Her father has  helped
    her to seek medical attention and counselling.  She is currently taking
    a drug called Propranolol which has been prescribed by her GP and which
    helps her feel calm  and  focus  on  life.   She  has  had  counselling
    sessions and is awaiting a report.

 8. The Appellant is integrated here.  She attends a youth day programme at
    the church and visits elderly people who live alone and helps  to  feed
    homeless people.  The Appellant believes that return to  Zimbabwe  will
    impact negatively on her health.

 9. In oral evidence the Appellant said that she had  not  lived  with  her
    father before coming to the UK. She lived with her mother, abusive step-
     father, sister and brother. She was the youngest child.  One  day  her
    mother left. She has not seen her since. Her aunt  came  and  took  her
    away. The aunt returned to collect her  siblings.  She  became  tearful
    when explaining that she did not know why her  mother  left.  The  last
    time she spoke with her was the day before she disappeared.

The Evidence of SP

10. SP is the Appellant's father.  His supplementary statement is dated  14
    January 2020.  His evidence can be summarised.

11. At the time SP made a statement on 6 October 2015 which was referred to
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge he was not aware of the extent of  the
    abuse against the Appellant.  However, he is aware that  the  Appellant
    suffered serious abuse,  verbal  and  physical  at  the  hands  of  her
    stepfather in Zimbabwe.  He found out about  this  through  his  mother
    (the Appellant's grandmother).

12. Sadly, his mother suffered a severe stroke on 12 January 2019.  She was
    to give evidence  at  the  Appellant's  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but unfortunately was unable to because of  her  health.   The
    Appellant  is  very  upset  about  her  grandmother's  condition.   The
    Appellant  is  taking  medication  and  she  has  registered   with   a
    counsellor.  She cannot cope at  times.   She  had  to  take  time  off
    school.  She has been assessed by the Wellbeing Health Services and  is
    waiting for the result and a report to be  prepared.   The  Appellant's
    removal would affect her and the entire family here.  The Appellant  is
    integrated into society.   He  has  lost  two  siblings  who  committed
    suicide and cannot contemplate seeing the Appellant going  through  the
    same ordeal.  Should the Appellant return to Zimbabwe she would  suffer
    abuse from her stepfather and not have any support.   Furthermore,  she
    would not have any opportunities because of the situation  there.   She
    would not be able to live or survive in Zimbabwe.  It would  be  unjust
    to put her life at risk.

13. In oral evidence he said that he  cannot  contemplate  being  separated
    from the Appellant. He described her as fragile and vulnerable. She  is
    depressed and needs her family here. The Appellant's brother is in  the
    UK. He has made a claim for asylum which is pending. Her sister made  a
    claim which is also pending.

Other evidence

14.  There  is  evidence  in  the  bundle  relating  to   the   Appellant's
    grandmother's admission into hospital.  There is evidence  from  London
    Central Seventh Day Adventist Church confirming that the Appellant  and
    her sister have "a good reputation in our community as hardworking  and
    conscientious people whom I would recommend becoming UK citizens".

15. There is a letter from the Appellant's sister, Polite, of  27  November
    2019.  Polite is the Appellant's older  sister.   She  describes  their
    close relationship and that the Appellant is currently studying a  BTEC
    in  sport  at  Central  Bedfordshire  College  and  intends  to  be   a
    physiotherapist.

16. There is a letter from SM of 29 November 2019.  She is the  Appellant's
    stepmother and a social worker.  In her view the Appellant's absence is
    likely to have a negative impact on her own daughter, A.  She  and  the
    Appellant have a "good strong sister relationship".  The Appellant  has
    taken the role of older sister.

17. There is a letter from the Appellant's aunt, S, of  27  November  2009.
    She describes sending the Appellant back to  Zimbabwe  as  being  "very
    suicidal".  Not only will it affect the Appellant,  but  it  will  also
    affect her own children's emotional and mental wellbeing.

18. There is a letter from Rushell Gayle of 24  November  2018.   He  is  a
    teacher and a  British  citizen.   However,  the  letter  concerns  the
    Appellant's sister P and not the Appellant herself.  Ms Child's at  the
    start of the hearing before me, gave me  the  correct  letter  from  Mr
    Gayle which concerns the Appellant.  There are a couple of letters from
    friends in the supplementary bundle.

Background evidence

19. The Appellant relied on a  report,  "Preliminary  observations  of  the
    United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food, (Ms Hilal Elva,
    on her official visit  to  Zimbabwe  from  18-28  November  2019).  The
    content of the report can be summarised.

20. Ms Elva visited Harare, Mwenezi and Masvingo Province.  She describes a
    food insecurity crisis in the country saying that  she  "cannot  stress
    enough the urgency of the situation in Zimbabwe".  According to Ms Elva
    60% of Zimbabwe's population of 14 million is considered food insecure.
      There  is  widespread  poverty,  limited  employment   opportunities,
    liquidity  challenges,  pervasive  corruption,  economic   instability,
    mismanagement of  funds,  natural  disasters,  recurrent  droughts  and
    economic sanctions and conditionalities  by  the  US  and  the  EU  all
    contribute to Zimbabwe's current crisis.  38% of the  rural  population
    is currently facing food insecurity which is  the  impact  of,  amongst
    other things, adverse weather conditions.  The number of food  insecure
    people is expected to almost double in 2020 compared to the same period
    in 2019.  In addition to severe drought conditions  that  affected  the
    2018-2019 agricultural  season  the  country  was  struck  by  tropical
    cyclone Idai which caused a flood induced disaster in greater  part  of
    the eastern highlands and some  areas  in  the  southern  part  of  the
    country destroying most of the expected harvest.

21.  She  describes  an  international  humanitarian  response  system   as
    essential in reducing the negative effects of the cyclone and  repeated
    droughts on food security.  There is also urban food  insecurity  as  a
    result of the currency crisis, a heavy tax system due to the imposition
    of austerity measures, unpredictable inflation rates,  high  levels  of
    unemployment and low wages.  Economic inequalities  are  on  the  rise.
    She spoke to many people in Harare who told her they could only  afford
    one meal  a  day.   She  experienced  consequences  of  the  disastrous
    economic crisis on the streets of Harare.  Most of the  poor  who  have
    travelled to the cities have ended up living  in  informal  settlements
    that are multiplying in the  suburbs  of  Harare.   She  describes  the
    squalid conditions in these settlements, describes the  failing  health
    system and identifies the elderly children and women as being the  most
    vulnerable segments of society.  They are  forced  to  rely  on  coping
    mechanisms such as school drop-out, early marriage and the sex trade in
    order to  obtain  food.   She  described  increasing  malnutrition  and
    partisan distribution of food favouring those who  support  the  ruling
    party.

Submissions

22. Ms Bassi relied on the case of Rajendran (s117B)- Family  life)  [2016]
    UKUT 138 to support  a  submission  that  the  Appellant's  family  and
    private life should be afforded little weight because of her precarious
    status. The Appellant  could  return  with  her  siblings  which  would
    provide a support group.  The  Appellant  would  be  able  to  build  a
    private life within a reasonable period of time. The evidence  is  that
    the Appellant's father supported his family in  Zimbabwe,  and  he  can
    carry on doing this. There is nothing stopping her father from visiting
    the Appellant in Zimbabwe. The Appellant's course come to an  end  this
    year.  There was no evidence that she would not be able to integrate in
    Zimbabwe.  There is  no  evidence  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration. There are no compelling circumstances.  The situation  has
    moved on from when the Appellant came here. She is now an adult and has
    gained  qualifications  and  skills.   Family  life  can  continue   in
    Zimbabwe, as it did before she came here.




23. Ms Child's relied on her skeleton argument. In respect of the  siblings
    returning together she drew my attention  to  the  Appellant's  brother
    having claimed asylum.  None of the siblings  live  independently.  The
    Appellant is the youngest. They  are  financially  supported  by  their
    father. However, his means  are  limited.  He  would  not  be  able  to
    maintain them in Zimbabwe. The cost of living there is high.  There has
    been no improvement in the economy. Ms Child relied in oral  submission
    on the Country Policy and  Information  Note  Zimbabwe:  Women  fearing
    gender-based harm or violence October 2018 ("the CPIN").  She  drew  my
    attention to what is said therein about gender violence.   She drew  my
    attention to Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] Civ 803 and said that this  was  an
    appropriate  case  where  flexibility  should  apply  because  of   the
    circumstances in which the Appellant came here.

The Law

24. The Appellant's case is that the decision  breaches  her  rights  under
    Article 8 ECHR. She relies on Paragraph 276ADE (1) of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The relevant part of the Rule reads as follows:-

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
                    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that
                    at the date of application, the applicant:

                    (vi)   subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or
                        above, has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less
                        than  20   years   (discounting   any   period   of
                        imprisonment) but there would be  very  significant
                        obstacles to the applicant's integration  into  the
                        country to which he would have to go if required to
                        leave the UK."

25. The Appellant relies on SSHD v Kamara [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  when  the
    Court of Appeal considered what is meant by very significant  obstacles
    in the context of paragraph 276ADE (1). At paragraph 14 Sales  LJ  said
    as follows:-

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's 'integration' into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad  one.   It  is
         not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain  life
         while living in the other country. It is not appropriate  to  treat
         the statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually
         be sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to  direct  itself  in
         the  terms  that  Parliament  has  chosen  to  use.  The  idea   of
         'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life".

26. The Appellant's case is that even  if  she  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Rules, the decision to remove her breaches her  right  to  family  life
    under Article 8.

27. Relevant to the tribunal's decision-making is Part 5A  (sections  117A-
    117D) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (inserted  by
    the Immigration Act 2014). As provided by section  117A  (1),  Part  5A
    applies where a court or tribunal is required to  determine  whether  a
    decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches article 8  and  as  a
    result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.
    Section 117A (2) requires the court or tribunal, in considering whether
    an interference with a person's right to respect for private and family
    life is justified under article 8(2), to have regard in  all  cases  to
    the considerations listed in section 117B.

28. Section 117B states as follows: -

         "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

29. There have been a number of cases concerning proportionality and s.117B
    of the 2002 Act since the UT  decision  in  Rajendran  and  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803.  I
    assume the parties were aware of this, but for one  reason  or  another
    did not rely on or bring them to my attention.   I  have  set  out  the
    relevant caselaw in some detail below.

30. In respect of the impact of s.117B, Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department, the Court of Appeal examined  the  interaction  of
    section 117A(2) and section 117C. Sales LJ observed:-

         "It is possible to conceive of cases falling within section 117B(4)
         (unlawful presence  in  the  UK)  or  section  117B(5)  (precarious
         immigration status in the UK) in which private or family  life  (as
         appropriate) of an especially strong kind has been  established  in
         the host country such that it should be accorded great  weight  for
         the purpose of analysis under Article 8 : Jeunesse v Netherlands is
         a prime example."

31. In CL v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925, the Court of Appeal again considered
    the interplay between s. 117B (4) and (5). The following is salient:-

         "53. Mr Malik submits that this is what the Court of Appeal held in
             TZ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.  At para 25 of the judgment in that case
             the Senior  President  of  Tribunals  (with  whom  Moylan  and
             Longmore LJJ agreed) said:

                  'The settled jurisprudence of the [European Court of Human
                  Rights] is that it is likely to be only in an  exceptional
                  case that article 8 will necessitate a grant of  leave  to
                  remain where a non-settled migrant  has  commenced  family
                  life in the UK at a  time  when  his  or  her  immigration
                  status is precarious ... That general principle applies to
                  any consideration of the  Rules  which  involves  engaging
                  with a requirement or requirements that possess an article
                  8 element ...  and  to  the  consideration  of  article  8
                  outside the Rules.'

         54.  Mr Malik also relies on  a  reported  decision  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) in Rajendran  (s117B
             - family life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC),  which  indicated  that,
             although section 117B(5)  of  the  2002  Act  is  confined  to
             "private life" established by a person at a  time  when  their
             immigration status is precarious, the considerations  set  out
             in sections 117A-D are not exhaustive and it is still relevant
             for a court or tribunal when considering the  public  interest
             to have regard to 'precarious family life' criteria set out in
             established article 8 jurisprudence.

         55.  The established jurisprudence to which reference  is  made  in
             these cases was summarised as follows by the Grand Chamber  of
             the European Court in Jeunesse v  The  Netherlands  (2014)  60
             EHRR 17, para 108:-

                  'Another important consideration is  whether  family  life
                  was created at a time when the persons involved were aware
                  that the immigration status of one of them was  such  that
                  the persistence of that family life within the host  State
                  would from the outset be precarious.  It  is  the  Court's
                  well-established case-law that, where this is the case, it
                  is likely only to be in exceptional circumstances that the
                  removal of the non-national family member will  constitute
                  a violation of article 8.'

         56.  This passage, however, and  the  European  Court's  case  law,
             cannot reasonably be read as establishing that, in determining
             the weight to be given to a  couple's  right  to  respect  for
             their family life, any relationship formed  when  one  partner
             did not (or did not to the other's knowledge) have a right  of
             permanent residence in the  country  should  be  given  little
             weight; nor that for this purpose all persons who do not  have
             settled status should be  viewed  identically,  regardless  of
             their  particular  immigration  status  and  history.  To  the
             contrary, the European  Court  has  made  it  clear  that,  in
             striking the balance between the right to respect  for  family
             life and the state's interest in controlling  immigration,  it
             is necessary to consider the particular circumstances  of  the
             individuals involved, including their immigration  status  and
             history. Thus, in the paragraph of  its  judgment  immediately
             preceding the passage quoted above (para 107), the Court  said
             that:-

                  'in  a  case  which  concerns  family  life  as  well   as
                  immigration, the extent of a State's obligations to  admit
                  to its territory relatives of persons residing there  will
                  vary according to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
                  persons involved and the general interest. Factors  to  be
                  taken into account in this context are the extent to which
                  family life would effectively be ruptured, the  extent  of
                  the ties in  the  Contracting  State,  whether  there  are
                  insurmountable obstacles in the way of the  family  living
                  in the country  of  origin  of  the  alien  concerned  and
                  whether there are  factors  of  immigration  control  (for
                  example, a history of  breaches  of  immigration  law)  or
                  considerations of  public  order  weighing  in  favour  of
                  exclusion ...'

          1. Earlier in the judgment (at para 102) the Court contrasted the
             position of the applicant in the  Jeunesse  case,  who  (apart
             from  a  tourist  visa  valid  for  45  days)  had  never  had
             permission to reside in the Netherlands, with that of  someone
             who had been granted permission  to  settle  in  the  country.
             Clearly there are degrees  of  precariousness  in  a  person's
             situation ranging from, at one extreme, someone who is in  the
             country in breach of immigration laws and is liable to removal
             through to someone  who  has  been  present  lawfully  in  the
             country for some years and is on a pathway to  settled  status
             (such as the five or ten year partner route  in  the  UK)  but
             does not yet have indefinite leave  to  remain.  It  would  be
             unreasonable to attach equal weight  to  family  relationships
             established by individuals in such different legal  situations
             and there is no "settled jurisprudence" which  requires  this.
             Rather,  the  Jeunesse  case  makes  clear  that  a   person's
             immigration status may greatly affect the weight to  be  given
             to their right to respect for family life: see also R (Ali)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  UKSC  60;
             [2016] 1 WLR 4799; para 32; GM  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1630,  para  33.
             It is also worth noting that in the Jeunesse  case  the  Court
             concluded that on the facts refusing the  applicant  residence
             in the Netherlands had  been  a  violation  of  her  right  to
             respect for her family life as protected by article 8.

          1. In Rhuppiah v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1 WLR 5536, para 39, the Supreme  Court
             recognised that the word 'precarious' has been applied both by
             the European Court of Human Rights and by UK courts  to  refer
             to  a  variety  of  situations  including  that  of  a  person
             unlawfully present as well as the status of a person  lawfully
             present for a limited period. The Supreme Court held  that  in
             the context of section 117(B) of the 2002  Act,  however,  the
             word "precarious" should be given a bright-line interpretation
             which  excludes  anyone  present  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and
             includes everyone who, not being a  UK  citizen,  is  lawfully
             present but does not have  indefinite  leave  to  remain:  see
             paras 43-46.

          1. We noted earlier what Lord Reed in the Agyarko case  (at  para
             46) called the 'real and  important'  margin  of  appreciation
             afforded to national authorities in relation  to  immigration,
             and  that  in  the  UK  the  authorities  with  constitutional
             responsibility  for  determining  policy  in  this  area   are
             Parliament and the Secretary of State. As  recognised  in  the
             Rhuppiah case (at para  37),  it  is  clear  that  in  section
             117(B)(5)  of  the  2002  Act  Parliament   has   deliberately
             distinguished between an applicant's private  life,  to  which
             little weight should be given in so far as it was  established
             at a time when a person's immigration  status  is  precarious,
             and his or her family life, which is not the subject of such a
             requirement. That leaves it open to courts  and  tribunals  in
             cases where  a  relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner  is
             established at a time when a person is lawfully present in the
             UK but does not have indefinite leave to remain to  give  such
             weight  to  the  relationship  as  is   appropriate   in   the
             circumstances of the particular case.

32. In GM Sri Lanka v SSHD EWCA Civ 1630, the  Court  of  Appeal  made  the
    following "six preliminary observations" about the test to be applied.

         First, the  IR  and  section  117B  must  be  construed  to  ensure
         consistency with Article 8. This accords with  ordinary  principles
         of legality  whereby  Parliament  is  assumed  to  intend  to  make
         legislation which is lawful (see for example R v SSHD ex p. Simms 2
         AC 115 at page 131; and Bennion on  Statutory  Interpretation  (7th
         Edition) at page 718 - there is "a  high  threshold  for  rebutting
         this presumption"). Were it  otherwise  then  domestic  legislation
         could become inconsistent with the HRA 1998 and the ECHR and be  at
         risk of a declaration of incompatibility.

         Second, national authorities have a  margin  of  appreciation  when
         setting the weighting to be  applied  to  various  factors  in  the
         proportionality assessment: Agyarko  (ibid)  paragraph  [46].  That
         margin of appreciation is not unlimited but is nonetheless real and
         important (ibid). Immigration control  is  an  intensely  political
         matter and "within limits" it can accommodate different  approaches
         adopted by different national  authorities.  A  court  must  accord
         "considerable weight" to the policy of the Secretary of State at  a
         "general level": Agyarko paragraph [47] and paragraphs [56] - [57];
         and see also Ali paragraphs  [44]  -  [46],  [50]  and  [53].  This
         includes the policy weightings set out in Section 117B.  To  ensure
         consistency with the HRA 1998 and  the  ECHR,  section  117B  must,
         however, have injected into it a limited degree of  flexibility  so
         that the application of the statutory provisions would always  lead
         to an  end  result  consistent  with  Article  8:  Rhuppiah  (ibid)
         paragraphs [36] and [49].

         Third, the test for an assessment outside the IR is whether a "fair
         balance" is struck between competing public and private  interests.
         This is a proportionality test: Agyarko (ibid) paragraphs [41]  and
         [60]; see also Ali paragraphs [32], [47] - [49]. In order to ensure
         that references in the IR and in policy to  a  case  having  to  be
         "exceptional" before leave to remain can be granted, are consistent
         with Article  8,  they  must  be  construed  as  not  imposing  any
         incremental requirement over and above  that  arising  out  of  the
         application of an Article 8 proportionality test, for instance that
         there be "some highly  unusual"  or  "unique"  factor  or  feature:
         Agyarko (ibid) paragraphs [56] and [60].

         Fourth,  the  proportionality  test  is  to  be  applied   on   the
         "circumstances of the individual case": Agyarko  (ibid)  paragraphs
         [47] and [60]. The facts must be evaluated in a "real world" sense:
         EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at paragraph [58]  ("EV
         Philippines").

         Fifth, there is a requirement for proper evidence.  Mere  assertion
         by an applicant as to his/her personal circumstances and as to  the
         evidence will not however necessarily be accepted as  adequate:  In
         Mudibo v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1949 at paragraph [31] the  applicant
         did not give oral evidence during the  appeal  hearing  and  relied
         upon assertions unsupported  by  documentary  evidence  which  were
         neither self-evident nor necessarily  logical  in  the  context  of
         other evidence. The FTT  and  the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the
         evidence as mere "assertion".

         Sixth,  the  list  of  relevant  factors  to  be  considered  in  a
         proportionality assessment is "not closed". There is  in  principle
         no limit to the factors which might, in a given case,  be  relevant
         to an evaluation  under  Article  8,  which  is  a  fact  sensitive
         exercise. This obvious point was recognised by the Supreme Court in
         Ali (ibid) at paragraphs [115ff]] and by the Court of Appeal in  TZ
         (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  1109  ("TZ")  at
         paragraph [29]. Nonetheless, there is in practice a relatively well
         trodden list of factors which  tend  to  arise  in  the  cases.  We
         address those of relevance to this appeal below. But others  exist,
         identified in  Strasbourg  and  domestic  case  law,  such  as  the
         personal conduct of an applicant or family member  in  relation  to
         immigration control eg. breach of  immigration  rules  or  criminal
         law, or public order  considerations;  the  extent  of  social  and
         economic ties to the UK; and the existence of  prolonged  delay  in
         removing the applicant during which time  the  individual  develops
         strong family and social ties: See  generally  Ali  paragraph  [28]
         citing with approval Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2014) 60  EHRR  17
         ("Jeunesse").

Conclusions

33. I found that the Appellant and her father were credible witnesses.  The
    Appellant came here aged 15.  She was at  that  time  an  unaccompanied
    minor. This was accepted by the  Respondent.  I  accept  that  she  was
    abused in Zimbabwe by her step- father.  I accept that she is depressed
    and seeking counselling. Her  mother  effectively  disappeared  without
    trace leaving the Appellant and her siblings in the hands of an abusive
    step-father.  Her father is separated from his wife, with whom he has a
    child A. However, Appellant and  her  mother  support  the  Appellant's
    appeal.   Appellant  and  the   Appellant   have   a   normal   sibling
    relationship.

34. The Appellant's aunt was able to bring the Appellant to the UK  and  to
    remove her from harm, following the Appellant's mother's disappearance.
    Her two siblings followed.  Since this time  the  Appellant  has  lived
    with her father. She is not living independently.  She  is  financially
    and emotionally dependant on him. I had the  benefit  of  hearing  oral
    evidence and I accepted that the relationship is very  close  and  that
    that the Appellant is very dependant, on her father.  He  is  the  only
    parent  with  whom  she  has  contact.  The  evidence  about   Zimbabwe
    establishes that the Appellant would face  very  real  difficulties  on
    return. It would be difficult for her  to  find  work  and  to  support
    herself, particularly as a lone female. However,  the  difficulties  do
    not amount to very significant obstacles to integration,  applying  the
    test in Kamara. She has not been here for a significant period of time.
    She is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She would have  some  financial  support
    from her father albeit not very significant.  Life would  be  extremely
    challenging for her, but not to the extent that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to integration as defined by Sales LJ in Kamara.

35. The Appellant relies on her family and private life to argue  that  the
    Respondent's  decision  breaches  her  rights  under  Article  8.   The
    Appellant cannot meet the Rules concerning  private  life.  She  cannot
    meet the Rules relating to family life.  The maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.

36. I find that the Appellant has significant family  life  here  with  her
    father which is akin  to  that  between  a  father  and  child.  It  is
    significant in this case that the Appellant joined her father  lawfully
    having been recognised by the Secretary of State  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor. It is not suggested by the Secretary of  State  that  she  could
    return to her abusive step - father. It is the Respondent's  case  that
    she can return to Zimbabwe alone or with her siblings.

37. The Appellant had a relationship with her father before she came  here.
    It was not created when she was here precariously. It  cannot  sensibly
    be suggested that the Appellant (who was a child when she came here) or
    her father had any choice other than to develop  and  strengthen  their
    pre-existing relationship. It cannot reasonably be suggested  that  the
    circumstances are  analogous  to  that  of  a  precarious  family  life
    scenario involving partners or spouses.  Considering the  circumstances
    of this case, I attach significance to the Appellant's family life here
    albeit strengthened when her stay here was precarious. In this case any
    other approach would not be consistent with Article 8.

38. It was not suggested by the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant's  father
    could return to Zimbabwe with her to continue  family  life.   This  is
    probably explained by the fact that he has a 12 -year old daughter  her
    who is a British citizen (A). Whilst it may be reasonable to  expect  a
    couple, one of whom does not have leave to remain here, to return to  a
    country to support each other, it is not so  straight  forward  in  the
    case of adult siblings.  The family life on which the Appellant  relies
    is with her father and not her siblings.  There was  no  evidence  that
    she has family life with her siblings in  the  UK  which  would  engage
    Article 8. Siblings are not responsible for each other in the same  way
    as a parent is for a child. Siblings are not committed to live together
    like adults in a relationship. The strength of the Appellant case rests
    in the particular relationship that she has with her  father.  In  this
    respect I take into account the impact of separation not  only  on  the
    Appellant but on her father too. He would be  heartbroken  to  have  to
    endure being separated from his vulnerable daughter.

39. There is no bright line between childhood and adulthood.  I  find  that
    there has been no significant change as  a  result  of  this  Appellant
    having  recently  reached  adulthood.   The  Appellant  is   vulnerable
    following her negative experiences in Zimbabwe. It would  be  extremely
    difficult for her to return to Zimbabwe as  a  lone  female.  I  cannot
    speculate about whether she could live with her siblings  in  Zimbabwe.
    If so, this may make her life there easier and she would have a  degree
    of family life; however, she  would  not  be  able  to  enjoy  a  real,
    meaningful and supportive relationship with her father in the  UK.   It
    is the relationship with her father on which she  relies  to  establish
    that the decision breaches her rights under Article 8  and  this  could
    not continue in Zimbabwe.   It is this relationship which I find to  be
    significant. I attach significance to the meaningful relationships that
    the Appellant has here with A and her grandmother.   I take account  of
    the CPIN.  Women  in  Zimbabwe  experience  discrimination  and  remain
    disadvantaged in society. The Appellant has been the victim of  a  form
    of domestic abuse.  Violence  against  women  generally  is  relatively
    common there.  There is no specific risk to this Appellant, but it is a
    factor that may make life in  Zimbabwe  even  more  difficult  for  her
    especially when she has already been abused.  Similarly, it is a factor
    that she would be returning to a country where there  are  very  severe
    economic problems.

40. In the circumstances  of  this  case,  I  conclude  that  the  decision
    breaches the Appellant's rights under Article 8.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed         Joanna McWilliam                       Date 25 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

