
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23326/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 July 2017                               |On 17 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 RAMALAT [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Shanthi &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Beg sitting
    at Taylor House on 3 April 2017) allowing the claimant's appeal against
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse to  grant  her  a
    family visit visa on compassionate grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity direction, and I do  not  consider  that  the
    claimant  requires  anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the   Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 10 May 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  granted  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer permission to appeal for the following reasons: "I am
    satisfied that it is arguable that the Judge materially erred regarding
    whether Article 8 was met on gravity and proportionality grounds."

The Appellant's Material History

 3. The appellant is a national of Angola.  She has two children, [FB], and
    [SB].  [FB] was born on [ ] 2002 and [SB] was born on [ ] 2005.  At the
    date of decision, the children were living with their mother  in  a  US
    Embassy compound in Liberia.  The reason for this was that the claimant
    was employed by  US  Aid  as  a  Malaria  Advisor  providing  technical
    oversight to the implementation of a US Government Malaria  project  in
    Liberia.  The claimant began this employment on 22 April 2015.

 4. The claimant's parents were both born in Nigeria, but at  the  date  of
    application they were both settled in the UK, and the claimant's mother
    had become a British citizen.

 5. On 9 February 2016 the claimant applied for a family  visit  visa.   In
    her application form, she said that  her  83-year-old  father  suffered
    from dementia and hypertension.  He had been admitted  to  hospital  in
    late December 2015 and  had  been  discharged  in  January  2016.   She
    acknowledged that she had been refused a  visit  visa  on  30  November
    2013, as she had made a false statement in her application  form.   She
    apologised for violating  the  UK  Immigration  Rules  by  leaving  her
    daughters to stay an additional  six  months  beyond  their  authorised
    stay.  She had done this at the request of her father who was  so  fond
    of them, and asked them to remain with him.  She could not say 'no'  to
    him, as he was crying.  She  asked  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for
    compassion to allow her to see her father again before he died.  He was
    old and frail and he might die at any  time.   She  promised  never  to
    violate any immigration rule again.

 6. On  17  February  2016  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (post  reference
    SHEFO/253348) gave his reasons for refusing the claimant's application.
     The previous application for UK entry  clearance  was  refused  on  11
    November 2013 because she had made false statements in her application.
     He noticed that she now stated that she wished for her application  to
    be granted on compassionate grounds.  But it had been decided that  her
    application  did  not  fall  for  a  grant  of   entry   clearance   on
    compassionate  grounds.  Any  future   applications   would   also   be
    automatically refused under paragraph V3.7B until 11 November  2023  in
    line with paragraph V.3(10)(A-F).

 7. The claimant's representative settled lengthy grounds of  appeal.   She
    and her children had been banned from entering the  UK  for  10  years.
    The claimant would not have any problems with that, if she did not  had
    a sick and aged father in the UK.  She was afraid that her father might
    depart at any moment and she wished to see him and  take  care  of  him
    before his final departure.  She had a fantastic job with all  expenses
    paid for by the US Government, including the  children's  school  fees,
    housing, transport, etc.  She was taking care of her  children  and  so
    she unable to leave them in Liberia on their own  for  a  long  period.
    She had no plans to leave her highly sought-after job.  All she  wanted
    to do was to see her father one more time.

 8. On 28 January 2017 the Entry Clearance Manager  gave  his  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal decision.  The claimant had  practised  deception
    on a previous application and it was therefore  appropriate  to  refuse
    her entry clearance under paragraph V3 of Appendix V of the Immigration
    Rules.  The decision to refuse her entry to visit the sponsor would not
    prevent them being able to continue to see each  other,  or  to  reside
    with each other in a third country.  He was satisfied that the decision
    was correct in law, and that it was proportionate to the maintenance of
    effective Immigration control.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Beg sitting in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House on  3  April  2017.   Mr  Solomon  of  Counsel
    appeared on behalf of the claimant, and the respondent was  represented
    by a Home Office Presenting Officer.  The Judge received oral  evidence
    from the claimant's mother. On 21 December 2016 her husband  had  died,
    and he had been buried in Romford.

10. The Presenting Officer said that he was aware of the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Abbasi (Visits -  bereavement  -  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT
    00463.  But he distinguished the case of Abbasi because  deception  had
    been employed by the claimant.  Accordingly, there were  no  compelling
    grounds to apply discretion in the present case.

11. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Solomon  submitted  that  the  claimant's
    past deception was outweighed by her desire, and need, to grieve at her
    father's graveside.

12. In her subsequent decision, the Judge found at paragraph [15] that  the
    claimant had committed deception in the Entry Clearance application she
    made in 2013, but nonetheless there  were  exceptional  and  compelling
    circumstances to justify granting her entry clearance now.   She  found
    that the claimant's inability to see her father before he died had  had
    a profound, emotional effect upon her.  She also took into account  the
    evidence given by her mother.  She said it was her husband's last  wish
    to see his daughter and  granddaughter  before  he  passed  away.   The
    claimant had been deprived of "her right" to pay her final respects  to
    her father.  The claimant's mother also  stated  that  her  own  health
    condition had worsened  since  her  husband's  death.   The  claimant's
    mother said that there was no guarantee that she would still  be  alive
    by the time the mandatory ban was over, and she  said  that  she  would
    like to see her daughter in the United Kingdom.

13. At paragraph [16], the Judge held that the Court in  Abbasi  recognised
    the importance of visiting a  grave  by  close  family  members  as  an
    intrinsic feature of a civilised society.  She found that the  claimant
    wished to visit the UK for a short period of time in order to visit her
    father's grave and to provide some comfort  to  her  mother  through  a
    period of mourning.  Mr Solomon, on behalf of the  claimant,  had  said
    that she would be coming to the UK alone, leaving her daughters  behind
    in Liberia, and therefore she had a strong incentive to  return.  There
    was no challenge to the claimant's ability to meet the maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements of a visit visa application under the Rules.
    The engagement of Article 8 was established.  Any interference  in  the
    claimant's Article 8 rights would be disproportionate.  The Judge found
    that there were wholly exceptional and compassionate  circumstances  in
    the case which outweighed the public interest.

The Error of Law Hearing

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Duffy said that he had nothing to add to the points  raised  in
    the permission application.  He had not brought  along  a  copy  of  SS
    (Malaysia) [2004] UKIAT 0091.

15. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Karim submitted that  the  error  of  law
    challenge was no more than  an  expression  of  disagreement  with  the
    findings that were reasonably open to the Judge.  The only issue raised
    in the permission application was whether the Judge had erred in law in
    finding that Article  8  was  engaged.   Although  the  Judge  granting
    permission had indicated that  there  was  an  arguable  error  in  the
    Judge's  assessment  of  proportionality,  this  was  not  an  argument
    advanced in the permission application.

Discussion

16. Ground 1 is that the Judge erred in finding that  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance to a visitor was an interference with Article 8,  in  a  case
    where there was no finding of family life.

17. Ground 2 is that the Judge erred in her analysis of private life.   The
    Tribunal in Abbasi referred to a number of cases in which Article 8 was
    engaged in burial cases, but those concerned the family/private life of
    "those  already  in  the  contracting  state".   Furthermore,   in   SS
    (Malaysia) [2004] UKIAT  0091,  the  Tribunal  said  that  private,  as
    distinct from family, life was not a basis on which a  right  of  entry
    could be based under the Human Rights Convention, as it  could  not  be
    construed as providing for all those whose private lives are restricted
    in some way in a signatory or non-signatory country.

18. I accept that the Judge made no finding that the claimant enjoys family
    life with her mother in the UK.  On the  contrary,  on  a  conventional
    analysis, applying the Kugathas criteria, the claimant does  not  enjoy
    family life with her mother.  But as  the  Judge  directed  herself  at
    paragraph [9] of her decision, in Abbasi the Upper Tribunal  held  that
    the refusal of a visa to foreign nationals seeking to enter the UK  for
    a finite period for the purpose of mourning  with  family  members  the
    recent death of a close relative, and visiting the grave of a deceased,
    is capable of constituting a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    rights of the persons concerned under Article 8 ECHR.  It is not  true,
    as alleged  in  the  permission  application,  that  the  burial  cases
    discussed in Abassi all  concern  the  family/private  life  of  "those
    already in the contracting state".  The  cases  discussed  concern  the
    private lives of those not in the contracting state, but  who  wish  to
    enter the contracting state in order to mourn with family  members  who
    are already in the contracting state.

19. The implication of the citation of the case of SS  (Malaysia)  is  that
    Abassi was wrongly decided.  But Mr Duffy did not seek to  persuade  me
    that this was the  case.  Indeed,  he  suggested  that  Abbasi  carried
    greater weight than SS (Malaysia), as it was a more recent decision  of
    the Tribunal.

20. At the hearing before Judge Beg, the Presenting Officer only sought  to
    distinguish  Abassi  on  proportionality  grounds.   Unlike  the  cases
    discussed in  Abassi,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  prima  face
    justified in refusing the entry clearance  application  on  suitability
    grounds.  As I explored Mr Karim with oral  argument,  it  is  arguable
    that Judge Beg has downplayed this distinct feature of  the  case  when
    conducting her balancing exercise in paragraphs [15] and  [16]  of  her
    decision.  The claimant's  past  immigration  offending  was  two-fold:
    firstly, she caused her children to remain  in  the  UK  for  some  six
    months after their visas had expired;  secondly,  she  then  sought  to
    cover this up by lying in her application for  a  visit  visa  in  2013
    about when the children had left the UK.

21. However, although a cogent justification for excluding the claimant  on
    suitability grounds is not at the forefront of  the  Judge's  balancing
    exercise, it is not the Entry Clearance Officer's case that  the  Judge
    has wholly failed to take this important  consideration  into  account.
    Moreover, on a fair reading of the  decision  as  a  whole,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the Judge did not  have  in  mind  the  claimant's  past
    deception and immigration offending when  deciding  that,  nonetheless,
    there were wholly exceptional and compassionate  circumstances  in  her
    case which outweighed the public interest.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.





Signed                              Date  14 July 2017


