
                                   `[pic]

Upper Tribunal a
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/23986/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 8 July 2019                |On Friday 12 July 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            JIBIN JOSEPH VAKANIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Wise Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  promulgated  on  11   February   2019   ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  treated  as  abandoned  the
      Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 14 November
      2018 refusing his human rights claim in the context of an  application
      for indefinite leave to remain.

2.          The Appellant is a national of India.  He entered the  UK  as  a
      student on 8 December 2008 with leave to remain from 5  November  2008
      to 31 October 2010.  He obtained further leave in that category to  30
      April 2012.  He then applied for and was granted leave to remain as  a
      Tier 1 post-study migrant until 9 August 2014.  On 8 August  2014  the
      Appellant made a further application  for  leave  as  a  student.   He
      applied to vary that application on 22 April 2015 to that of a Tier  2
      migrant, but that application was rejected as invalid on 24 June 2015.
       He was however granted leave as a Tier 2 migrant from 2 July 2015  in
      response to an application made on that date.  His leave granted to 31
      May 2018 was later extended to 13 June 2020.

3.           The  Appellant's  appeal  focusses  on  the  reasons  for   the
      Respondent's decision dated 24 June 2015 which he says is contrary  to
      the Respondent's guidance in relation to the exercise  of  discretion.
      The other contentious issue is the legal effect of the  gap  in  leave
      which was the basis for the Respondent's rejection of the  application
      for indefinite leave to remain.

4.          Judge Andrew in the Decision treated the appeal as abandoned  on
      the basis that section 104(4A) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") applies  because  the  Appellant  had
      been granted leave to remain.

5.          The Appellant's grounds rely on section 82 of the 2002  Act  and
      the description of the decisions which  attract  a  right  of  appeal,
      specifically the refusal of  a  human  rights  claim.   The  Appellant
      asserts that as there was a refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim,  the
      Respondent's decision generated a right of appeal notwithstanding  the
      grant of leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant (which grant preceded the
      decision letter under appeal here).  That is consistent with the  fact
      that the Respondent's decision confirmed there to be a right of appeal
      on that basis which is also consistent with the Respondent's guidance.
       Of course, however, the Respondent cannot confer a  right  of  appeal
      where none exists as a matter of law.

6.          Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Cruthers on 30 May 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:
            "..2.      I take it to be common ground that the appellant  has
           limited leave to remain in the UK until 13  June  2020  (as  per
           paragraph 2 of the decision under consideration).
            3.   The exact date of the limited grant of  leave  referred  to
           above is not immediately apparent to me.  But from paragraphs  7
           and 8 of the appellant's witness statement of 30 January 2019, I
           take it that the grant referred to was made before the appellant
           submitted his  index  application  on  12  November  2018.   The
           decision said to have been under appeal to Judge  Andrew  was  a
           refusal of indefinite leave to remain -  decision  taken  on  14
           November 2018 (her  paragraph  1).   Judge  Andrew  treated  the
           appeal  as  abandoned  by  reference  to  section   104(4A)   of
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
            4.   As per the grounds on which the appellant seeks  permission
           to appeal, I consider it arguable that the subsection of section
           104 referred to above does  not  operate  to  create  a  "deemed
           abandonment" where the grant  of  leave  referred  to  was  made
           before the decision which the appellant  is  seeking  to  appeal
           against."

 7.         The matter comes before me to assess whether the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
8.    By letter dated 25 June 2019,  the  Respondent  submitted  a  Rule  24
      response in the following terms so far as relevant:

           "..2. The Respondent does not oppose the appellant's application
           for permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal  to  determine
           the appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing  to  consider
           whether the appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276B"

9.    Whilst  not  withdrawing  the  concession,  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that
      section 113 of the 2002 Act might be relevant and  questioned  whether
      it could be said that there was a human rights claim in  circumstances
      where the Appellant will not be removed, at least not  prior  to  2020
      when his leave ends.  He could  of  course  make  an  application  for
      further leave to remain at that time.  Mr  Kannangara  submitted  that
      this was not relevant.  The issue still has to be determined based  on
      a hypothetical removal as at the date of hearing.

10.   I begin my consideration with that issue.   Section  113  provides  as
      follows:

           "human rights claim" means a claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
           Secretary of State at a place designated  by  the  Secretary  of
           State that to remove the person from or require him to leave the
           United Kingdom or to refuse him entry into  the  United  Kingdom
           would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998
           ..."


11.   In some respects, it is irrelevant whether the claim made is  a  human
      rights claim.  If the Respondent has considered it as such and refused
      it without certifying the claim  as  clearly  unfounded  (pursuant  to
      sections 94 or 96 of the 2002 Act) or refused to treat it as  a  fresh
      claim applying paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules then there is  a
      refusal of a human rights claim which, pursuant to the current wording
      of section 82 of the 2002 Act generates a right of appeal.

12.   In any event, though, Mr Kannangara's submission  is  consistent  with
      case-law, specifically,  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  JM  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1402.  That
      is not precisely on point since the appellant did not  have  leave  to
      remain at the relevant time.  Nor could she have appealed if  she  had
      leave to remain as, at that time, the decision generating a  right  of
      appeal - namely a refusal to vary leave - did  not  give  a  right  of
      appeal if appellant had leave remaining. However, the ratio (that  the
      claim that removal would breach an appellant's human rights is  to  be
      assessed on a hypothetical basis, whether or not removal  is  imminent
      at the relevant time) is applicable to this case.

13.   Turning then to section 104(4A) of the 2002 Act,  that  provides  that
      "[a]n appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while  he  is  in
      the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if the  appellant  is
      granted leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom...".   The
      intention behind that sub-section appears to be  that  the  appeal  no
      longer serves any purpose and is therefore deemed  by  statute  to  be
      abandoned.  So much is evident from section 104(4B) to  which  section
      104(4A) is subject which provides that where an appeal is on asylum or
      humanitarian protection  grounds,  there  is  no  automatic  statutory
      abandonment and an  appellant  may  give  notice  that  he  wishes  to
      continue the appeal in order to vindicate his entitlement  to  refugee
      or HP status.

14.   Turning then to the situation  here,  the  Appellant  has  been  given
      leave to remain but only as a Tier 2 migrant for a limited  period  of
      time.  In order to  raise  his  entitlement  to  indefinite  leave  to
      remain, he is required to continue his challenge to  the  Respondent's
      negative decision in that regard.  The only issue therefore is whether
      he can do that by way of an  appeal  or  only  by  a  judicial  review
      challenge.  In agreement with FtTJ Cruthers, I agree that  the  answer
      to this question is to be found in  a  temporal  analysis  of  section
      104(4A).  In other words, the appeal is only  statutorily  treated  as
      abandoned if the appellant "is"  (and  not  "was")  granted  leave  to
      remain.

15.   I accept, as  I  have  already  indicated,  that  under  the  previous
      version of the appeal provisions in section 82  of  the  2002  Act,  a
      person in the Appellant's position would not be entitled to a right of
      appeal as he had extant leave to remain prior to  the  decision  under
      appeal.  However, I am fortified in my conclusion that this is not now
      the way in which the provisions are to  operate  by  the  Home  Office
      policy guidance entitled "Rights of Appeal" (Version 7.0:  July  2018)
      which analyses the position as follows:

           "Human rights application where the person has immigration leave


           This section provides guidance on human rights claims where  the
           person has immigration leave and is seeking leave of a different
           duration (an upgrade application). It tells you about whether  a
           human rights claim has been made where the applicant has  extant
           immigration leave and is seeking leave of a  different  duration
           (an upgrade application). When considering  an  application  for
           leave to remain you must first identify whether or not  a  human
           rights claim has been made. The section, "What is a human rights
           claim" sets out which applications made  under  the  Immigration
           Rules are human rights claims.  It  gives  guidance  on  how  to
           identify human rights claims that have  been  made  outside  the
           Immigration Rules. Where an applicant has made  a  human  rights
           claim which is refused, they have a right of appeal (subject  to
           certification).  However,  where   an   applicant   has   extant
           immigration leave then whether they have  made  a  human  rights
           claim will depend on:
           . the basis of the grant of their extant immigration leave
           . the basis on which they  are  seeking  leave  of  a  different
      duration
           Immigration leave: human rights or non human rights
           It is important  that  you  establish  whether  leave  has  been
           granted on a human rights or a non human rights  basis  as  this
           may affect whether the current application  is  a  human  rights
           claim. Where a person has extant leave on a human  rights  basis
           and is seeking leave to remain of a different  duration  on  the
           basis that the grant of limited leave  is  itself  a  breach  of
           their human rights, that  application  is  not  a  human  rights
           claim. The rationale for this is  that  the  second  application
           (for example, for indefinite leave to remain) is in reality,  an
           upgrade application  rather  than  a  human  rights  claim.  The
           applicant is merely seeking a more generous form of  leave  than
           that which they have already been granted.....
           New human rights claims
           There will be applicants who have  immigration  leave  on  human
           rights grounds, who make a new and different human rights  claim
           which if refused will have a right of appeal.  For  example,  an
           applicant who has extant leave  as  a  partner,  which  they  no
           longer qualify for, seeks a variation of that leave on the basis
           that they are the parent of a  child.  That  constitutes  a  new
           human rights claim. The refusal of such a claim will  give  rise
           to a right of appeal. Where the applicant has extant immigration
           leave on a non human rights basis and is seeking  to  vary  that
           leave on a human rights basis that  will  normally  be  a  human
           rights claim and they will have  a  right  of  appeal  from  any
           refusal of that claim. The  section  "What  is  a  human  rights
           claim?" gives guidance on this. An  example  of  this  would  be
           where an applicant has extant immigration leave as a student and
           makes an application for leave to remain as a partner  which  is
           refused. The applicant would have a right of appeal against that
           refusal as it has not been accepted that they have  a  right  to
           remain on human rights grounds. At  the  end  of  their  student
           leave they will be required to leave the UK and be removable and
           their argument is that that removal will be unlawful  under  the
           Human Rights Act 1998."

16.   For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the  Decision  contains
      an error of law and I set it aside.  Given the terms of the  Decision,
      the Appellant has not had his appeal considered substantively  on  the
      merits at all. For that reason, Mr Tufan  submitted  that  the  appeal
      should probably  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
      determination.

17.   Mr Kannangara initially submitted that I could go on  to  re-make  the
      decision in this Tribunal as he appeared to think that the issues were
      only ones of law in relation to which few findings of fact  needed  to
      be made.  However, I pointed out to him the  recent  Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in R (oao Masum Ahmed) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1070.  That decision  is  binding  on  this
      Tribunal and appears to place the Appellant in some difficulty due  to
      the  analysis  of  paragraph  276B(a)(i)  of  the  Immigration   Rules
      concerning continuous lawful residence.

18.   Due to the nature of and  reasons  for  the  gap  in  the  Appellant's
      residence in 2014/2015, the facts of his case at that time may require
      more detailed consideration to ascertain the extent of the gap and the
      effect of that gap on the issue whether the Appellant has  ten  years'
      continuous lawful residence (see chronology set out at [2] above).   I
      accept of course that the issue  for  the  Tribunal  is  a  wider  one
      whether Article 8 ECHR is breached by the decision under  appeal,  but
      the starting point will be whether the Appellant  can  meet  paragraph
      276B given that this is the basis on which he claims to be entitled to
      leave to remain on human rights grounds.  In any event, the  facts  at
      that time, may also be relevant to that wider issue.   The  extent  of
      the fact finding which is required in this case may therefore be quite
      extensive, particularly since there has been no previous consideration
      of the merits of the Appellant's case.

19.   Having taken  instructions,  Mr  Kannangara  agreed  that  the  appeal
      should  be  remitted  to  the  Tribunal.    I   have   given   careful
      consideration to  the  Joint  Practice  Statement  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this
      Tribunal.  That reads as follows:
        "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
        proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
        the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
        that :-
        a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
           First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for
           that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier
           Tribunal; or
        b) the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
           necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
           is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
           2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal."

20.   In light of what I say at [18] above, concerning  the  extent  of  the
      fact finding which is necessary in this case and the lack of any prior
      consideration of the merits of the Appellant's case,  I  am  satisfied
      that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
      for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Andrew.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Andrew
promulgated on 11 February 2019 is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Andrew.
 Signed          [pic] Dated: 8 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
