
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/23942/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 August 2017                      |     On 11 September 2017            |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by B Assured Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, AA, was born in 1980 and is a male citizen of Iraq.   He
    arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2002  and  claimed  asylum.   His
    application  was  refused.   The  appellant  was  subsequently  granted
    exceptional leave to remain in October 2006  and  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

 2. Following criminal convictions  (September  2006  -  violent  disorder;
    April 2016 -  fraudulent  business  activity)  the  respondent  made  a
    decision to deport the appellant  on  16  May  2016.   The  appellant's
    subsequent asylum claim was refused and the appellant appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Atkinson) which, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 18 May 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. I find that Judge Atkinson erred in law such that his decision falls to
    be set aside.  I have reached that decision for the following  reasons.
    It is accepted that the appellant comes from a contested area  of  Iraq
    (Diyala).  The judge found that the appellant's account "of his  family
    background is not reliable" [39].  However, the judge  did  accept  the
    appellant does  not  speak  Arabic  and  does  not  have  any  identity
    documents and has never been to or lived in Baghdad or  the  IKR.   The
    judge found [46] that "the appellant does not have  a  viable  internal
    relocation option within Baghdad or the south of Iraq".  The judge went
    on to consider the possibility of the appellant relocating to the  IKR.
    He observed that the authority of AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 544 (IAC) indicated that a returnee could obtain entry to the  IKR
    as a Kurd for ten days but was unlikely to be removed from the IKR even
    if unable to find work there [48].  The judge found [50] that it  would
    not be unreasonable for the appellant to travel to the  IKR.   However,
    at [52] the judge found as follows:

         I find that the appellant would  face  some  obstacles  in  finding
         employment in the  IKR  and  therefore  face  some  hardship.   The
         economic situation in the IKR is described as being in crisis.  The
         unemployment figures for 2015 are said to be in the region of  30%.
         Whereas there are doubts about the extent of his  family  in  Iraq,
         there is no credible evidence before me showing the appellant would
         be able to call on family support in the  IKR.   I  also  find,  as
         suggested by Dr Fatah [the appellant's expert  witness],  that  the
         appellant may have some difficulties in adjusting to  life  in  the
         IKR because he has been in the United Kingdom since 2002.

 4. Notwithstanding those observations, the judge went on [53] to find that
    the appellant's relocation to the IKR would not be unduly harsh.

 5. One would have expected following  that  finding  that  the  subsequent
    paragraph [54] would provide the judge's reasoning for concluding  that
    internal  flight  would  not  be  unduly  harsh   notwithstanding   the
    "difficult environment" which the judge had identified earlier  in  his
    analysis.  However, at [54], the judge wrote:

         In coming to my decision, I also take account  of  the  appellant's
         claim not to have relevant identity documentation.   I  follow  the
         approach adopted in AA when faced with these circumstances  and  as
         such find that the appellant cannot succeed in his protection claim
         on the basis of an absence of such documentation.  In  the  present
         case, as Dr Fatah has identified at section 6.4 of the  report,  it
         is open to the appellant to apply to the Iraqi Embassy in London to
         obtain his civil status identity  card  (CSID)  and  thereafter  an
         Iraqi passport.  I note in this respect the appellant has said that
         he has a brother in Diyala who may be able to assist him.

 6. This paragraph is problematic.  It does not, in my opinion,  offer  any
    justification for the judge's finding  at  [53]  that  internal  flight
    would not be  unduly  harsh.   Indeed,  it  is  disconnected  from  the
    previous paragraphs in which the judge had  found  that  the  appellant
    would face a "difficult environment" in the IKR.  The  judge  fails  to
    acknowledge the fact that  the  appellant's  claim  including  that  in
    respect of  internal  flight  does  not  depend  upon  the  "technical"
    difficulties in obtaining documentation.   It  is  not  clear  how  the
    appellant's brother in Diyala might assist the appellant in obtaining a
    CSID whilst in the United Kingdom.  Moreover, it is not clear  how  the
    possession of a CSID would enable the appellant to settle in the longer
    term in the IKR.  Moreover, the judge has not grappled  with  the  fact
    that the appellant is likely to be returned to Baghdad (where the judge
    finds he would be at risk) or he might encounter  serious  difficulties
    in the relatively short period of  time  before  he  could  arrange  to
    travel onwards to the IKR.  It is not clear whether that onward journey
    would be by  air  or  overland;  if  the  latter,  the  judge  has  not
    considered whether the appellant would be likely to face risk en route.



 7. I agree, therefore, with Judge Froom, who granted permission to  appeal
    in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  Judge  Atkinson's  analysis   was
    incomplete.  He  has  failed  to  address  the  matters  which  I  have
    identified above and his paragraph [54]  does  not  provide  sufficient
    justification for his conclusion at [53] that the appellant  would  not
    find internal relocation in Iraq unduly harsh.

 8. Mr Hussain urged me to proceed to  remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    appeal.  I have considered doing so but have decided that I should not.
     I am  aware  that  both  parties  may  wish  to  adduce  new  evidence
    concerning the circumstances which this appellant may encounter both in
    Iraq generally and should he exercise the option of travelling  to  the
    IKR.  I am aware that there are direct flights from the United  Kingdom
    to Erbil and it would be helpful to know the position of the respondent
    as regards the route by which it is proposed to return  this  appellant
    to Iraq.  Moreover, it  is  not  clear  what  attempts,  if  any,  this
    appellant has made to obtain a CSID or any other  documentation  whilst
    he remains in the United Kingdom.  This  may  be  important  given  the
    judge's findings at [45] that  the  appellant  would  be  "unlikely  to
    identify individuals who would be willing to sponsor him [to settle  in
    Baghdad] and thereby enable  him  to  access  accommodation  and  other
    services".  It seems those findings are based upon the assumption  that
    the appellant would not have a CSID, an assumption  which  is  at  odds
    with the judge's  finding  at  [54].   However,  I  see  no  reason  to
    interfere with the judge's finding  that  the  appellant  does  have  a
    family member living  in  Diyala.   It  is  not  clear  what,  if  any,
    assistance that family member may be able to offer  the  appellant.   I
    consider these  are  all  matters  which  require  further  examination
    followed by clear and equivocal findings of fact by a  Tribunal.   This
    analysis is best conducted in the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  set  aside
    Judge  Atkinson's  decision  but  preserve  his  findings  (which   the
    appellant has not challenged in the Upper Tribunal) that the  appellant
    has given a false account of his family members living  in  Iraq.   The
    decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on the basis of  the
    fact that the appellant is Kurdish, from  Diyala  and  that  he  has  a
    brother or other family member living in  Diyala.   By  the  time  this
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing that Tribunal
    will expect the appellant to give a full account of any attempts  which
    he may make whilst in this country to  obtain  documentation  from  the
    Iraqi Embassy.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 18 May
    2017 is  set  aside.   The  findings  of  the  Tribunal  which  I  have
    identified in paragraph [8] above shall stand.  The appeal is  returned
    to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Atkinson) for  that  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 5 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 5 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


