
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23656/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: the 26th October 2020            |On: 29th October 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE



                                   Between

                                Jagtar Singh

                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr  O'Brien,  Counsel  instructed  by  Lexmark  Legal
Associates

For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Appellant is a national of India born on the 5th  May  1961.   He
       appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge GD Davidson) to dismiss his appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.

    2. The Appellant is a long term overstayer with no viable claim to leave
       to remain under the Immigration Rules. On appeal he submitted that he
       is nevertheless entitled to leave to remain because to  do  otherwise
       would place the Secretary of State in breach of her obligations under
       s6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998: the  Appellant  submits  that  it
       would be a disproportionate, and so unlawful, interference  with  his
       Article 8 rights if he were to be refused  leave  to  remain  in  the
       United  Kingdom.  The  basis  of  his  claim  is  that  he  enjoys  a
       significant family/private life with his sister,  brother-in-law  and
       nephew in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  child  is  disabled,  and  the
       Appellant's brother-in-law suffers from schizophrenia. As such, it is
       claimed, the Appellant's sister is heavily dependent on his  support.
       It is further submitted that the Appellant has a  close  relationship
       with his nephew such that it would be  contrary  to  that  vulnerable
       child's best interests if  he  were  to  have  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.

    4. Permission was granted in limited terms by Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill
       on the 22nd October 2019. Judge Gill acknowledged that the  Appellant
       had not attended his appeal, and so the question  of  proportionality
       had been determined in his absence. Judge Gill noted the  Appellant's
       assertion that he never received the Notice of Hearing, that  he  had
       apparently nothing to gain from his non-attendance, and considered it
       arguable that there had been some  procedural  impropriety/unfairness
       in the First-tier Tribunal proceeding in his absence.

    5. Permission was further granted on the ground that there may have been
       some discrete procedural unfairness in  that  the  hearing  may  have
       proceeded without the Tribunal having before it all of  the  relevant
       documentary evidence. The Respondent's  bundle  contained  only  four
       items:  a  pre-action  protocol  letter  sent  by   the   Appellant's
       representatives, the application form, a statement by  the  Appellant
       and the refusal letter. The  Respondent  had  not  included  in  that
       bundle various items of medical evidence that had been submitted with
       the application. Judge Gill considered it arguable  that  through  no
       fault of its own, the Tribunal reached its  decision  without  having
       had regard to all of the pertinent evidence.

    6. Judge Gill expressly refused permission on all other grounds pleaded.

    7. Before me the parties agreed that in fact I need not deal  with  both
       grounds. That was because they were able to agree on  this.  That  at
       the date of the appeal the only documentary evidence before the First-
       tier Tribunal was the Respondent's bundle,  containing  the  items  I
       mention above.  For whatever  reason  a  whole  tranche  of  evidence
       submitted to the Respondent did not make it into  that  bundle:  this
       included medical evidence relating to the  respective  conditions  of
       the Appellant's nephew and brother-in-law, DWP letters,  and a letter
       from the nephew's school.   The Appellant had served no bundle of his
       own, on his case because he was unaware that the hearing was  due  to
       take place.

    8. I am satisfied that through no fault of  its  own  the  Tribunal  did
       proceed to determine the appeal without sight of  important  evidence
       that had, pre-hearing, already been supplied by the  Appellant.  That
       was a procedural  irregularity  rendering  the  decision  unfair.  It
       follows that that the decision in the appeal must be set aside to  be
       remade.

       Decisions

    9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains material  error
       of law and it is set aside.

   10. The decision in the appeal is to be remade de novo in the  First-tier
       Tribunal by a Judge other than Judge GD Davison.

   11. There is no order for anonymity.

                                                                       [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           26th October 2020
