
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23784/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 24th January 2019                |On: 4th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               SAFIULLAH SAFI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Sriharan, instructed by SMA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 16 January  1994.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 24  October  2010  with  entry  clearance
    granted to accompany his mother. On 11 November  2013  he  was  refused
    indefinite leave to remain  as  the  child  of  a  settled  person.  He
    appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on  12  March  2015  and  dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18 March 2015.  He  was  refused  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal
    and became appeal rights exhausted on 17 September 2015.


 2.  On 15 October 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds. In a decision of 18 August 2016, the respondent refused
    to treat his submissions as a fresh human  rights  claim,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 353 of the immigration rules, as he had already had an appeal
    on human rights grounds in March 2015. The  respondent  stated  in  the
    refusal letter that there was no right of appeal against the decision.

 3. However the appellant lodged  an  appeal  against  the  decision  on  7
    October 2016 and, in the grounds of  appeal,  relied  on  the  reported
    decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Sheidu  (Further   submissions;
    appealable decision: Sudan) [2016] UKUT  412  in  submitting  that  the
    respondent had made a decision refusing the  appellant's  human  rights
    claim which gave rise to a right of appeal.

 4. The following then occurred. On 18 January 2017 a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Duty Judge decided that the issue of whether there was a  valid  appeal
    was arguable and could be raised at a hearing. In  a  letter  dated  19
    July 2017 addressed to the First-tier Tribunal  the  removals  casework
    department of the Home Office requested that the appeal be  struck  out
    as invalid on the basis that the refusal letter was not an  immigration
    decision under section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 which gave rise to a right of appeal. The appeal was, however,
    listed for hearing on 13 March 2018. On 24 January 2018 the Home Office
    referred to the lack of response to the previous letter of 19 July 2017
    and again requested that the appeal be struck out. On 9  February  2018
    the Tribunal wrote  to  the  Presenting  Officers  Unit  advising  that
    representations into the validity of the appeal could be  made  at  the
    hearing.

 5. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury  on  13  March
    2018. It does not appear that the validity issue was raised before  the
    judge and neither was it raised by the judge. The judge proceeded  with
    the appeal without considering the matter and heard evidence  from  the
    appellant and his father and heard submissions from  both  parties.  He
    found that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the immigration rules and that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances outside the rules. In a decision dated 27 July  2018  and
    promulgated on 9 August 2018, he dismissed the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.

 6. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Hanbury's
    decision on the grounds of delay in promulgating his decision,  failing
    to give clear reasons and making irrational findings.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused in the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
    subsequently granted in the Upper Tribunal on 5 December  2018  on  all
    grounds.

 8. At the hearing I  indicated  to  the  parties  my  concerns  about  the
    validity of the appeal and the jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal  in  the
    matter, in view of the nature  of  the  decision  giving  rise  to  the
    appeal. Whilst no challenge had been made to Judge  Hanbury's  decision
    by either party on such grounds, the Court of Appeal made clear in Virk
    & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  652
    that jurisdiction could not be conferred by waiver  or  agreement  when
    there simply was no statutory jurisdiction. Accordingly it was a matter
    that had to be addressed despite it  not  having  been  raised  in  the
    grounds or grant of permission. Since neither  party  had  contemplated
    the issue being raised, I gave them  an  opportunity  to  consider  the
    matter, to take any necessary instructions and  to  make  any  relevant
    applications. After a short break, both parties advised  me  that  they
    were content to make submissions on the point  without  an  adjournment
    and  were  content  for  me  to  make  a  decision  on  the  Tribunal's
    jurisdiction.

 9. Ms Sriharan accepted that the appropriate course at  the  time  of  the
    decision was for a challenge to be made by way of judicial  review  but
    the appellant's previous solicitors (not  her  instructing  solicitors)
    chose instead to lodge an appeal. She submitted that  the  Home  Office
    had considered paragraph 276ADE(1) and  exceptional  circumstances  and
    had therefore accepted that there was  a  human  rights  claim,  as  in
    Sheidu, although she accepted that there were differences in Sheidu.

10. Mr Tarlow asked me to find that the Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  as
    there was no right of appeal.

11. As I advised the parties, my view is that there was  clearly  no  valid
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The decision of 18  August  2016
    was nothing like the decision in Sheidu and contained nothing within it
    to suggest that it was an immigration decision made  under  section  82
    refusing a human rights claim. The letter of 18  August  2016  made  it
    very clear that the appellant's  application  was  treated  as  further
    submissions under paragraph 353 of the immigration rules, that  it  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 353 so as to amount to  a  fresh
    claim and that there was no right of appeal. The nature of the decision
    was unambiguous. Accordingly there was no valid appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Tribunal had  and  has  no  jurisdiction  in  the
    matter.

12. It is clear, from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  the  case  of
    Virk, that jurisdiction cannot be taken to have been  accepted  by  the
    fact that the respondent made no representations  at  the  hearing  and
    that the judge proceeded on the basis that there was  a  valid  appeal.
    That is apparent from [23] of Virk:

    "This decision is consistent with the fact that the FTT is  a  creation
    of statute whose jurisdiction in this case is limited by the  terms  of
    s.82 of the 2002 Act. The same goes for the UT. Statutory  jurisdiction
    cannot be conferred by waiver or agreement; or by the  failure  of  the
    parties or the tribunal to be alive to the point. Although, as Longmore
    LJ pointed out, decisions taken without jurisdiction may in due  course
    become irreversible, that point has not been reached in this  case.  It
    was, in my judgment, open to either the FTT or the UT to take the point
    about jurisdiction notwithstanding the  failure  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to raise it herself. Judge Kebede was therefore entitled to  rely
    on the FTT's lack of jurisdiction in order to decide the appeal and the
    only objection to his duties lies in the way he proceeded to  determine
    it."

13. In the circumstances the decision of Judge Hanbury is set aside  and  I
    re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on the basis of a lack of
    jurisdiction.




DECISION

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal  for
    lack of jurisdiction.




Signed:[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 24 January
2019


