
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/24230/2018 (P)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 July 2020                    |On 6 August 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                MADINA LIMBU

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                       For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Everest Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



           Background

        1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
           appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 4
           February 2020 against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge P J White, promulgated  on  1  October  2019  following  a
           hearing at Taylor House on 19 August 2019.

        2. The appellant is a Nepalese national born on 22 July  1981.  She
           sought entry clearance as an adult dependent child to  join  her
           father, a former Gurkha, present and  settled  in  the  UK.  Her
           application was refused by the ECO on 28 October 2018 under  the
           Home Office policy on adult children of  former  Gurkhas,  under
           the Immigration Rules and article 8.

        3. It was conceded at the hearing that the appellant could not come
           within the policy as she was over 30 when  the  application  was
           made (at 19). The judge found that she  did  not  qualify  under
           Appendix FM and that there was no family life such as to  engage
           article 8. Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

        4. Two grounds of appeal were put forward  by  the  appellant.  The
           first was that the judge failed correctly  record  the  evidence
           and secondly that he failed to give adequate reasons  or  accord
           sufficient weight to the evidence. Permission was granted on the
           basis that the judge arguably misunderstood the  factual  matrix
           of the appeal.

           Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

        5. The matter was listed for a hearing at Field House on  25  March
           2020  but  due  to  the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
           precautions against its spread, the hearing  was  adjourned  and
           directions were sent to the parties on 5  May  2020.  They  were
           asked to present any objections to the matter being  dealt  with
           on the papers and to make any further submissions on  the  error
           of law issue within certain time limits.

        6. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties.
           I now consider the matter.

        7. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment  of  Osborn  v
           The Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note
           No 1 2020: Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic  (PGN)  and
           the Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction  (PPD).  I  have
           regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of
           the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being  "to
           enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly".
           To this end I have considered that dealing with  a  case  fairly
           and  justly  includes:  dealing  with  it  in  ways   that   are
           proportionate to the importance of the case, the  complexity  of
           the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking
           flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable,
           that  the  parties  are  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
           proceedings; using any special expertise of the  Upper  Tribunal
           effectively; and avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with
           proper consideration of the  issues  (Rule  2(2)  UT  rules  and
           PGN:5).

        8. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to all the
           evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. Neither party
           has raised any objection to the matter being considered  on  the
           papers. A full account of the facts are set out in those  papers
           and that the issue to be decided is a narrow one. There  are  no
           matters  arising   from   the   papers   which   would   require
           clarification and so an oral hearing would  not  be  needed  for
           that purpose. I have regard to the importance of the  matter  to
           the appellant and consider that a speedy determination  of  this
           matter is in her best interests. I am satisfied that I  am  able
           to fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers  before
           me and I now proceed to do so.

           Submissions

        9.  The  respondent's  submissions  were  received  first  by   the
           Tribunal. They are dated 27 May 2020. The appellant  replied  on
           29 May 2020 agreeing with the those submissions. I have not seen
           any earlier correspondence from the appellant.

           Discussion and conclusions

       10. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds  for  permission
           and the submissions made by both parties. I  am  satisfied  that
           for the following reasons  the  judge's  determination  contains
           errors of law and that his decision is unsustainable.

       11. The appellant argues in her grounds that the judge was wrong  to
           find discrepancies within  the  evidence  as  to  the  financial
           support the appellant received from  her  father.  The  evidence
           shows that she is right to complain. Contrary to what the  judge
           recorded at paragraph 15, the sponsor has visited the  appellant
           every year since arriving in the UK and his last visit  was  not
           five/six years ago.  His  annual  visits  are  accepted  by  the
           respondent in the decision letter and indeed  confirmed  by  the
           endorsements in his passports, all of which was evidence  before
           the judge. Plainly he did not consider it carefully enough.

       12. It would appear that the judge  conflated  the  mother's  visits
           with those made by the sponsor. The evidence before him was that
           the appellant's mother had last visited in 2014 and that she had
           been unable to return since  due  to  ill  health.  The  sponsor
           continued to visit his daughter without her. I accept that  this
           is an important point because the appellant's evidence was  that
           her  father  brought  her  money  on  his  visits.  Clearly  the
           misunderstanding of  this  evidence  impacts  upon  the  judge's
           findings  of  financial  dependency.  Equally,  his  finding  on
           emotional dependency is flawed as  it  was  also  based  on  the
           misunderstanding that the sponsor had not  visited  for  several
           years.

       13. With respect to the second ground, the appellant argues that the
           judge was wrong to find that she had offered no explanation  for
           remaining unemployed when in fact she had addressed this in  her
           witness statement. That again is correct.  The  judge  does  not
           appear to have considered that evidence. The appellant explained
           that  she  was  poorly  educated  and  that  this  hindered  her
           prospects of employment so she remained in the family  home  and
           continued to be reliant upon her father for support.

       14. It is pointed out by the appellant's  representatives  that  the
           sponsor has only sought to bring one of his four children to the
           UK and that the appellant continued to live in the  family  home
           since the sponsor's departure.  She is  single,  unemployed  and
           reliant upon the sponsor for support. These  are  matters  which
           show  ties,  dependency  and  family  life  but  they  were  not
           considered by the judge.

       15. Mr McVeety in his submissions properly and fairly  accepts  that
           the judge erred in his assessment of the evidence  on  financial
           dependency and the sponsor's visits. Whilst it is  not  accepted
           that the findings on family life are flawed,  he  concedes  that
           given his concession, the appropriate course of action would  be
           for a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant  agrees
           with the proposed solution.

       16. This is an appeal  where  the  appellant  has  not  had  a  fair
           hearing. Despite the respondent's submissions on family life,  I
           am  reluctant  to  preserve  that   finding   as   the   judge's
           misunderstanding of the evidence may well have impacted  on  and
           influenced his conclusions on the issue of whether  family  life
           continued  between  the   appellant   and   her   parents.   The
           determination is therefore set aside in its entirety and a fresh
           decision shall be re-made by another  judge  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal on all issues.




           Decision

       17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  shall
           be re-made on all issues by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.




           Anonymity

       18. There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
           and I see no reason to make one.




           Directions

      19.      Directions for the hearing shall be issued in due  course  by
           the First-tier Tribunal.




      Signed


        R. Keki?


      Upper Tribunal Judge


      Date: 29 July 2020




