
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24590/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th July 2019                     |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Roland [T]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A R Hudson, promulgated on 21st February 2019, following a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 8th February  2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Malawi,  and  was  born  on  26th
    August 1995.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    23rd November 2018 refusing his application for leave to remain on  the
    basis that he had direct access to his British citizen children in  the
    UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim, for present purposes, is that  he
    was unable to attend the hearing on 8th February 2019 and  had  applied
    for an adjournment by a letter dated four days before  the  hearing  on
    4th February 2019 that he "was feeling unwell".   No  medical  evidence
    had been supplied from a GP or from anyone else.  The judge went on  to
    consider the appeal and  observed,  in  detailed  reasons  given  (from
    paragraphs 11 to 17) that the Appellant could not  succeed  because  in
    May 2017, the Appellant had instigated family court proceedings to gain
    direct contact with his children.

 4. He was only permitted indirect contact, and an order was made  that  he
    be limited to that for six months,

         "And  attend  a  full  domestic  violence  perpetrators'  programme
         beginning no later than 30th October 2018.  Should he do that,  the
         indirect contact would be reviewed.  As of 1st  November  2018,  Mr
         [T] had not started the DV course and the case was  closed  to  the
         family court" (see paragraph 13 of the determination).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the Appellant  was  disadvantaged
    and the judge decided in a manner that was procedurally unfair for  the
    following reasons.  First, the case was under  a  float  list  with  no
    guarantee of it proceeding on the same date.  Second,  the  Appellant's
    adjournment request was dated 7th February 2019, and in  refusing  that
    request, the Tribunal had said that "if the Appellant  gets  a  medical
    note then the adjournment will be reconsidered".  That decision of  7th
    February 2019, however, did not arrive with  the  Appellant  until  9th
    February 2019, which was a day  after  the  appeal  was  heard  on  8th
    February 2019.

 6. In the meantime, the Appellant had gone to the  Harley  Street  Medical
    Centre, which confirms his attendance then on 8th  February  2019,  the
    day of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, and there he had met
    with Dr Matthew Stephenson, and had a consultation.  The Appellant also
    maintained that throughout the period during which he was applying  for
    an adjournment, he  had  contacted  the  Tribunal's  enquiry  desk  for
    updates but had not been given any information.  In the  circumstances,
    there had been a failure under Rule 4(3)(h)  to  apply  the  overriding
    objective and to deal with cases "fairly and justly".   In  particular,
    the strictures in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 had not  been  followed  by
    the Tribunal.  Finally, the judge had erred  at  paragraph  13  and  at
    paragraph 15 in coming to the decision that he did.

 7. On 9th April 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 8th July 2019, the  Appellant  was  not  in
    attendance.  I put his appeal to the end of the morning's list.  At the
    end of the other cases, I heard his appeal in his absence and Mr  Bates
    made a number of submissions.  Mr Bates, for the  Home  Office,  stated
    that the Appellant had put in a late application in any  event.   There
    was no indication as to what was wrong with him.  There was  no  letter
    from  the  GP  providing  any  indication  about  his  difficulties  in
    attending court on the day.  In fact, even in the  Grounds  of  Appeal,
    the Appellant does not demonstrate what was wrong with him.

 9. Furthermore, he does not demonstrate how he was  disadvantaged  because
    it is not known what he would have said had he attended.  Mr Bates also
    clarified  that  the  Appellant  had  been  given   leave   to   remain
    "exceptionally" outside the Immigration Rules, given that he had failed
    on  the  suitability  requirement,  because  at  that  time  he  had  a
    relationship  with  his  children,  which  had   subsequently   ceased.
    Therefore, the  reference  that  he  now  makes  to  the  judge  having
    overlooked this is misleading.  The position before the judge was  that
    the Appellant did not have contact with the children.

10. The position before the judge was that the Appellant was seeking direct
    access to his children.  There had been no  progress  in  that  regard.
    Furthermore, he had not attended today  to  explain  how  he  had  been
    disadvantaged.

11. After I returned back  to  my  chambers,  I  was  sent  word  that  the
    Appellant had arrived.  I returned back into the courtroom, after a  40
    minutes' hearing with Mr Bates earlier on, and reopened the appeal.  Mr
    [T], the Appellant, explained that he  had  been  sitting  outside  the
    courtroom and had not come into the court to see what was happening.  I
    asked him to explain how he would put his case.  He said he had gone to
    the Harley Street Medical Centre on 8th February 2019, the day  of  the
    hearing, and met with Dr Matthew Stephenson.  He handed up a  note.   I
    considered this and it appears that the Appellant had  a  "sore  throat
    symptom".  He was asked simply to take fluids and try cool drinks.

12. I  asked  him  if  he  had  actually  undertaken  a  domestic  violence
    perpetrators'  programme.   He  said  that  he  had.   He   handed   up
    documentation.  There was a letter from Arch charity  dated  26th  June
    2019 from Stoke-on-Trent.  Curiously,  it  referred  to  the  Appellant
    beginning his modules on 11th June 2019.  He had  to  do  five  modules
    over a six week period of two and a half hours each.  He was unable  to
    explain how this letter made sense if the Appellant was required to  do
    these modules on 11th June 2019 and yet was dated 26th June 2019.

13. The Appellant continued to maintain that he had  been  attending  these
    one-to-one sessions.  Mr  Bates  replied  that  the  Appellant  had  to
    complete such a programme "no later than 30th October 2018"  (paragraph
    13) as the judge had made clear.  Therefore, this was to no avail.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

15. The Appellant instigated in May 2017 family court proceedings  to  gain
    direct contact with his children.  This  was  fully  explained  by  the
    judge below.  He was only being permitted indirect contact.   Therefore
    "an order was made that he be limited to that for six months and attend
    a full domestic violence perpetrators'  programme  beginning  no  later
    than 30th October 2018" (paragraph 13).  As the judge  made  clear,  by
    the date of the hearing, this had not been done by the  Appellant.   He
    had not started the course.  Therefore, "the case  was  closed  to  the
    family  court".   As  the  judge  explained  "it   appears   in   those
    circumstances  that  the  current  position  is  that  the  court   has
    determined that it is in the best interests of the children to have  no
    direct contact with their father" (paragraph 13).

16. The judge's conclusion was that "Mr [T] does not  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with  his  children,  and  the  family
    court appears to have concluded that their best interests are served by
    having no direct contact with their father" (paragraph 16).   Mr  Bates
    submitted that if  the  judge's  conclusion  was  "he  is  entitled  to
    indirect contact and it would remain  open  to  him  to  exercise  that
    indirect contact from Malawi  if  he  chooses  to  do  so",  then  that
    prospect is still available to him.  I agree that that  is  indeed  the
    case.

17. The judge was entitled to come to that  conclusion.   This  is  a  case
    where, six months after the judge's determination, very little progress
    if any has been made in the Appellant's case.  He went to see a  Harley
    Street practitioner at 3pm on 8th February 2019.  He had no  reason  to
    believe that he had been  granted  an  adjournment.   As  a  matter  of
    courtesy, he ought to have attended at  10am  in  the  morning  at  the
    hearing centre and explained to the judge that he could not proceed and
    had a medical appointment.

18. As it turns out, there  was  nothing  in  his  medical  condition  that
    suggests that he would not have been able to  give  evidence.   As  the
    note from Dr Matthew Stephenson makes clear,  this  is  a  patient  who
    "looks well" and that there are "normal no inflammation present at all"
    and that he does "not exude swollen glands".  He has complained about a
    "possible viral infection" and he has been "advised to increase fluids,
    try cool drinks to help with sore  throat  and  to  speak  to  a  local
    pharmacist to advise on the medicines for sore throat".

19. But more importantly than this, the fact is that the Appellant had  not
    undertaken a full domestic violence perpetrators' programme  which  was
    necessary by 30th October 2018.  As a consequence, his file was  closed
    by the family court.  Matters even now are not any further  progressed.



20. If the Appellant wishes to proceed any further with an  application  of
    this sort, this is an appropriate case for a fresh  claim.   The  judge
    below was entitled to conclude entirely as he did and gave a  full  and
    comprehensive determination in that regard.  There is no error of  law.



Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction is made.

23. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019

