

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/24178/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford IAC                |           Decision Promulgated      |
|On 25th April 2018                   |           On 01st May 2018          |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     THM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           In person
For the Respondent:                Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of South Africa born in  1983.  He  appeals
    with permission the 2nd May 2017 decision of First-tier Tribunal  Moxon
    to dismiss his human rights appeal.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a British child. Having had regard to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant, it is accepted, has lived in the  United  Kingdom  since
    2006 when he was given leave to enter as a  working  holidaymaker.  His
    leave expired in March 2008 and he overstayed. In 2012 he  applied  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of a British national, CM. It was granted
    so that he had valid leave  until  the  27th  September  2015.  He  was
    subsequently granted a further period  of  leave,  on  a  discretionary
    basis, until March 2016.  This was because although his marriage to  CM
    had ended, he was pursuing proceedings in the Family Court so  that  he
    could retain contact with his daughter. N. N is a British national  who
    was born in April 2013.  On the 16th  March  2016  he  made  a  further
    application for leave. This was refused on the 3rd October 2016 and  it
    is that decision that is the subject of this appeal.


 4. The Respondent refused to grant limited leave because the Appellant had
    failed to provide any up to date evidence from the Family Court,  or  a
    sworn statement from CM that he was continuing to see N. He had  failed
    to provide "compelling evidence" that he was pursuing  matters  in  the
    Family Court.  He therefore failed to meet the relevant requirements of
    Appendix FM in relation to 'leave  to  remain  as  a  parent'.  In  the
    absence of evidence that the Appellant had a family life in the UK  the
    Respondent refused to consider the matter under Article 8.  Furthermore
    the application fell to be refused on 'suitability' grounds because  in
    October 2014 the Appellant had been convicted  of  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm and attempting to pervert the course of justice  and
    had been sentenced to ten months in prison:  the refusal to grant leave
    was therefore conducive to the public good.

 5. When the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  therefore,  the
    matters in issue were as follows:

              i) Could the Appellant meet the  requirements  under  Appendix
                 FM? In particular:


                  - was it "conducive to the  public  good"  that  leave  be
                    refused because of the conviction, having regard to  law
                    and policy?


                  - was he able to satisfy E-LTRPT.2.4(a)(ii)  that  he  had
                    "direct access" to N, or E-LTRPT.2.4  (b)  that  he  was
                    taking, or intended to  continue  to  take,  an  "active
                    role" in her upbringing".


             ii) Was Article 8 engaged?  In particular:


                 - did the Appellant enjoy a family life with N?


                 - would refusing him leave interfere with that right?

            iii) If the answer to the questions  in  (ii)  was  affirmative,
                 could the Respondent show the interference to be justified?


                 In assessing the question of proportionality  the  Tribunal
                 was bound to consider the public interest factors  set  out
                 at s117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
                 2002. For the purposes of this appeal the most pertinent of
                 these was s117B(6), which required the Tribunal to consider
                 whether  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                 relationship with N, and whether it would be reasonable  to
                 expect  her  to  leave  the  UK.   In  the  assessment   of
                 reasonableness the Tribunal was obliged to weigh the public
                 interest as expressed at s117B (1)-(5) and  in  this  case,
                 the matter of the conviction.


 6.  The  Tribunal  found  against  the  Appellant   on   the   matter   of
    'suitability'. The circumstances of his conviction were that in 2014 he
    had assaulted his then wife CM, including by putting his  hands  around
    her neck and attempting to strangle her.  The Tribunal  noted  that  in
    his live evidence the Appellant had sought to minimise the  seriousness
    of the assault by omitting to mention that he had had tried to strangle
    his wife. He had told the Tribunal that he had hit her. This effort  to
    mislead the Tribunal cast significant doubts over the assertion that he
    had been rehabilitated and was remorseful, notwithstanding the positive
    indications in that regard arising from his guilty plea, his completion
    of a Domestic Violence Perpetrator Programme (DVPP) and the  fact  that
    CAFCASS and the family court had latterly been satisfied that he should
    be permitted to see his daughter.


 7. That finding meant that the Appellant could not hope to  succeed  under
    the Appendix FM 'leave to remain as a partner' route.

 8. The Tribunal therefore turned to consider whether the Appellant  enjoys
    a "genuine parental relationship" with his daughter.   The evidence  he
    had produced in the way of court orders and CAFCASS reports were now of
    "some age". There was no independent evidence to corroborate his  claim
    that he ever gave CM  money  towards  his  daughter's  upkeep.  CM  had
    written two letters herself to confirm that the Appellant  spends  time
    with their daughter but these were undated and not supported by any  up
    to date additional material from the  parties'  respective  solicitors.
    Those letters that there were from the lawyers, detailing contact, were
    again of "some age".   One of the court orders had  specified  that  if
    the child were to be permitted to stay with the Appellant he would have
    to provide a written  agreement  (presumably  from  the  landlord)  and
    photographs of the house. These had not been produced and the  Tribunal
    inferred from that that she had not  in  fact  stayed  with  him.   The
    Appellant had provided no reasonable explanation of why he had moved to
    Bradford when his daughter and CM live in  Lincolnshire.   CM  did  not
    attend the hearing and there was no  reasonable  explanation  why.  The
    weight to be attached to her letters in support was therefore  reduced.
    At the same paragraph the Tribunal states that it cannot  be  satisfied
    that the letter was reliable.  The Appellant had produced various train
    tickets to support his claim that he had been to Lincolnshire to  visit
    his daughter but these were "not determinative". He had  also  produced
    photographs of himself with a young mixed race girl who appeared to  be
    the same age as his daughter but  these  were  not  determinative.  The
    Tribunal only had the Appellant's  word  for  it  that  these  pictures
    showed him and his daughter  and  "not  another  young  female".    The
    Appellant had submitted the accounts of an ISA  that  he  said  he  had
    started to save for his daughter's first car but this could  have  been
    set up simply to pursue this application.   Taking all of this together
    the Tribunal could not be  satisfied  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship and the appeal was thereby dismissed.

 9. The Appellant, who is unrepresented, sought permission to appeal on the
    grounds that he had not understood what he was required to  produce  by
    way of evidence. He protests that  he  does  have  a  genuine  parental
    relationship with N and that given the chance he  could  have  produced
    evidence of the same. He believes that she has  the  right  to  have  a
    father.

10. Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  EB  Grant  who
    considered it arguable that there was procedural unfairness in  respect
    of the photographs. The Tribunal rejects the  evidence  that  the  girl
    shown was the Appellant's daughter but it is not clear why and moreover
    the point was not put to the Appellant. Further Judge Grant  considered
    it arguable that the Judge had erred in failing  to  consider  relevant
    caselaw, in particular JA (meaning of  'access  rights')  India  [2015]
    UKUT 00225 (IAC).

11. Before me Mr Diwnycz accepted that both the potential errors identified
    by Judge Grant were made out and that the matter should be remitted.

    Error of Law

    The Photographs


12. The Appellant had produced a large bundle of  photographs.  All  depict
    what appears to be the same mixed-race girl at various  stages  of  her
    life. In many she is shown with the Appellant. There  are  pictures  of
    the Appellant and the child a petting-zoo. He is showing her sheep; she
    appears to be about 2 years old. In some they are eating together or he
    is holding her. Others show him  pushing  her  on  swings,  taking  her
    swimming, her at the fairground, in  a  park,  eating  pizza,  at  home
    playing with toys, playing  pinball,  driving  what  appears  to  be  a
    tractor, and in a ball park. It is apparent from the child's  clothing,
    development and hairstyles that  these  were  all  taken  on  different
    occasions. In one she is wearing a red football  shirt  with  her  name
    written on the back.
13. What the determination says about these photographs, and in  particular
    the one showing the personalised football shirt, is that they are  "not
    determinative". I note that this phrase appears twice in paragraph  46,
    also in relation to the train tickets produce  showing  travel  between
    Bradford and Lincolnshire as recently as two weeks before the  Tribunal
    hearing. It is of course the case that the evidence does not have to be
    "determinative" to attract weight.  The Tribunal goes on to say that it
    only has the Appellant's word for it  that  this  is  his  daughter  as
    opposed to "another young female".   Mr Diwnycz was as puzzled by  that
    reasoning as I was. It was not apparent from the determination that the
    HOPO on the day had challenged the Appellant's evidence that  this  was
    in fact his daughter. If the Tribunal rejected that evidence it had  to
    give some reasons as opposed to simply  suggesting  that  it  might  be
    another random child.




    The Evidence of Relationship


14. The Appellant had inter alia produced the following evidence of contact
    with his daughter:


               . Seven Court Orders made by  the  Family  Court  in  Lincoln
                 between October  2014  and  March  2016  showing  that  the
                 Appellant had attended every  hearing  in  respect  of  his
                 daughter, and that he had  co-operated  with  the  previous
                 orders as to indirect contact and the requests of CAFCASS


               . The last order on file, dated 8th March 2016, was  made  by
                 District Judge Cooper. It records that  the  Appellant  had
                 completed the DVPP course and that the parties had  reached
                 agreement that the  child  would  remain  living  with  her
                 mother but would have direct contact with her father. Judge
                 Cooper records CM's consent to N staying overnight with her
                 father  in   Bradford,   subject   to   his   consent   and
                 understanding that this would need to be at N's pace and CM
                 being satisfied as to the suitability of his accommodation.
                 The Order further records  that  the  Appellant  shall  not
                 bring N into contact with  any  new  partner  without  CM's
                 consent. CM expressly consents for the child having contact
                 with the Appellant's friends.


               . A CAFCASS report  written  for  the  family  court  on  8th
                 February 2016


               . A handwritten letter purporting to be from CM stating  that
                 N sees her dad regularly  and  "absolutely  loves"  staying
                 with him every few months when she  is  "very  well  looked
                 after and spoilt rotten" by him

               . The photographs (see above)

               . A number of train tickets  showing  journeys  made  between
                 Bradford and Boston, Lincolnshire

               . A number of letters from CM's  solicitors  confirming  that
                 items he had sent to the child  had  been  passed  on,  and
                 enclosing photographs and updates about N's progress.


15. Having directed itself to that  evidence  the  Tribunal  concluded,  at
    paragraph 51:


         "Taking all of the evidence into account, particularly the  adverse
         credibility findings and the lack of  compelling  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's continuing involvement in his daughter's life, I am not
         satisfied that he has such involvement. I am not satisfied that  he
         has any or any intention to play an active role in her life  and  I
         find that his assertions to the contrary are a fabrication to  seek
         unmeritorious leave to remain in the UK".


    The  adverse  credibility  findings  were,  as  I  understand  it,  the
    Appellant's attempt to minimise the severity  of  the  assault  on  his
    former wife.


16. What concerned Judge Grant, and Mr Diwnycz, about  that  reasoning  was
    that the Tribunal had failed to take into account the  guidance  in  JA
    (India) in respect of the assessment of family relationships  and  what
    the term "access rights" might include. In that decision Upper Tribunal
    Judge C Lane had held that term to include 'indirect'  access  such  as
    letters and presents - evidenced as having occurred in this  case  from
    the letters of the family solicitors.


17. What concerns me is altogether more fundamental. This was a case  where
    the Appellant had already been granted limited leave to remain  because
    he was pursuing the case before the Family Courts to  be  permitted  to
    see his daughter.   All of the evidence that there was pointed one way:
    that he had been taking  an  active  interest,  that  access  had  been
    limited, at least until he completed the DVPP,  to  "indirect"  access,
    but since at least March 2016 he had  been  permitted  to  have  direct
    access to his daughter, with the express consent of CM.    The  primary
    reason  given  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  contention  that  this
    arrangement continued to the present day was that the last court  order
    was of "some age". True it was over a year  old  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, but it was evident from the face of the order that  there  was
    at that stage no further need for involvement from the court, since the
    parties had reached agreement as to the  dates,  times  and  conditions
    attached to the  Appellant's  direct  contact  with  N.   There  is  no
    requirement in the rules that any  order  be  dated  within  a  certain
    period of the decision. It would be an odd and impractical  requirement
    if persons in the position of this Appellant were required to return to
    the Family Court seeking 'up to date' orders simply for the benefit  of
    this Tribunal. Apart from anything else it would place an  unreasonable
    burden on that Court.


18. Weight is classically a matter for the fact-finding  Tribunal,  and  on
    appeal it would normally be the case that perversity would need  to  be
    established in order to interfere with conclusions as to  weight.  That
    is a high test.   It is one that I find, in the absence of any  logical
    reasons why the evidence adduced by the Appellant was rejected,  to  be
    met.  Even discounting the unsworn  and  undated  letter  from  CM  the
    Appellant had supported his evidence that he had  continued  to  see  N
    with the photographs and very  up  to  date  train  tickets  which  are
    rejected for no other reason than that they  are  "not  determinative".
    The import  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion  is  that  this
    Appellant, having diligently pursued the case through the family courts
    for two years has not bothered to see his  daughter  at  all,  but  has
    spent alternate weekends travelling to  Boston  by  train,  and  taking
    pictures with another child, all to make it look like he has.   In  the
    absence of any countervailing evidence, or any indication  that  he  is
    lying about the visits, I  am  bound  to  find  that  this  was  not  a
    conclusion within the range of reasonable responses.


    The Re-Making


19. Given the nature and extent of the fact finding required I  find,  with
    the consent of the parties, that the most appropriate disposal would be
    for this matter to be remitted to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than
    Judge Moxon.  The matters in issue remain those matters set out  at  my
    paragraph 5 above.


20. I note that in his application for permission to appeal  the  appellant
    submitted further evidence including a letter  from  the  Accommodation
    Manager at his flats confirming that the Appellant has  the  landlord's
    permission for his daughter to stay there  and  that  the  manager,  Mr
    Jonathan Leonard, has seen the child in the building, and met  her,  on
    several occasions.   That evidence is formally admitted.  I  note  that
    the Appellant undertook to  copy,  file  and  serve  a  new  bundle  of
    evidence upon the Tribunal and Respondent.


    Decisions

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.


22. The decision in the appeal will be remade following a fresh hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

23. There is an order for anonymity.

 [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
25th April 2018
