
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/24660/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 9 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                              Mr HAROON IMTIAZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R De Mello of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs N Willocks, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  26  May  1989.   He
       appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 6 October  2016
       refusing him indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  under
       the Immigration Rules as the Secretary  of  State  claimed  that  the
       appellant produced a false ETS certificate  document  for  indefinite
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

    2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain dismissed the appellant's appeal in
       a decision promulgated on 15 June 2017.

    3. The appellant's appealed against the decision  and  a  Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Scott Baker  refused  permission  to  appeal  the
       decision dated  8  January  2018  but  he  was  subsequently  granted
       permission on 7 June  2018  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McMillan
       stating that it is arguable that the Judge  may  have  erred  by  not
       appreciating the distinction between "questionable" and "invalid"  in
       assessing  whether  the  respondent  has  discharged  the  evidential
       burden.

    4. Thus, the appeal came before me on an error of law hearing.

    5. The Judge found that the appellant was not able to recall  where  the
       college or its name or any physical features of the  college  or  its
       surroundings where he claimed to have taken his test even  though  he
       was familiar with the city of Nottingham as he had family  there  who
       he would visit. The Judge stated that the only evidence provided  was
       the appellant's bare assertion that he took the test. The Judge found
       that on the evidence he finds that the appellant  did  not  take  the
       test. The Judge found that the appellant's  removal  with  his  child
       would not breach the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8  of
       the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  as  they  could  move  to
       Pakistan as a family.

    6. The respondent's response to the grounds  of  appeal  under  rule  24
       stated that the Judge assessed  the  evidence  with  regards  to  the
       appellant's knowledge and evidence of what occurred during  the  test
       process alongside evidence  of  the  Home  Office  interview  on  the
       Judge's observations of the appellant's English  language  skills  at
       the hearing. The Judge give adequate reasons for his  findings.  Even
       though the test may  have  been  found  questionable,  it  was  still
       incumbent upon the Judge  to  make  a  finding  whether  or  not  the
       respondent adduced adequate evidence to discharge his initial  burden
       of deception.

    7. The complaint against the Judge is that he  did  not  appreciate  the
       difference between a "questionable" result and an  "invalid"  result.
       Nowhere in the  decision  does  the  judge  make  reference  to  this
       distinction and what it means in assessing the appellant's case.  The
       difference between questionable and invalid is an important  one.  In
       respect of invalid or cancelled it is evidence that it was taken by a
       proxy test taker but questionable means that there was a  possibility
       it was not taken by a  proxy  test  taker  and  that  is  why  it  is
       considered to be inconclusive.

    8. The respondent accepted that the policy in respect of a  questionable
       test result is that the applicant is offered another free test. It is
       submitted that the appellant although not offered another  test  took
       the test and passed.

    9. This however is not determinative of whether  or  not  the  appellant
       cheated. Plainly, there may be reasons why a person who  is  able  to
       speak English to the required level would nonetheless cause or permit
       a proxy candidate  to  undertaking  ETS  test  on  their  behalf,  or
       otherwise to cheat.  The  case  of  MA  Nigeria  [2016]  UKUT  50  at
       paragraph 57 refers.

   10. However, the case of SM and Qadir makes it abundantly clear that  the
       e Secretary  of  State's  generic  evidence  combined  with  evidence
       particular to an appellant did, in  fact,  discharge  the  evidential
       burden of proving that a  TOEIC  certificate  had  been  produced  by
       dishonesty. The test is whether on the balance of probabilities,  the
       appellant employed deception.

   11.  In  Peter  Millington's  witness  statement  where  he  states  that
       questionable result is where an individual test result was  cancelled
       on the basis of test administration irregularity including  the  fact
       that the test was taken at a  United  Kingdom  testing  Centre  where
       numerous other results have been invalidated the basis of a "match".

   12. Therefore, it is important  to  appreciate  the  distinction  between
       questionable and invalid in order to come to a sustainable  decision.
       There was evidence before the Judge upon which he could have  reached
       the conclusion that he did but  the  decision  is  not  safe  without
       appreciation of this distinction. The consequences  to  an  appellant
       are very serious and therefore only the most anxious  scrutiny  would
       suffice.

   13. For the reasons given above, I set aside the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
       heard by any Judge other than Judge Hussain.



Notice of Decision

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed      Dated this 7thApril 2019.

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Ms S Chana

