
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24645/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 March 2019                        |On 21 March 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JULIANA ONYINYECHI UHUO
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision, I shall refer to the appellant  as  "the  respondent"
    and to the respondent as the "appellant" (as they respectively appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal). The appellant was born on 31 July 1997
    and is a female citizen of Nigeria. 21 January 2016,  she  applied  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her private life.
    By decision dated 19 October 2016, the Secretary of State refused  that
    application. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 23 February 2018, allowed the appeal.  The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



 2. I find that the judge erred in law. This was  a  decision  against  the
    refusal of human rights application but both parties  acknowledge  that
    the appeal turned on the question of  whether  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended):

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-LTR.4.5.
             in Appendix FM; and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and  under  25  years  and  has
             spent at least half of his life living continuously in the  UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK.

                                                               [my emphasis]

 3. The judge erroneously held at  [9]  that  the  relevant  date  for  the
    calculation of the period under subparagraph (v) was the  date  of  the
    hearing at the First-tier Tribunal. In the same paragraph, he  observes
    that the appellant met the requirements of  subparagraph  (v)  'at  the
    time of the decision.' In both instances, the judges has  employed  the
    wrong date. The relevant date was the date of application.

 4. Secondly, the judge has miscalculated the date for the commencement  of
    continuous residence.  At [9], the judge found that the respondent  had
    been wrong to consider  that  the  appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom for the last time on 29 July 2007. The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had first entered on 16 February 2006 and that she had  taken
    a family holiday during two weeks prior to  29  July  2007.  The  judge
    found that, 'I am satisfied that her  departure  on  holiday  does  not
    break her period of continuously living in the UK.  As  result  at  the
    time of the decision the appellant met the requirements  [of  paragraph
    276ADE].' Paragraph 276A provides:

         276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE(1).

             (a)  "continuous residence"  means  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom for an unbroken  period,  and  for  these  purposes  a
             period shall not be considered to have been  broken  where  an
             applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for a period of  6
             months or less at any one time, provided that the applicant in
             question has existing limited leave to enter  or  remain  upon
             their departure and return, but shall be  considered  to  have
             been broken if the applicant:

    the appellant had left the United Kingdom having  overstayed.  She  had
    entered on a multi-visa enabling her to come and  go  from  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor within a two-year period provided that she did not
    spend longer than six months in the country during  any  single  visit.
    Having overstayed, the appellant no longer had 'existing limited  leave
    to enter' when she returned. The two-week holiday, therefore, did break
    the  appellant's  continuous  residence.  The  correct  date  for   the
    calculation of the beginning of the period was 29 July 2007  as  stated
    by the respondent and not February 2006.

 5. In the light of the judge's errors, I have set aside  the  decision.  I
    have remade the decision. This is an appeal on human rights grounds and
    I therefore consider the  circumstances  as  at  the  date  of  today's
    hearing. Although the appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE, were she to make the same application today following
    a considerable delay between the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  and  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing, then she would meet  the  requirements  of  the
    rule. Taking July 2007 as the commencement date, she has  as  at  today
    been resident continuously for 11 years and 9 months  which  represents
    more than half of her current age (21 years and 8 months). As Mr Mills,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State, acknowledged that  his  highly
    relevant factor in the Article 8 analysis.

 6. Generally, I would not remake a decision to achieve the same result  as
    the First-tier Tribunal. However, I have decided to do so in this  case
    rather than to exercise my discretion not to set aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision. I have done so to acknowledge that the Secretary  of
    State  had  good  grounds  for  challenging  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    decision. The appellant, on the other  hand,  has  benefited  from  the
    delays inherent in the appeal system.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 23 February 2018
    is set aside. I  have  remade  the  decision.  The  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 19 October 2016 is
    allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).


Signed                              Date 18 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

