

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24841/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 27 February 2018                    |on 9 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                OLUSEGUN [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Atuegbe.
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith, promulgated on 11 October 2017, in
        which the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        respondent's refusal of an application for leave to remain  as  the
        parent of a child.



Background


     2. The appellant, a national of Nigeria,  was  born  on  23  September
        1973.  The  Judge  assessed  the  application  before  setting  out
        findings of fact from [12] of the  decision  under  challenge.  The
        Judge was not satisfied on the evidence that the appellant had been
        truthful and states there are reasons  to  doubt  the  relationship
        between the appellant and Mrs [A] is as claimed.
     3. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  asserting  the  Judge
        misunderstood the oral evidence and did not have regard to some  of
        the documentary evidence, for example letters from [F]'s school and
        copies of bus tickets, as a result of which he fell into  error  in
        making findings of fact which affected consideration of  the  legal
        issues. The Judge granting  permission  considered  this  to  be  a
        borderline case but found there was some substance in the grounds.
     4. The respondent's Rule 24 response submits the  grounds  are  little
        more than an attempt to reargue the matter and the grounds fail  to
        identify actual errors in law instead focusing on their view of the
        evidence.
     5. For this reason, it was necessary to invite Mr Atuegbe to  set  out
        clearly, by reference to cases such as R (Iran) the exact nature of
        the legal errors he was submitting the Judge had made.  These  were
        broken down into four main headings being (a) error of fact, (b)  a
        lack of findings in relation to section  117B,  (c)  a  failure  to
        consider the  evidence  and  (d)  that  the  Judge  had  speculated
        contrary to the evidence.
     6. No arguable merit in the assertion the Judge had made an  error  of
        fact material to the decision to dismiss the appeal was made out in
        Mr Atuegbe's submissions. The Judge made findings  in  relation  to
        section 117B when considering the proportionality of  the  decision
        and the submission the Judge had speculated in a manner  sufficient
        to amount to material legal error was not  made  out.  Accordingly,
        the only point upon which Mr McVeety was invited to reply was  that
        relating to the alleged  failure  of  the  Judge  to  consider  the
        evidence  which  included  the  evidence  from  the  school  or  GP
        material.
     7. The decision under challenge records at [18]  a  reference  to  the
        refusal letter criticising the lack of  evidence  relating  to  the
        appellant's relationship with his daughter [F], the only  documents
        submitted being a letter from her school and GP. The Judge notes in
        the appellants bundle there are some photographs of  the  appellant
        with some children but little else and that the letters of  support
        did not refer to the appellant's parenting.  The  letter  from  the
        children's mother made no reference  to  the  appellant  being  the
        father and a further  witness  describes  the  appellant  as  being
        "helpful to me, to the people around him and his family"  but  does
        not refer to the appellant with his children. The Judge records the
        mother's oral evidence and the fact it was clear she felt abandoned
        by the appellant when he left her in  Scotland  but  that  she  had
        facilitated some contact; although the evidence gave the impression
        that the relationship is still not stable and implied they  do  not
        reside together. The Judge did  not  find  that  evidence  gave  an
        impression of a devoted father who was integral to  his  children's
        lives. The Judge therefore took into account the evidence that  had
        been provided.
     8. The Judge at [16] notes there is a DNA report  which  confirms  the
        appellant is the  father  of  the  child  [F]  although  the  birth
        certificate does not record that the appellant is  her  father.  In
        relation to a second child, Sean, his registration  of  birth  does
        not name the appellant as the father and the evidence of  both  the
        appellant and his wife was that they did not know who  the  child's
        father is because she was in another relationship at the time.  The
        Judge noted there  was  no  DNA  evidence  confirming  the  child's
        paternity.  In  relation  to  a  third  child,  Divina,  the  birth
        certificate does include the appellant's name  as  the  father  and
        there is no DNA evidence as the  appellant  claimed  he  could  not
        afford to meet the cost of testing.
     9. The fact DNA evidence exists for one  child  does  not  necessarily
        establish a genuine and subsisting relationship in the same  way  a
        lack of DNA does not establish such a relationship does not exist.
    10. The Judge clearly took into account all the evidence  provided  and
        considered the same with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny.
        The Judge took into account the oral evidence that was given before
        concluding it had not been made out the appellant was in a  genuine
        and subsisting  relationship  and  so  could  not  satisfy  section
        117B(6). At [32] the Judge finds "on the evidence before  me  I  am
        not satisfied that the appellant meets 117B(6)  because  I  do  not
        find that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with [F]".
    11. The Judge  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children  but
        concluded that these will be met by remaining  with  their  primary
        carer, their mother.
    12. At [30] the Judge finds that if the children's mother is  committed
        to the appellant as a partner she has the option of  continuing  to
        live as a family unit  with  the  appellant  and  the  children  in
        Nigeria, a country she too originates from. There is no  suggestion
        that the children should be removed from the United Kingdom as  the
        first at least is a British citizen but  rather  that  this  is  an
        option open to the children's mother if she wishes to exercise  the
        same.
    13. Having considered  the  grounds  of  challenge,  submissions  made,
        evidence and decision as a whole, I find there is arguable merit in
        the  assertion  the  grounds  are,  in  reality,  no  more  than  a
        disagreement with the findings of the Judge and  disagreement  with
        the weight the Judge attached to  the  evidence.  In  this  respect
        weight is a matter for the Judge and it has not been shown that the
        conclusions are arguably perverse, irrational, or outside the range
        of findings reasonably open to the Judge on  the  evidence.  It  is
        clearly a case in which it was found the public interest  outweighs
        the appellant's argument. The conclusion the respondent's  decision
        is proportionate is an arguably sustainable decision on  the  facts
        of this case.
    14. No arguable legal error is made  out  sufficient  to  warrant  this
        tribunal interfering with this decision.


Decision

    15. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 8 March 2018











