
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24771/2018 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 19 May 2021                   |On the 16th June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     R A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                         the entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood, Nationwide Law Solicitors acting on
                    behalf of the appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz , Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  14  October  2019,  in   which   the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  application
         for entry clearance to settle in the UK  to  join  his  mother  and
         sponsor was dismissed.

      2. The FtTJ made an anonymity order, and no application was  made  for
         the order to be discharged before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 19  May  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face- to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the sponsor so that she was able to hear and  see  the
         proceedings being conducted. There were no issues regarding  sound,
         and no problematic technical problems were encountered  during  the
         hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. The appellant is a national of Iran.  In an application made on  25
         September 2018 he applied for entry  clearance  by  way  of  family
         reunion to enter the UK and settle with his mother and sponsor. His
         mother and 2 sisters left Iran  in  August  2017  and  entered  the
         United Kingdom. They claimed asylum on 6 September 2017  and  their
         claims were allowed by the respondent and they were granted refugee
         status on 5 March 2018.

      5. On the 4 December 2018 the respondent refused the application.  The
         Entry Clearance Officer (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "ECO")
         considered the  application  under  paragraph  352D  but  gave  the
         following reasons for refusing the application:

          1) Having considered the documentary evidence including the birth
             certificate, the date of birth is different to the date on the
             passport. No  other  evidence  was  submitted  to  confirm  or
             demonstrate the relationship and therefore  the  ECO  was  not
             satisfied that the appellant and the sponsor were  related  as
             claimed (paragraph 352D(i)).

          2) The ECO took into account the appellant's age but at the  date
             of the application he was 31 years old and was  therefore  not
             under the age of 18 and thus could  not  meet  paragraph  352D
             (ii).

          3) The appellant had provided no  evidence  of  any  relationship
             with  the  sponsor  before  she  came  to  United  Kingdom  in
             September 2017. Nor was  there  any  evidence  of  contact  or
             communication with the sponsor since September 2017.  The  ECO
             was therefore not satisfied that the appellant was part of the
             family unit of the sponsor at the time the  sponsor  left  her
             home (see paragraph 352D (iv)).

          4)  The  ECO  considered  whether  the  application  raised   any
             exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant  a  grant   of   entry
             clearance outside the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,
             but the ECO reached the conclusion that the appellant had  not
             demonstrated that he was a member of the sponsor's  pre-flight
             family and therefore the application was refused.

      6. Following the refusal of the application, documents were  submitted
         with the appeal including photographs, passport copies, BRP copies,
         TB certificate, ID booklet, interview record, determination letters
         and chat records (see ECM review date stamped 14 March  2019).  The
         ECM considered the  supporting  documents  submitted  but,  on  his
         review, stated that he was satisfied that the original decision  to
         refuse was correct and was not prepared to exercise  discretion  in
         the appellant's favour.

      7. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         entry clearance came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  2
         October 2019.

      8. In a determination promulgated on the 14  October  2019,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rules in question and on Article 8 grounds.  The  judge
         heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  sponsor  as  recorded   at
         paragraph [5].

      9. At paragraphs [6]-[11] the FtTJ set out his findings  of  fact  and
         conclusions on the appeal.

     10. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  that  there
         were a "number of evidential difficulties with the claim" and  that
         the  "appellant  bears  the  burden  of  proof  on  a  standard  of
         probabilities." At paragraph [6] the  FtTJ  set  out  that  in  the
         asylum interview undertaken 8 February 2018 the sponsor  said  that
         she had 4 children but, on the screening interview only  showed  3.
         At [8] the FtTJ  set  out  the  inconsistency  in  the  documentary
         evidence noting that the birth certificate gave a different date of
         birth to that of the passport issued to the  appellant.  The  judge
         noted that they both had the same place of birth but that there had
         been "no objective evidence to show that the change  of  year  from
         the Persian calendar to the Gregorian calendar  would  account  for
         the error".

     11. At [9] the FtTJ stated that even if the sponsor was the  mother  of
         the appellant, he did not accept that the appellant was  living  in
         the family unit  in  Iran  when  she  departed  but  was  based  in
         Malaysia. The FtTJ noted that there was  a  copy  of  his  multiple
         entry visa (although this was a poor copy) but that it  stated  the
         appellant was studying and was  valid  until  July  2019.  In  this
         respect, the judge stated "there is no updated witness statement by
         the appellant to show what his status is now. There is no  evidence
         from the appellant to show how his fees are  being  paid  over  the
         years, and how he has maintained himself. Given that he is aged  31
         years and left the family home, I do not find he has discharged the
         burden of proof that he was part of the pre-fight family unit,  and
         dependent upon the sponsor. I have taken into account  the  x  bank
         statements and remittances, but they only go back to October  2018,
         and whilst they may be to date, they do not show what was happening
         in the years before. There are notable gaps in the evidence which I
         find is readily available, or at least,  no  explanation  has  been
         provided as to why the appellant could not provide it."

     12. At [10] the FtTJ made reference to the appellant's father  who  was
         last seen by the sponsor in 2014 that found "there is  no  evidence
         the father has not been assisting the appellant  in  some  form  or
         other."

     13. At [11] the FtTJ concluded that he did not find that the  appellant
         had discharged the burden of proof and dismissed the appeal finding
         that  he  had  not  shown  the  necessary  family  life  as   being
         established but even if he had, he is not shown that there was  any
         interference with it because they are living in different countries
         and is not shown that it is disproportionate  for  entry  clearance
         not to be granted. "The appellant has not shown  what  his  current
         status is in Malaysia and the siblings live  in  the  UK  have  not
         attended to give evidence or prepared any witness statements either
         to support what the appellant and the sponsor say."

     14. He therefore dismissed the appeal.

     15. Permission to appeal  was  issued  and  permission  to  appeal  was
         granted by FtTJ Bristow on 26 February 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     16. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge
         Gill) issued directions on 20 April 2020 that she had  reached  the
         provisional view that it would  be  appropriate  to  determine  the
         issue of whether there was an error of law and if  so  whether  the
         decision should be set aside without  a  hearing.  Directions  were
         given that the party who sought permission  to  appeal  may  submit
         further submissions in support of the assertion of an error of  law
         and on the question of whether the FtTJ's decision  should  be  set
         aside if error of law is to be found, to be filed and served on all
         of the parties. Directions were given for the other party  to  file
         and  serve  submissions  in  response.  At  paragraph  5   of   the
         directions, it was set out that if  any  party  considered  that  a
         hearing was necessary to consider the questions set out, they  were
         required to submit reasons for that view within the  timetable  set
         out by UTJ Gill.

     17. On behalf of the appellant a document was filed  entitled  "further
         submissions in support of assertion error of  law".  This  document
         set out the following:

             "it is submitted to the  honourable  Tribunal  that  there  is
             clearly an error of law made  by  the  learned  judge  in  his
             determination. The 1st question that needs to be considered by
             the tribunal is whether  the  appellant  is  the  son  of  the
             sponsor. We submit that enough evidence has been  provided  to
             the tribunal to suffice them that the appellant is the son  of
             the sponsor and a member of their family. 2nd question was the
             tribunal needs to consider is if the Tribunal finds  that  the
             appellant is the son of the sponsor, whether his  life  is  in
             danger if he returns to Iran. We submit  that  the  answer  to
             this question has already been determined by the respondent in
             the case of the sponsor that the life of the sponsor  and  the
             sponsor's family members are in danger if they return to  Iran
             as they have already been granted asylum in the UK. For  these
             reasons and those asserted in the grounds  for  permission  to
             appeal; it is contended that the learned  judge  has  made  an
             error of law and his determination is to be set  aside  and  a
             fresh determination needs to be determined."

     18. On  18  May  2020  the  respondent  submitted  a  response  to  the
         appellant's grounds and in response to UTJ  Gill's  directions.  It
         does not appear that the author of the grounds had seen the further
         submissions from the appellant set out in the preceding paragraph.

     19. The response is short, and states as follows:

             "The SSHD asserts that  the  A  has  failed  to  identify  any
             material errors in law in the FtT determination.  The  grounds
             just stand a disagreement with the findings, the conclusion in
             respect of article 8 is sustainable in law.

             The A, in effect seeks to argue private life  rights  when  no
             such rights exist in an extraterritorial appeal of this  kind,
             see Secretary of State for the Home Department v Abbas  [2017]
             EWCA Civ 1393."

     20. Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia reviewed the file and  in  directions
         issued on 8  March  2021  indicating  that  the  appeal  should  be
         determined without a face- to- face  hearing  and  directions  were
         given for a remote hearing to take place and that this  could  take
         place via Skype. He recorded at paragraph 2 that neither party  had
         expressed a view as to  whether  it  be  appropriate  to  determine
         whether the making of the FtTJ's decision involved the making of an
         error on a point of law without a hearing. He considered the issues
         in the appeal and reached the conclusion that  the  Upper  Tribunal
         would benefit from  oral  submissions  made  by  the  parties  (see
         paragraph 3).

     21. The hearing was therefore listed as  a  remote  hearing  with  both
         advocates providing their oral submissions.

     22. Mr Mahmood on behalf of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal and the further submissions summarised above.

     23. In his oral submissions he submitted that there were  2  issues  in
         relation to the decision firstly the relationship and the  date  of
         birth of the applicant. It had not been accepted that the appellant
         was related as claimed and the other issue was whether he was  part
         of the family in Iran and would be at risk.

     24. With regard to the error, he submitted  there  was  evidence  which
         covered the date of birth and that the judge appeared to be  taking
         information to justify his decision to refuse. Mr Mahmood  referred
         to the screening interview where she said she had  4  children  and
         there were 4 names that was given.  The  passport  was  before  the
         judge and also a certificate. These are referred to in the skeleton
         argument. There was one document which was a translation which  had
         the wrong translation of the date of  birth  and  that  there  were
         other documents which gave the date of birth. He submitted that the
         explanation was  because  there  had  been  a  confusion  with  the
         Georgian calendar being different. This was explained to the  judge
         but that the judge disregarded the evidence. Mr  Mahmood  submitted
         that the translation was "not a  very  authentic  document  from  a
         third party" and there was a possibility of an error.

     25. As to the issue of family reunion, he submitted that this was  "not
         about collecting documents". He referred to the  sponsor  providing
         photographs and list of communications showing daily calls  to  her
         son and money receipts. This was before the judge.

     26. He further submitted there was nothing to make  an  any  assumption
         concerning the appellant's father and the judge could  not  justify
         the conclusion at paragraph [10].

     27. He further submitted that the  sponsor  had  been  in  contact  and
         communication with her child, and he was part of the  family  unit.
         Mr Mahmood submitted that apart  from  that  the  other  issue  was
         whether the appellant's life was  in  danger.  He  was  clearly  in
         danger as his family had claimed asylum.

     28. In his closing submission Mr Mahmood submitted  that  once  it  was
         accepted that he was part of the family, his life was in danger  in
         Iran.

     29. I then heard from Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent. There was
         a written response filed on behalf of the respondent dated  18  May
         2020 which I have summarised above.

     30. He submitted that the  grounds  stand  as  a  disagreement  to  the
         decision of the FtTJ and that the appellant is an adult  who  could
         not claim asylum vicariously and may not  be  part  of  the  family
         unit.

     31. After that short submission, Mr Mahmood  stated  that  he  had  not
         received  the  rule  24  response  (the  written  submissions)  and
         arrangements were made for this to be sent to him by the  email  he
         had provided.

     32.  Following  this  Mr   Mahmood   submitted   that   the   rule   24
         response/document should not be admitted because it was not  before
         the FtTJ. He stated that to allow the document to be admitted would
         be unfair to the appellant.

     33. When asked if he could indicate which part of the rule 24  response
         or written submissions he disagreed with, Mr  Mahmood  stated  that
         the application made was not an asylum  application  but  that  the
         sponsor was asking for a child to join her for family  reunion  and
         that "he was not making an asylum application". He stated that  the
         written submissions were a new issue and that  the  Upper  Tribunal
         was limited to matters before the judge and nothing else. He stated
         that this would be introducing a new ground  and  that  it  is  not
         possible to show a new ground of refusal. He  stated  that  if  the
         tribunal admitted the  written  submissions,  it  would  be  a  new
         ground.

     34. Following those submissions, Mr Mahmood indicated that had not seen
         or read the rule 24 (written submissions)  and  I  stated  that  we
         would not finish the hearing until he had  seen  the  document.  Mr
         Diwnycz confirmed that he had sent it to him. Having then read  the
         document Mr Mahmood stated that there was nothing in  the  rule  24
         written  submissions  that  Mr  Diwnycz  had  stated  in  his  oral
         submissions. He further stated that  it  had  not  been  argued  or
         raised on the basis of private life. He further submitted that  the
         matter should go back to the tribunal.

     35. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my  decision  which  I
         now give.

Decision on error of law:

     36. Dealing with  the  issue  of  admissibility,  the  rule  24/written
         submission dated 18 May 2020 is  an  admissible  document.  It  was
         provided in response to the directions an order made  by  UTJ  Gill
         and is therefore an admissible document.

     37. As to its contents, the written  submissions  are  very  short  and
         state that the grounds are no more than  a  disagreement  with  the
         decision of the FtTJ and also raise a point that the appellant  had
         argued private life rights when no such right exists  in  an  extra
         territorial appeal of this kind relying on the decision in  SSHD  v
         Abbas [2017] EWCA Civ 1393.

     38. Again, reference to a legal  argument  does  not  make  a  document
         inadmissible and the document sets out an issue of law relevant  to
         Article 8 of the ECHR. I do not accept  the  submission  made  that
         this was a new issue. In reaching his decision the ECO applied  the
         relevant  Immigration  Rule  which  is  paragraph  352D  and   also
         considered it outside the rules on human  rights  grounds  (Article
         8). Since April 2015 there has been  no  right  of  appeal  to  the
         tribunal on the ground that the Secretary of State's  decision  was
         not in accordance with the Immigration  Rules.  The  only  relevant
         right  of  appeal  under  section  82(1)(b)  of  the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration  Act
         2014) and that decision would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
         Human Rights Act 1998 in the context of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
         Nevertheless, the Immigration Rules  and  associated  guidance  are
         highly relevant to the tribunal's task  because  they  reflect  the
         responsible Minister's general assessment of when interference with
         the right to respect for private and family life is justified under
         article 8(2) on the basis of legitimate public interests.

     39. However, I have not heard any  legal  argument  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent in respect of the cited decision in Abbas and there  was
         little set out in the written submission in respect of this. On the
         facts of that case, the Court of Appeal found that the  UK  had  no
         obligation on private life grounds to grant entry clearance to  the
         applicant  to  visit  an  elderly  relative  in  the  UK   in   the
         circumstances where there was no family life (article 8). The issue
         here is not in relation to private life but whether or not there is
         family life between the appellant and  the  sponsor  sufficient  to
         engage article 8 and whether refusing entry clearance amounts to  a
         disproportionate interference with the sponsor's right  to  respect
         for  family  life  taking  into  account  the  particular   factual
         matrix.

     40. Mr Mahmood objected to the oral submissions of Mr Diwnycz  and  the
         reference to the appellant being an adult. This was also not a  new
         issue. The decision letter expressly referred  to  the  Immigration
         Rules and that the appellant could not meet paragraph 352D  on  the
         basis of the appellant being over the age of 18 as he was an adult.
         Furthermore, the circumstances of the appellant's age were directly
         relevant to the issue of family  life  and  the  related  issue  of
         whether the appellant  formed  part  of  the  sponsor's  pre-flight
         family which again was an issue plainly relevant  to  the  decision
         and as set out in the decision letter.

     41. The relevant Rule being set out at part 11 of the Rules  where  the
         Secretary of State has made provision for close family members to
         seek family reunification with persons recognised  as  refugees  in
         the United Kingdom.

     42. Paragraph 352D states:

             352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to
             enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or
             remain with the parent who currently has refugee status are
             that the applicant:

             (i) is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
             granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and

             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is
             not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family
             unit; and

             (iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum
             at the time that the person granted asylum left the country of
             their habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and

             (v) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by
             virtue of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article
             1F of the Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in
             their own right; and

             (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom
             entry clearance for entry in this capacity.

     43. I therefore now turn to the grounds. Having considered the  grounds
         and having done so alongside  the  oral  submissions  made  by  the
         advocates and the decision of the FtTJ  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point  of
         law and that the decision should be set aside in its entirety.

     44. I will set out my reasons for reaching that view.

     45. The grounds seek to challenge the FtTJ's conclusion reached on  the
         relationship between the sponsor and the appellant. As set  out  in
         the decision letter the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  they  were
         related as claimed (see paragraph 352D (i)) due  to  the  differing
         dates of the sponsor's birth certificate and the date of  birth  on
         the appellant's passport. Reference is made in the grounds to other
         documents that were before the FtTJ which supported the  nature  of
         the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor.

     46. At paragraphs [6] and [8] the FtTJ considered this issue. He  noted
         at [6] that the asylum interview referred to  4  children  and  the
         screening interview only showed 3. At [8] the judge referred to the
         sponsor's birth certificate and the passport providing 2  different
         dates and that there was "no objective evidence" to show the change
         of the year  from  the  Persian  to  the  Gregorian  calendar.  The
         reference to there being "no objective evidence" must refer to  the
         explanation given during the evidence as to why the dates  were  in
         error/inconsistent and as reflected at paragraph 5 that  there  was
         an error in the document.

     47. Looking at the documents before the tribunal,  the  translation  of
         the sponsor's birth certificate (page  15)  gives  the  appellant's
         date of birth as 26/3/1986. The passport set out at page  12  gives
         the date of birth of  26  Jan  1987  and  therefore  there  was  an
         inconsistency as to the date from those documents.

     48. Whilst the judge referred to there being "no objective evidence", I
         note that in the bundle of documents there  was  reference  to  the
         Iranian calendar (at pages 35 - 37AB).

     49. However, the grounds make the point that there was  other  evidence
         available which gave the birth date as 26 January 1987 and  against
         that background the judge was in error in not assessing this  issue
         in the light of all of the documents that was before  the  Tribunal
         and in the light of the evidence of the sponsor that there had been
         a mistake.

     50. A further point relevant to the relationship  between  the  parties
         concerns the earlier provision of evidence  which  appeared  to  be
         inconsistent evidence as to the number of children the sponsor had.
         The FtTJ highlighted that there were "evidential  difficulties"  at
         [6] noting that the sponsor stated in the asylum interview that she
         had 4 children but that the screening interview had  only  referred
         to 3.

     51. The grounds set out that the  person  carrying  out  the  screening
         interview had made an error and had written 3 and that there was no
         contradiction between the AI and the SI.

     52. I have looked  at  the  documents  before  the  judge.  The  asylum
         interview question 1 sets out that the sponsor was asked  questions
         as to whether  she  agreed  with  the  contents  of  the  screening
         interview. Her response was that it "needed to be amended"  because
         of mistakes. The mistake was that the appellant had stated she  had
         4 children, but the screening interview showed 3. At question 9 the
         interviewer asks, "you have four children  is  that  correct?"  The
         sponsor stated "yes". Then at question 10 she was asked to  provide
         details of where they are. The sponsor' s reply made  reference  to
         her 2 daughters living with her in the UK, 1 of her sons  lived  in
         London and her other son lived in Malaysia and he is a student (see
         page 52AB). At question 77 of the interview four children again are
         referred to (see p 63AB).

     53. Whilst the judge  set  out  the  differences  in  the  evidence  by
         reference to the asylum interview at paragraph [6] he did not  make
         any further reference to the other evidence  available  before  him
         before reaching his overall conclusions set out at [8]. It is  also
         unclear when reading paragraph [8] whether the judge is relying  on
         the differences as to the number of children he identified  at  [6]
         or the differences as to the date of birth at  [8]  in  reaching  a
         conclusion that the appellant and the sponsor were not  related  as
         claimed.

     54. I am therefore satisfied  that  the  FtTJ  did  not  carry  out  an
         assessment of all of the evidence  that  was  before  the  tribunal
         before reaching his conclusions.

     55. The issue of whether it was a material error or not arises  because
         at paragraph [9] the judge considered the issue in the  alternative
         by stating "even if the sponsor is his mother, the appellant, it is
         clear from the evidence that he was not living in the  family  unit
         in Iran when she departed but he was based in Malaysia."

     56. At paragraph [9] the judge then set out his reasons as  to  why  he
         was not satisfied that the appellant was  part  of  the  pre-flight
         family unit. The grounds refer to paragraph [9] and that the  judge
         stated that there was no witness evidence provided by the appellant
         and no evidence as to his status at the time  of  the  hearing  but
         that this was incorrect as the sponsor set out his status  and  was
         still a student on a Visa.

     57. I have carefully considered  the  evidence  before  the  FtTJ.  The
         sponsor's evidence in the witness statement (see pages 6 - 7 of the
         bundle) gave no details of the  appellant's  circumstances  or  any
         narrative of the circumstances of when they left Iran. In the  oral
         evidence recorded in the decision at [6] the  judge  recorded  that
         she said her son was a student in Malaysia and at [7] that her  son
         lives in Malaysia. I have not been referred to any  other  evidence
         that was before the judge concerning the appellant's  circumstances
         and the judge was not incorrect when he said there was  no  witness
         statement from the appellant himself.  Therefore,  other  than  the
         student Visa which had run out by the date of the hearing, the only
         evidence came from the sponsor.

     58. As to how his fees had been paid, the judge  appeared  to  conclude
         that there was no evidence as to how the fees had  been  paid  over
         the years or how he maintained himself. The judge  considered  this
         in the context of the appellant's age and also, he  considered  the
         bank statements but stated they were only  available  from  October
         2018.

     59. The grounds do not appear to challenge that factual point  made  by
         the judge that the bank statements/remittances only  went  back  as
         far as October 2018. The grounds make the point that the  appellant
         was under no obligation to provide the evidence from more than  one
         year. However, the burden of proof is upon the appellant  to  prove
         on the balance of probabilities the factual elements of his claim.

     60. That said, it is unclear to me whether  the  judge  considered  the
         issue of whether the appellant was part of the pre-flight family by
         taking into account the sponsor's  evidence  as  recorded  at  [7].
         There are no factual findings made as  to  the  history  of  events
         given  by  the  sponsor.  Nor  is  there  any  assessment  of   the
         photographs or the communication/chat evidence.

     61. In the light of those issues taken together and in the light of the
         FtTJ's misunderstanding of the evidence I am  satisfied  that  this
         may have impacted on his overall conclusions as to  whether  family
         life continued between the appellant and his family members and  on
         the issue of whether the appellant formed part  of  the  pre-flight
         family, along with whether they were related as claimed.

     62. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should be  set  aside  in  its
         entirety with no factual findings preserved.

     63. I observe that the respondent has published Family Reunion Guidance
         which addresses "exceptional circumstances" for those who are  aged
         over 18 which may have relevance at any future hearing.

     64. Mr Mahmood stated that it could be re-heard by the Upper Tribunal I
         have therefore considered whether it should be remade in the  Upper
         Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In  reaching
         that decision I have  given  careful  consideration  to  the  Joint
         Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
         concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

     65. I have considered the further hearing of the appeal  in  the  light
         of the practice statement recited above and  by  reference  to  the
         history of the appeal. The decision is a case management  decision,
         and the Upper Tribunal has a broad discretion to remit or remake  a
         decision which has been found to involve an error of law  (see  S12
         of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007). In applying that
         discretion, I have reached the conclusion that as a result  of  the
         nature of the errors of law set out above, it will be necessary for
         the sponsor  to give evidence and   to  deal  with  the  evidential
         issues, and therefore further fact-finding will be necessary and in
         the light of the relevant documentary evidence which had  not  been
         considered by the FtTJ. I also observe that there has been  further
         new documentary evidence provided on behalf of the  appellant  upon
         which factual findings will need to be made.  In my  judgement  the
         best course and consistent with the overriding objective is for  it
         to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing.  I  find
         that the appeal falls into both categories (a) and (b) as  set  out
         in the practice statement above.

     66. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that  the  decision  of
         the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and
         the decision shall be set aside and will be remitted  for  a  fresh
         hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.



Notice of Decision.

     67. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and therefore the decision  of  the  FtT
         shall be set aside. No findings are preserved. The  decision  shall
         be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated    03 June 2021.

