
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24382/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 12 February 2019                  |On 20 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                        funmilayo folashewa ojedokun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adebayo, David and Vine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Funmilayo Folashewa Ojedokun, was born on 14 March  1989
    and is a female citizen of  Nigeria.   She  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2006 as a student.  Following further extensions  of
    leave in the same capacity she applied for leave to remain outside  the
    Immigration  Rules  which  was  refused   on   20   August   2015.    A
    reconsideration request resulted in a further rejection on  7  November
    2015.  There is in the papers a consent order relating  to  a  judicial
    review (JR 14288/2015) which is dated 5  July  2016  and  concerns  the
    withdrawal of the decision  of  7  November  2015  and  followed  by  a
    reconsideration.  It is  not  entirely  clear  from  the  papers  which
    decision the First-tier Tribunal addressed itself.  Judge Devittie,  in
    a decision promulgated on  23  July  2018,  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision dated  20  August  2015;  that  is  the  only
    decision to which he refers [1].

 2. The appellant now appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I
    notified  the  representatives  at  the  Upper  Tribunal   hearing   at
    Manchester on 12 February  2019  that  I  intended  to  set  aside  the
    decision.  My reasons for doing so are as follows.  Both parties agreed
    that the judge erred in law by  failing  to  consider  the  appellant's
    circumstances as at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as regards the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds (Section 85 of
    the 2002 Act, as amended).  There is also a great deal of confusion  as
    to the basis of the appellant's Article 8 appeal.  The decision  of  10
    October 2016 deals only with the appellant's  private  life.   This  is
    strange given that the appellant had, in the form of a letter from  her
    solicitors dated 26 August 2015 raised the matter of her  family  life.
    Having said that, no detail is provided other than the  assertion  that
    the appellant had established family life  with  her  aunt,  a  British
    citizen.  Mr Bates, who appeared for the Secretary of State before  the
    Upper Tribunal, helpfully told me that, on remittal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, both the appellant's private and family life should form  the
    subject  of  the  human  rights  appeal.   That  should  be  the   case
    notwithstanding that there may remain an argument that no human  rights
    application in respect of family life has ever actually been made.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not assisted by the fact  that  there
    was no Presenting Officer before him in  Taylor  House  in  June  2018.
    Oddly, his decision does  not  record  the  attendance  of  one  of  Mr
    Adebayo's colleagues before him at the hearing.  What is clear is  that
    the judge has misapplied Section 85, as both parties now agree.  I find
    that  he  was  also  led  into  error  by  his  failure  to  deal  with
    submissions, which the judge had directed to be filed,  concerning  the
    length and nature of the residence  of  the  appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Those representations were made in writing by the appellant's
    solicitors on 19 June 2018 but appear to have been  overlooked  by  the
    judge.

 4. It will be apparent from my decision that this  litigation  has  fallen
    into a state of some confusion.  I  am  satisfied,  however,  that  the
    judge has erred in law and that I should set aside his decision.  Given
    the problems that have  arisen,  I  find  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision.  I direct that both parties may  file  at  the  Tribunal  and
    serve on each other fresh evidence, upon which  they  may  respectively
    seek to rely, no later than 10 days prior to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  For the avoidance of any doubt, the appellant is  at  liberty
    to appeal on both private and  family  life  Article  8  grounds.   The
    circumstances of the appellant will be considered as at the date of the
    next First-tier Tribunal hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  23  July
2018 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   The  appeal
is returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Devittie)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.  Both parties may rely  on  fresh  evidence
provided that that evidence is filed at  the  Tribunal  and  served  on  the
other party no later than 10 days before the next hearing.


Signed                              Date 3 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

