
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24953/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2021                       |On 14 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     fka
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant  or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

         The hearing of this appeal was conducted by Microsoft Teams

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Bhachu, Counsel, instructed by Optimus Law
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Juss ("the judge"), promulgated on 28 October 2020. By  that  decision,
    the judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision, dated 11 October 2018, refusing his human rights  claim  made
    in the context of deportation proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born in 1993. He has resided
    in the United Kingdom since 2007. Having failed to obtain leave through
    a number of applications and an appeal in 2010, the appellant underwent
    an Islamic marriage with his current partner, Ms X, a British  citizen.
    They have three children together, born in 2015, 2016, and 2018.  Ms  X
    has her parents and siblings living in  United  Kingdom.  In  2018  the
    appellant was sentenced  to  16  months'  imprisonment  after  pleading
    guilty to the offence of Actual Bodily Harm in respect of a "road rage"
    incident. The sentence engaged the Borders Act 2007 and  a  deportation
    order was accordingly made.

 3. In essence, the appellant's human rights claim was based on his  family
    life in the United Kingdom and the lack of support available to him  in
    Afghanistan. More specifically, it was said that Ms X  had  significant
    caring responsibilities for her father (particularly during the  Covid-
    19 "lockdown") and that the appellant's absence from  the  family  unit
    would place significant strain on her and, in turn, the three children.
    Further, it was said that Ms X's mother, who had separated from  father
    and then re-married, had her own caring responsibilities and would  not
    be able to assist with care of the father or indeed the three children.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the outset of the  hearing,  the  appellant's  Counsel  (Ms  Bhachu)
    sought an adjournment in order to obtain further medical evidence on Ms
    X is father's condition  (he  suffered  from  mental  health  problems,
    specifically paranoid schizophrenia and bi-polar). This application was
    refused, with the judge giving reasons for this at [10]: in summary, it
    was said that such evidence could have been sought  earlier  and  there
    was nothing to suggest that the father's condition had deteriorated, as
    claimed.

 5. The evidence was then summarised, together with the parties' respective
    submissions. At [24] and [29] the judge directed himself to  HA  (Iraq)
    [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 in respect of the unduly harsh  test,  this  being
    the central issue in the appeal.

 6. The crux of the judge's findings and reasons appear at  [26]-[33].  The
    judge noted the absence of medical evidence on Ms X's  father's  health
    and found that: (a) Ms X was not having to live with her  father  as  a
    result of his  ill-health;  (b)  the  possibility  of  assistance  from
    external sources, specifically social services, had not  been  explored
    by the family; (c) Ms X's mother and/or siblings could  help  care  for
    the father.

 7. Following from these findings, the judge concluded that  because  Ms  X
    could be relieved of some or most of her  caring  responsibilities  for
    her father, she would be able to focus on the three children. In  turn,
    this would have alleviated difficulties arising  from  the  appellant's
    deportation.

 8. The judge concluded  that  Ms  X  and  the  children  could  visit  the
    appellant in Pakistan.

 9. Ultimately, the judge concluded that the separation scenario would  not
    have unduly harsh consequences on either Ms X or the children.  Nothing
    is said about the possibility of them going to live with the  appellant
    in Afghanistan, although this issue  was  raised  in  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter.

10. Finally, at [40] the judge concluded that  there  were  no  "compelling
    circumstances"  over  and  above  the  matters  considered  within  the
    Immigration Rules (in light of Binaku (s.11 TCEA;  s.117C  NIAA;  para.
    399D) [2021] UKUT 34 (IAC), it  is  section  117C  which  provides  the
    relevant legal framework for consideration in  deportation  cases,  not
    the Rules. However,  this  has  no  material  bearing  on  the  present
    appeal).




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

11. The grounds can best be divided into three: first, it is said that  the
    judge erred in refusing the adjournment request; second, he  failed  to
    adequately consider,  or  give  any  reasons  for  rejecting,  relevant
    evidence; third, he failed to undertake a proper assessment of  whether
    "very compelling circumstances" existed.

12. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  12
    November 2020. The reasons for the grant purported to exclude the first
    ground of appeal. However, the stated  position  above  the  horizontal
    line on the decision notice simply says that "Permission to  appeal  is
    granted". In light of Safi and others (permission to appeal  decisions)
    [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC), the grant was unrestricted.



The hearing

13. At the outset  it  transpired  that  Ms  Cunha  had  not  received  the
    appellant's bundle containing the evidence relied on in the grounds  of
    appeal. As I understood the position, the appellant representatives had
    sent these materials to the appropriate inbox used  by  the  respondent
    for service. It is not always clear what has or has not  been  done  in
    any particular case, but I am currently encountering a similar  problem
    in numerous cases. It seems to me as though Senior Presenting  Officers
    are under a good deal of pressure as a result of the Covid-19  pandemic
    and the prevalence of remote hearings. I venture to emphasise that  the
    respondent  must  take  all  possible  steps   to   ensure   that   her
    representatives are provided  with  relevant  electronic  materials  in
    advance of hearings.

14. In the present case, I ensured that Ms Cunha had enough  time  to  read
    and digest the relevant materials before the hearing proceeded.

15. Ms  Bhachu  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  In  respect  of  the
    adjournment issue, she accepted that there was no new medical  evidence
    and thus she was unable to make  any  further  submissions  as  to  the
    materiality of any error by the judge. She indicated that the  Covid-19
    situation had presented difficulties in obtaining such evidence.

16. In respect of the second ground, it was submitted that  the  judge  had
    failed to take account of, or to have provided reasons in  respect  of,
    the 2020 Independent Social Worker's report, Ms X's witness  statement,
    and that of her  mother.  This  evidence  went  to  the  issue  of  the
    inability of other family members to care for father and  his  lack  of
    trust in others. This in turn was relevant to the judge's assessment of
    the unduly harsh test.

17. Ms Cunha submitted  that  the  expert  evidence  added  little  to  the
    appellant's case. The judge was entitled to have noted the  absence  of
    relevant medical evidence and the failure of the family to explore  the
    possibility of support by social services. In addition, Ms X  had  been
    able to care properly for the children  whilst  the  appellant  was  in
    prison.

18. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Conclusions on error of law

19. After careful consideration and reading his decision  sensibly  and  in
    the round, I have concluded that the judge has erred in law and that as
    a result his decision should be set aside.

20. In respect of the first ground, it  is  of  course  difficult  for  the
    appellant to show that any error by the judge was material,  given  the
    absence of any new medical evidence. Having said that, the basis of the
    adjournment application was to obtain the very type of  evidence  which
    the judge repeatedly noted was absent. In my view, that absence  played
    a material part in the judge's overall reasoning. I am also prepared to
    accept that the ongoing Covid-19 issues are likely  to  have  made  the
    obtaining of medical evidence of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and
    now  significantly  more  difficult  for  the  appellant's  than  would
    otherwise have been the case.

21. In the end, I find that the judge did err in refusing the  adjournment,
    but it cannot be shown by evidence that this error was material to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

22. Turning to the second ground, I am satisfied that the judge  failed  to
    have adequate regard to, or to provide adequate reasons in respect  of,
    the most recent (as then was) witness statement evidence of  Ms  X  and
    her  mother.  This  evidence  did  indeed  address  a  change  in   the
    circumstances of the mother's potential ability to provide care for the
    father in particular, and,  perhaps  to  a  lesser  extent,  the  three
    children. Whilst reference is made to the 2020 witness statement of  Ms
    X at [19], the relevant aspects of  the  evidence  and  that  from  her
    mother do not appear to have been factored into the judge's assessment.
    Nor can I detect reasons for rejecting it.

23. I recognise that the  judge  has  relied  on  the  absence  of  medical
    evidence. On the assumption that  he  was  entitled  to  rely  on  that
    absence, there remained what appears to be the uncontroversial fact  of
    the father's mental health conditions  and  that  Ms  X  had  been  his
    primary carer. In addition, it seemed to  be  common  ground  that  the
    father did require  care.  The  evidence  from  Ms  X  and  her  mother
    potentially indicated that alternative adequate care might (I put it no
    higher) not have been forthcoming.

24. The question of possible care provided by social services has certainly
    caused me pause for thought. I accept  that  there  was  no  "positive"
    evidence from the appellant to indicate that enquiries had been made by
    the family. It was of course for the appellant to prove his case and in
    general terms the judge might have been entitled to infer  that  social
    services could potentially  provide  assistance.  Three  considerations
    have led me to conclude that the judge has nonetheless erred.

25. First, whilst hindered by the absence of up-to-date  medical  evidence,
    it had been accepted that the father did suffer  from  what,  on  their
    face, were significant  mental  health  problems.  The  judge  did  not
    undertake an assessment, based on the evidence he did have, as  to  the
    nature of any possible care that might be required.

26. Second, as mentioned previously, the judge  failed  to  deal  with  the
    issue of trust. This point is only fairly briefly referred to in Ms X's
    evidence, but it was a factor relevant to care by either  other  family
    members or strangers.

27. Third, the failure to have engaged with the evidence relating to Ms X's
    mother's circumstances is, to an extent, linked to the general issue of
    alternative care for the father (see, for  example,  what  is  said  at
    [33]).

28. Finally, I am persuaded that the judge failed to adequately engage with
    the Independent Social Worker's 2020 report. In  truth,  this  is  only
    considered very briefly at the end of [30]. It is said that the  report
    did not undermine the conclusions which had already been reached. There
    is a distinct danger here of the cart having been put before the horse,
    as opposed to a holistic assessment of all the evidence. Whilst I am in
    no way suggesting that the report would have had a decisive  impact  in
    favour of the appellant's  claim,  it  was  relevant  expert  evidence,
    required adequate consideration and, if it was to be rejected in  whole
    or part, reasons for such a conclusion.

29. For the reasons set out above, the judge's decision is flawed and  must
    be set aside.



Disposal

30. Remittal is an exception to the general rule  that  a  case  should  be
    retained in the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  relevant  decision  re-made.
    However, in the present case, material evidence has not been adequately
    considered and in my view there is relatively extensive fact-finding to
    be undertaken. In all the circumstances, I conclude  that  remittal  is
    the appropriate course of action.

31. It is clear that there has been  no  dispute  as  to  the  genuine  and
    subsisting relationships between the appellant, Ms  X,  and  the  three
    children. It is appropriate to preserve  this  factual  basis  when  it
    comes to the re-hearing of this appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.

32. In all other respects, the facts and conclusions to be drawn  in  light
    of the relevant legal framework are in issue.  This  must  include  the
    respondent's assertion that Ms X and the three children can go and live
    with the appellant in Afghanistan.



Anonymity

33. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. With a  degree  of
    hesitation, I am prepared to maintain that direction.



Notice of Decision

34. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

35. I exercise my discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

36. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



    Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be  re-heard
         in light of what is said in this decision;

      2. The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Juss;

      3. The First-tier Tribunal shall issue  any  further  case  management
         directions it deems appropriate.



    Directions to the parties

      1. No later than  14  days  after  this  decision  is  sent  out,  the
         appellant shall  confirm  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who,  if
         anyone, will be called  to  give  oral  evidence  at  the  remitted
         hearing and whether  an  interpreter  will  be  required  for  that
         hearing;

      2. No later than 14 days before the remitted  hearing,  the  appellant
         shall file and serve (in whatever form is directed  by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal) a consolidated bundle of all evidence relied on;

      3. No later than 7 days before the  remitted  hearing,  the  appellant
         shall file and serve (in whatever form is directed  by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal) a skeleton argument;

      4. With liberty to apply to amend these directions.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor             Date:  28 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
