
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24117/2018
                                                               HU/24116/2018
                                                               HU/24120/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 August 2019                             |On 04 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                            ZA (FIRST appellant)
                            AF (SECOND appellant)
                            ZF (THIRD appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Badar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of  Pakistan  born  on  5  March  1988,  29
    September 2009 and 17 September 2014  respectively.   They  appeal  the
    decision of a First-tier Judge dismissing  their  appeals  following  a
    hearing on 11 April 2019.   They  had  appealed  the  decision  of  the
    respondent on 14 November 2018 to refuse their applications  for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  Permission to appeal was  granted  on
    17 July 2019 by the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   Mr Badar, who  appears  before  me,  also  represented  the  appellants
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the  judge  referred  to  his  well-
    prepared skeleton argument in paragraph 43 of his  decision  which  set
    out the law that the judge said he must apply.

3.   The judge  found  that  the  appellants'  case  was  well  set  out  in
    Counsel's skeleton argument.  The judge summarised the positive aspects
    as set out in the skeleton argument as follows:

         "a.  Respondent's error of law in not carrying  out  a  Section  55
             assessment.


         b.   Best interests of the child to remain in the UK and the length
             of residence of the children.


         c.   The appellants at all time are lawfully  residing  within  the
             UK.


         d.   The unusual  circumstances  of  the  appellants  losing  their
             husband/father, and as a  result,  would  have  lost  ties  to
             Pakistan/developed deeper ties to the UK.


         e.   Appellants support network of the sister/brother in law within
             the UK".

4.   The judge considered the points made  in  respect  of  the  appellants'
    support network in paragraph 55 of his decision as follows:

         "55. Appellants support network of the sister/brother in law within
             the UK Whereas the Respondent has not carried out a Section 55
             assessment, the Appellants submit that the  following  factors
             are relevant to this assessment.


             a.   Both  appellants  are  going  to  school.   Psychological
                  Assessment  Report  (p.28  of  AB)  was  provided  to  the
                  Respondent at  the  date  of  application.   Report  makes
                  various findings such as lack of Urdu (S2 speaks a  little
                  French as well), close circle  of  friends  and  concludes
                  with  'Any  move  to  Pakistan,  I  feel  would   have   a
                  detrimental  impact  on  the  personal,  educational   and
                  emotional development of the children (p.35 of AB)'.


             b.   Whilst the appellants are  not  qualifying  children,  it
                  should be noted that second appellant spent her  formative
                  years within the UK, equivalent to that if she was born in
                  the UK.


             c.   The appellants have lost their father  tragically.   They
                  do not have the father  figure  that  an  ordinary  family
                  being removed would.  Their bonds to the family in the UK,
                  M and S should be given substantial weight.


             d.   It is clear from the evidence that they see  their  lives
                  continuing in the UK, with  regards  to  their  circle  of
                  friends, attachment to their teachers and  family  in  the
                  UK".

5.   Having  considered  the  positive  features  the  judge  concluded  his
    determination as follows:

          "56.    The cons are that Parliament has passed the rules relating
             to the exit and entry of people  into  this  country  and  the
             renewal of leave.  The appellant does not meet the rules.  The
             Home Office argues that there are no insurmountable  obstacles
             preventing  his  private  life  and  family  life  from  being
             exercised abroad.


         57.  The  appellant's  husband  died  in  Pakistan  and  his  death
             certificate appears in the bundle on the same  day  the  third
             appellant was born in this country.  The first  appellant  had
             returned with her children to Pakistan in August  2014  before
             returning  to  the  U.K.  in  December.   She  had   made   an
             application on 11 August 2017 and  her  leave  expired  on  14
             August 2017. She entered as a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur  and  was
             granted limited leave she can have no expectation  to  receive
             any leave beyond this period.


         58.  She chose to come to this country indeed leave her husband  in
             India presumably because she felt her  life  would  be  better
             here.  Her leave was precarious. She has created  a  situation
             where she is on her own with two children in this country  and
             she relies on article 8 to remain.


         59.  Parliament has passed rules and the appellant's  children  are
             not qualifying children they have not been here seven years  I
             note the second and third appellants school reports which show
             they are well settled at  school.   They  apparently  speak  a
             little Urdu but the respondent  would  argue  they  are  young
             enough to adapt to the country of their mother's origin.


         60.  We have a psychology report on page 263/8 This is carried  out
             by Kevin  O'Doherty  psychologist  and  cognitive  behavioural
             therapist The first appellant presented as a  confident  well-
             adjusted individual with a good grasp of the issues There  are
             no  psychotic  features,  delusional  ideas  or  disorders  or
             suicidal ideation  .She has normal  speech  and  answered  the
             questions intelligently A summary of his conclusion appears on
             page 35 and  it  can  records  that  the  first  appellant  is
             suffering from anxiety and  depression   .It  is  moderate  in
             severity  .Her children have a wide circle of friends and have
             been accustomed to their British  way  of  life  It  does  not
             conclude she is unable to perform the  duties  of  her  chosen
             profession and should be returned to Pakistan there  would  be
             some psychological effect and this is noted


         61.  The appellant family will be able  to  assist  her.   In  this
             country she has one sister and in Pakistan she has her parents
             two brothers.  Her husband's family will only a duty to assist
             her. She says she is not in contact with her husband's  family
             and they do not look after but we have no independent evidence
             of this She is educated.  She has  a  BSE  in  home  economics
             level III childcare works  here  as  a  childminder  The  main
             reason she cites for not living in Pakistan  is  her  children
             that they will not be able to adapt to life their the  friends
             and social life here.


         62.  It is perhaps a good time to remind myself about  the  law  in
             this area.  In Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions  affecting
             children; onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  197(IAC)  the  Upper
             Tribunal in considering the case law in relation to  decisions
             affecting children  identified  the  following  principles  to
             assist in the determination  of  appeals  where  children  are
             affected by the appealed decisions:


                  'i)  As a starting point it is in the  best  interests  of
                      children to be with both their parents  and  if  both
                      parents are being removed  from  the  United  Kingdom
                      then the  starting  point  suggests  that  so  should
                      dependent children who form part of  their  household
                      unless there are reasons to the contrary.


                  ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to  have
                      both  stability  and   continuity   of   social   and
                      educational provision and the benefit of  growing  up
                      in the cultural norms of the society  to  which  they
                      belong.


                  iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                      of origin can lead to development of social  cultural
                      and educational ties that it would  be  inappropriate
                      to disrupt, in the absence of  compelling  reason  to
                      the contrary.  What amounts to lengthy  residence  is
                      not clear cut but  past  and  present  policies  have
                      identified seven years as a relevant period.


                  iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,
                      the Tribunal notes that seven years from age four  is
                      likely to be more significant to  a  child  than  the
                      first seven years of life.  Very young  children  are
                      focussed on their parents rather than their peers and
                      are adaptable.


                  v)   Short periods of residence, particularly ones without
                      leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to enter
                      or remain, while claims are promptly considered,  are
                      unlikely to give rise to private  life  deserving  of
                      respect in the absence of  exceptional  factors.   In
                      any event, protection of the economic  well-being  of
                      society amply justifies removal in such cases.'


         63.  There is limit to how far the interest  of  the  child  should
             outweigh the respondent's concerns.  In EV  (Philippines)  and
             Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it  was  held  that  despite
             finding, in a family's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove
             them,  that  the  best  interests  of  the  children  lay   in
             continuing their education in the  United  Kingdom  with  both
             parents also remaining in the United Kingdom, the Tribunal had
             been entitled to find that the need  to  maintain  immigration
             control outweighed the children's best interests


         64.  In the present case applying the case law and in particular EV
             (Philippines the two children are aged 9 and 4 and  can  adapt
             to life in Pakistan


         65.  As was stated in EV (Philippines (para 32 to 37) 'the tribunal
             is concerned with how emphatic an answer falls to be given  to
             the question: is it in the best  interests  of  the  child  to
             remain?  The longer the child has been here, the more advanced
             (or critical) the stage of his education, the looser his  ties
             with the country in question, and  the  more  deleterious  the
             consequences of his return, the greater the weight that  falls
             into one side of the scales.  If it is overwhelmingly  in  the
             child's best interests that he should not return, the need  to
             maintain immigration control may well not tip the balance.  By
             contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but
             only on balance (with some factors pointing  the  other  way),
             the result may be the opposite'.


         66.  I note the case law on children and conclude that the children
             are young enough to adapt to life in the old country and  they
             have extended family who can assist her on  return.  They  can
             enjoy the rich  cultural  heritage  of  Pakistan.  There  will
             return as a family unit and spent a short period  of  time  in
             this country.  It might be financially better to live in  this
             country although there was no evidence of  this  this  is  not
             itself a reason to grant leave under  article  8.   The  rules
             have not been met. There are no  major  health  considerations
             relating to her or the children. Parliament has passed laws As
             section 117(1) makes clear the issue is effective  immigration
             control.  I  have  found  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
             immigration rules and therefore at the relevant date there  is
             public interest served by the refusal".

6.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

7.   In the grounds it was submitted that the judge had made  various  slips
    in his determination, for example referring to India  in  paragraph  58
    rather than Pakistan and it was submitted that the determination showed
    clear signs of a template decision.

8.   In ground 1 it was argued that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the
    psychologist's report and the school reports.  There was no  engagement
    with the findings made by the expert.  It  was  acknowledged  that  the
    judge had referred to the submissions made as recorded in paragraph  55
    of the decision.   There  had  only  been  a  very  brief  analysis  in
    paragraphs 60 and 61 of the decision.

9.   In ground 2 it was argued that the judge  had  come  to  an  irrational
    decision with reference to paragraph 58.  The appellant's  husband  had
    died on 17 September 2014 - the day the third appellant had been  born.
    It was argued in ground 3 that the judge had erred in  the  application
    of  paragraph  117B(3)  in  finding  against  the  appellant  that  the
    appellant was not employed - the judge had  recorded  in  paragraph  61
    that she had worked as a childminder.  The judge had further  erred  in
    relation to Section  117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act  in  noting  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  was  in  the  public
    interest  and  observing  "this  consideration   weighs   against   the
    appellant".  In ground 4 it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    applied the authorities he had referred to properly and his conclusions
    at paragraph 66 did not reflect the submissions made on behalf  of  the
    appellants as recorded in paragraph 55 of the determination.  The judge
    had erred in concluding as he had done regarding the best interests  of
    the children.

10.  Ms Isherwood submitted there was no material error of law.   The  judge
    had found the children were not qualifying children in paragraph 59  of
    the decision.  It was plain that the judge had taken into  account  the
    psychologist's  report.   Ms  Isherwood  referred  to   the   following
    paragraph in the report at page 31:

         "I am informed that the client was four months  pregnant  when  her
         husband was given the diagnosis of stage 4 cancer.  The client came
         to the UK with her one daughter, and her husband was to join her if
         he was medically able to.  Unfortunately,  he  subsequently  passed
         away from cancer in Karachi Pakistan".

    Ms Isherwood submitted it was a matter of choice and she had never  set
    up the business as an entrepreneur which was the basis of the grant  of
    her visa.  She had not sought to rectify her status.  It  was  accepted
    by Counsel as recorded in paragraph 36 of the judge's decision that the
    appellant did not meet the Rules.

11.  It was clear  that  the  judge  had  considered  the  position  of  the
    children as set out in the report, ground 1 and ground 4 needed  to  be
    read together.  The judge had correctly addressed himself on  the  case
    law.  The family would face no unusual circumstances in Pakistan.

12.  Various points had been taken in relation to slips made by  the  judge.
    It was plain that the reference to India  was  simply  a  typographical
    error.  It had been open to the judge to find as she did  in  paragraph
    58 of the decision. Both representatives accepted that  the  judge  had
    mistakenly referred to the date of the appellant's return  to  Pakistan
    with her children in paragraph 57 of the decision -  the  correct  date
    was 9 October 2014.  In relation to 117B (6) the judge had been correct
    in observing that there were no qualifying children.  The judge had not
    erred in the weight given to the public interest. He had referred to EV
    (Philippines) in paragraph  63  of  the  decision  where  the  need  to
    maintain immigration control  outweighed  the  best  interests  of  the
    children. The grounds were simply a disagreement with the decision.

13.  In reply, Mr Badar submitted that the judge had  not  properly  engaged
    with  the  expert's  report  and  referred  to  paragraph  3   of   the
    respondent's  decision  in  which  consideration  had  been  given   to
    exceptional circumstances. The case had been argued outside the  rules.
    It had never been the respondent's case  that  the  appellant  had  not
    worked in accordance with the visa she had been issued with.

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

15.  I am not satisfied that the various slips  identified  by  Counsel,  as
    well as the apparent lack of proofreading, while regrettable, indicated
    that the judge was not properly focused on the case before him or  that
    this was a template decision as contended.  It is clear that the  judge
    went carefully through the skeleton argument that Mr Badar had produced
    and he scrupulously addressed himself to the relevant authorities.   He
    refers to both the  psychological  assessment  report  and  the  school
    reports. He had full regard to the interests of  the  children  in  the
    light of the case law and  was  entitled  to  conclude  as  he  did  in
    paragraph 66 of the decision. I do not find the judge materially  erred
    in his consideration of S117B as contended. I  agree  with  the  points
    made by Ms Isherwood and find that the grounds raise no material  error
    of law.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

It is appropriate to make an anonymity order in  this  case  given  that  it
    concerns children.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 21 August 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
