
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/24361/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Heard on 14 November 2018             |On 6 December 2018               |
|Prepared on 21 November 2018          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                 ADEBOYE [A]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khosla, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 22 May 1974. He  appeals
      against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Courtney
      sitting at Hatton Cross on 23 February 2018 in which she dismissed the
      Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  13
      October 2016. That decision was to refuse to grant the Appellant leave
      to remain on the basis of his family and private life.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in October 2000  on  a  visit
      visa. In 2009 he was included as a dependent  on  an  application  for
      leave to remain under Article 8 which was refused. In 2010 he  applied
      for indefinite leave to remain which was refused on 11 May  2011.  The
      Appellant appealed and on  18  April  2012  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Boardman allowed the appeal to the limited  extent  that  the
      May 2011 refusal was declared unlawful and a lawful decision  remained
      outstanding. The issue which led to the finding that the decision  was
      not in accordance with  the  law  was  a  consideration  of  the  best
      interests of the Appellant's daughter A born 2 December 2008.

   3. It appears that the matter was reconsidered by the Respondent  because
      on 16 October 2013 the Appellant was granted leave to  remain  on  the
      basis of his family and private life valid until 15 April 2016. On  17
      March 2016 shortly before that leave was due to expire  the  Appellant
      applied for further leave to remain and  it  was  the  refusal  on  13
      October 2016 of  that  application  that  gave  rise  to  the  present
      proceedings.

The Explanation for Refusal

   4. The application was rejected under  the  suitability  requirements  of
      paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
      September  2007  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  possessing  false
      identity documents and sentenced  to  four  months  imprisonment.  The
      Respondent stated that this  conviction  meant  that  the  Appellant's
      presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.


   5.  The  application  also  fell   for   refusal   under   paragraph   R-
      LTRPT.1.1(d)(i) because the Appellant failed to meet  the  eligibility
      requirements contained in paragraph E-LTRPT.2.3(a), the Appellant  did
      not have sole responsibility for A who did not live with him.  Neither
      A nor A's mother were  British  citizens  or  settled  in  the  United
      Kingdom (sub-paragraph 2.3(b)). The Appellant had an order  permitting
      contact to A but there was no evidence to show that he was adhering to
      it as there was nothing from A's mother.

 6. In relation to the private life claim, the Appellant did not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  He  had  not  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of 20 years, he had resided in  Nigeria
    for 26 years and thus had spent the majority  of  his  life  there.  He
    spoke English and Yoruba and his mother  still  lived  in  Nigeria.  He
    would not face any very significant obstacles to his reintegration into
    Nigeria. There were no exceptional circumstances which might lead to  a
    grant of  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  If  the
    Appellant were to leave the United Kingdom A would still be  here  with
    her  mother  although  both  were   over   stayers.   There   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to them relocating to Nigeria where they could
    enjoy their full rights as citizens.

The Decision at First Instance

   7. In her determination the Judge rejected the Respondent's argument that
      the application should fail for lack of  suitability  because  of  the
      Appellant's criminal conviction. She noted that the conviction was  in
      2007 and the Appellant had not reoffended since. As neither A nor  A's
      mother were British citizens, it was accepted that the Appellant could
      not succeed under Appendix FM in  any  event,  even  disregarding  the
      suitability issue. The Appellant could not succeed under paragraph 276
      ADE of the Immigration Rules. He was currently employed in the  United
      Kingdom and there was no reason why he  could  not  obtain  employment
      upon return.


   8. The Judge considered the matter outside the  rules  under  Article  8,
      posing a series of questions, indicative of a structured approach. The
      first question was whether the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting
      parental relationship with A. The Appellant had  complained  that  A's
      mother only allowed him to see  A  with  great  reluctance  and  would
      certainly not cooperate in providing evidence in support of the uptake
      of contact. After reviewing the evidence of contact at [24] to [36] of
      the determination the Judge concluded that there was not a genuine and
      subsisting relationship between the Appellant and A. However  even  if
      she were wrong about that it would still be reasonable to expect A  to
      leave the United Kingdom.

   9. A was a qualifying child having lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  7
      years (she was born on 2 December 2008) and was now 9  years  of  age.
      The Judge  pointed  to  the  lack  of  medical  evidence  which  might
      otherwise have indicated that it would be unreasonable to expect A  to
      relocate to Nigeria. Although  A's  mother  suffered  from  ill-health
      there was again  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  mother's
      problems materially interfered in any way with her ability to bring up
      A who could speak English which was an official language  in  Nigeria.
      Citing the Court of Appeal decision in EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA
      Civ 874 the Judge noted that the best interests of A were to remain in
      education which she could do upon return to her own country. There was
      no evidence to show that A had any other family members living in  the
      United Kingdom.

  10. Directing herself on the Court of Appeal authority  of  MA  (Pakistan)
      [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the Judge noted A's disregard for the  Immigration
      Rules and that he had spent significant time  in  the  United  Kingdom
      without any legal basis of  stay.  Although  the  Appellant  may  have
      established a private life he could maintain contact with his UK-based
      friends through modern means  of  communications.  She  dismissed  the
      appeal.

The Onward Appeal

  11. The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  relying  on  a  letter
      written by A's  school  which  indicated  that  both  of  A's  parents
      supported her education and attended school events. The grounds argued
      that insufficient weight had been placed on this evidence.  The  Judge
      had recorded two outstanding bills rendered by A's school  in  respect
      of the after-school provision of care. The letter from the school  had
      noted that the Appellant  was  currently  funding  this  care  and  it
      confirmed that A stayed with the Appellant during half term  holidays.
      There was another letter which was not referred to by the Judge  which
      was dated 14 October 2016. It  was  from  the  Children  and  Families
      Department of Sheffield Council inviting the  Appellant  to  attend  a
      meeting with social workers to discuss  A's  needs.  This  was  highly
      relevant to the question of whether the Appellant enjoyed  a  parental
      relationship with A.


  12. The Judge had not considered whether the contact order  the  Appellant
      had could be enforced in Nigeria in the event that A  and  A's  mother
      were also returned there. The Appellant had explained why the level of
      contact with A had reduced. The two letters and the  Appellant's  oral
      evidence indicated a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  A  and
      the Judge had erred in not accepting this.  The  grounds  also  argued
      that a decision was expected from the Supreme Court on  the  issue  of
      the reasonableness of expecting a child to leave the United Kingdom. I
      refer below to that case now reported as KO Nigeria & Ors [2018]  UKSC
      53. The grounds suggested that the onward appeal be stayed pending the
      handing down of the Judgement in that case.

  13. The final point made by the grounds was that the Judge had  failed  to
      follow the established authority of Devaseelan in that the Appellant's
      case was materially indistinguishable from  that  presented  to  Judge
      Boardman at the 2012 appeal hearing when he had found the Respondent's
      decision to refuse leave to remain to be not in  accordance  with  the
      law (see paragraph 2 above). There was no good  reason  to  go  behind
      Judge Boardman's findings.

  14. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert on 18 June 2018. In  refusing
      permission to appeal she wrote that the  decision  displayed  detailed
      evidence-based reasoning and the conclusions were open to the Judge on
      that evidence. The grounds were no more than an attempt to reargue the
      Appellant's case. The Judge did not need to mention  every  aspect  of
      evidence. The argument that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  comply  with
      Devaseelan principles overlooked what the  Judge  had  actually  found
      with  regard  to  issues  such  as  telephone  contact.  She   refused
      permission.

  15. The Appellant renewed his application  for  permission  to  appeal  on
      substantially the same grounds acknowledging that the appeal could not
      succeed under appendix FM. Weight ought to  have  been  given  to  the
      Appellant's oral evidence. It was "frankly  beyond  comprehension  why
      [Judge Courtney] would not be  prepared  to  place  weight  upon  [the
      letter from the school dated 19 April 2016] with respect  to  what  it
      says about the Appellant".

  16. The renewed application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers
      before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 16 October 2018. In a very brief
      decision she granted permission to  appeal  stating:  "There  is  some
      arguable merit in the assertion in the grounds that the Judge arguably
      failed to consider all the evidence and failed  to  consider  material
      matters and that her  approach  was  arguably  inconsistent  with  the
      principles in Devaseelan. All grounds are  arguable".  The  Respondent
      did not reply to the grant of permission.

The Hearing Before Me

  17. As a result of the decision to grant permission to appeal  the  matter
      came before me to decide in  the  first  place  whether  there  was  a
      material error of law in the Judge's decision such that it  should  be
      set aside and the appeal reheard. If there was not, then the  decision
      of the First-tier would stand.


  18. For the Appellant reliance was placed on the grounds of onward appeal.
      The findings of the First-tier judge were said to be  perverse.  Judge
      Boardman had found that family life  was  being  enjoyed.  There  were
      three occasions on which contact taken place and  he  had  found  from
      that that family life was  established.  The  Respondent  granted  the
      Appellant leave to remain following that decision. The key to the case
      was that A was now 9 years of age. KO had confirmed that the  sins  of
      the parents should not be visited on the child although one could  not
      ignore the status of the parents. A's mother had had  an  appeal,  not
      asylum based, which was dismissed. A's parents  were  in  dispute  and
      that had to be settled by the family court. Contact was  not  ongoing.
      A's mother had done all she could to prevent contact. Once  the  court
      order was no longer in force for example if all the parties were  back
      in Nigeria A's mother would again refuse contact. The Appellant  would
      have to look to the Nigerian courts.

  19. In reply the Presenting Officer argued there was no error  of  law  in
      the First-tier decision. To  prove  irrationality  or  perversity  the
      Appellant would have to cross a high threshold. It was  a  matter  for
      the Judge what weight she placed on the documents produced and she had
      looked at all matters in the round. It was unlikely that the Appellant
      would have been attending parent's evenings at A's school  because  he
      had said it was costly for him to go up to Sheffield.  Judge  Boardman
      had found family life on the basis  of  telephone  calls  between  the
      Appellant and A but since that decision was made in 2012 six years had
      passed and it was open to Judge Courtney to revisit  the  family  life
      issue. The case of KO Nigeria now applied. It was  not  accepted  that
      the Appellant had a genuine relationship with A but even if it was one
      had to look at a real-world analysis  as  prescribed  by  the  Supreme
      Court. The Appellant had no leave to remain neither  did  A's  mother.
      The natural expectation would  be  for  A  to  follow  her  mother  to
      Nigeria. The Judge had looked at each specific  factor  including  A's
      education and medical needs.


  20. Finally in reply the Appellant's solicitor argued that there had  been
      a misreading of the case of Devaseelan. Unless there was evidence that
      the facts were now different, the decision of Judge Boardman had to be
      the starting point. The passage of time would change some  things  but
      not all. In this case there was nothing to justify  a  departure  from
      Judge Boardman's finding. If  the  letter  from  the  school  was  not
      accepted that was tantamount to accusing  the  school  of  lying.  The
      letter  had  in  fact  been  submitted  in  support  of  the  mother's
      application and it was produced by the Respondent  at  the  First-tier
      hearing. There was no reason therefore why Judge Courtney had rejected
      that evidence.

  21. I queried whether one could read [32] of the determination  as  saying
      that the Judge had rejected the letter from the school because it  had
      been written to support the mother (the Appellant's interpretation  of
      that paragraph). Was it not the case that she had  she  said  she  had
      rejected the letter because it was inconsistent with the evidence  she
      had been given about  the  contact  taken  up  by  the  Appellant?  In
      response the Appellant's solicitor said A would be 10 next  month  and
      entitled thereafter to United Kingdom citizenship.  It  could  not  be
      reasonable for A to leave the United Kingdom.

Findings

  22. The Supreme Court have  given  guidance  on  the  application  of  the
      reasonableness  test  when  considering  the  position  of  qualifying
      children in the case of KO (Nigeria) & Ors [2018] UKSC 53. The Supreme
      Court emphasised the need for "a straightforward  set  of  rules"  and
      that the purpose of their approach in KO was "to narrow rather than to
      widen the residual area of discretionary judgment".


  23. There were three appeals before the Supreme Court, one of which NS  is
      particularly relevant to the  issues  raised  in  the  instant  appeal
      before me. It was not a deportation case and thus the public  interest
      did not require the adults' removal  because  they  had  a  subsisting
      parental relationship with the qualifying children (one  of  whom  was
      more than 10 years old). The Upper Tribunal had  recognised  that  the
      children would lose much if they and their parents  were  removed  and
      further the children had no  knowledge  of  life  outside  the  United
      Kingdom. Their best interests were to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Nevertheless, the Upper Tribunal  considered  it  outrageous  for  the
      parents to be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom.

  24. At [51] of KO Lord Justice Carnwath (giving the judgment of the  whole
      Court) did not consider that the Upper Tribunal's disapproval  of  the
      parents' conduct was relevant to its conclusion under section 117B (6)
      of the 2002 Act. The parents' conduct was only relevant to the  extent
      that it meant that they had to leave  the  country.  It  was  in  that
      context that it had to be considered whether it was reasonable for the
      children to leave with them. The children's best interests would  have
      been for the whole family to remain in the United  Kingdom  but  in  a
      context where the parents had to leave, the natural expectation  would
      be that the children would go with them. Importantly he added:  "there
      was nothing in the evidence reviewed by  the  Judge  to  suggest  that
      [removal] would be other than reasonable". As a result, the appeal  of
      the Appellant NS was dismissed.

  25. In the light of the decision in KO the  appropriate  test  is  whether
      there is a natural expectation that a qualifying child should go  with
      their parents. They in turn are expected to leave if (as in  the  case
      before me) neither have leave to be here. That is the relevance of the
      parents' poor immigration history.  The  issue  is  then  whether  the
      natural  expectation  that  A  would  go  with  her  mother  could  be
      displaced. Those factors which related to A and which the Judge  dealt
      with in some detail in over 40 paragraphs were relevant.

  26. Since the Appellant could not succeed under  Appendix  FM,  the  issue
      before the Judge was whether the Appellant could succeed  outside  the
      rules under Article 8. The principal focus  of  the  appeal  at  first
      instance was  on  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
      daughter. She was not living with him but was living with  her  mother
      who herself did not have any leave to remain in this country. Since  A
      was not living with the Appellant the issue was  not  only  whether  A
      would be required to leave the United Kingdom if  the  Appellant  were
      removed but what would the impact  be  on  A  if  the  Appellant  were
      removed and A stayed behind?

  27. As the Judge pointed out at [61] the Appellant and A had  been  living
      in different cities in the United Kingdom for several years and A  had
      become accustomed to a long-distance relationship with her father.  He
      could maintain contact with her in the future through modern means  of
      communication and occasional visits by A. Removal of the Appellant  to
      Nigeria would not materially affect the way in which his  relationship
      with A was currently conducted and did not constitute an  interference
      with or lack of effective respect for the family life which father and
      daughter would have.

  28. If the Appellant did not have a genuine and parental relationship with
      A the question of the reasonableness  of  expecting  A  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom would not arise since  section  117  B  (6)  would  not
      apply. Further, this was not an appeal by A's mother, if  it  was  and
      since she was the carer of A it  would  then  be  highly  relevant  to
      consider whether it was reasonable to expect A  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom. The refusal of the Appellant's application would  not  be  so
      detrimental to A's best interests that it would infringe Article 8.

  29. The alternative scenario was that A might be  expected  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom. The Appellant would not be able to take her with  him,
      but A's removal would be in the context of the removal of A's  mother.
      The contact order made in the Sheffield County Court  dated  19  April
      2013 is in the usual form state indicating that it may be  a  criminal
      offence under the Child Abduction Act 1984 to remove A from the United
      Kingdom without the leave of the court.  That  would  not  necessarily
      prevent the Respondent from removing A at the same time as A's  mother
      in accordance with immigration procedures.

  30. Judge Courtney had looked at the case through the prism  of  what  was
      then understood to be the law as prescribed in MA  Pakistan  that  one
      could take into account the poor immigration  record  of  the  parents
      when assessing the reasonableness of expecting a qualifying  child  to
      leave the United Kingdom. Following the Supreme Court decision  of  KO
      that is no longer the correct approach but instead one has to look  at
      what is the natural expectation. Since neither  parent  has  leave  to
      remain in this country the natural  expectation  would  be  that  they
      would be both required to leave the United Kingdom, A's mother  taking
      A with her.

  31. The Judge nevertheless proceeded to deal with the case on an  even  if
      basis. If it was necessary to consider whether it  was  reasonable  to
      expect A to leave United  Kingdom  the  answer  was  that  it  was  so
      reasonable. The Judge first directed herself on  what  were  A's  best
      interests before proceeding to carry out the balancing  exercise.  The
      first question she posed was whether the Appellant had a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship with A. The grounds of onward  appeal
      took issue with the Judge's conclusion  that  there  was  not  such  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship  (see  [37]).  Much  was  made  of
      correspondence provided during the course of the  hearing.  The  Judge
      was not impressed by the letter from the school  seeking  payment  for
      after  school  provision  because  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
      Appellant had actually paid what he owed in relation  to  that  after-
      school care.

  32. The Judge quoted the letter dated 19 April 2016 which  referred  to  A
      having regular contact with the Appellant during school  holidays.  At
      [32] the Judge noted the inconsistency between  this  letter  and  the
      Appellant's own evidence on whether the Appellant could attend  school
      events (not least because of the distance involved between  where  the
      Appellant lived and where A lived). The complaint in the  grounds  was
      that the letter was corroboration of the Appellant's  claim  to  enjoy
      staying contact with A during school holidays and that the  Judge  had
      materially erred in law by  not  placing  appropriate  weight  on  the
      letter.

  33. The problem for the Appellant was that the evidence as it came out  in
      from to the Judge was inconsistent and it was therefore a question for
      the Judge to decide what weight she  could  reasonably  place  on  the
      letter. It was her view that she could place no weight on  it  because
      of the serious inconsistency in the evidence. The grounds are  thus  a
      mere disagreement with the Judge's conclusion on that point. The other
      problem was that letter itself was somewhat vague. The  Appellant  had
      claimed that A had spent Christmas and New Year with him. When  saying
      that there was no supporting evidence for this claim  what  the  Judge
      was  pointing  to  was  that  something  beyond  the  Appellant's  own
      assertion to show where A was at the relevant time was  required.  The
      letter from the school adopted a broad-brush approach but that was not
      supportive of the specific claim of the Appellant. Since  it  was  the
      Appellant's claim that A had spent Christmas and New Year with him  it
      was reasonable to have expected the Appellant to  have  produced  some
      supporting evidence to show that such a visit took place but  no  such
      supporting evidence beyond the  Appellant's  own  assertion  and  some
      photographs were put forward.


  34. The Judge indicated at [29] that the photographs  were  "few  and  far
      between" being taken in December 2013, December 2015, and in 2016. The
      hearing took place in February 2018 almost 2 years later and the Judge
      was influenced by  the  out  of  date  nature  of  the  evidence.  The
      Appellant had claimed in his statement that he had spent Christmas and
      New Year 2017 with A but the Judge pointed out at [28]  there  was  no
      corroborating evidence of that. It was  a  matter  for  the  Judge  to
      decide what weight she placed on the evidence of contact. Where it was
      reasonable to expect supporting evidence to be available, but none was
      it was open to the Judge to take an adverse view  of  the  Appellant's
      credibility.

  35. The Appellant had shown himself to be an unreliable  witness,  he  had
      falsely claimed to be the custodian of some compensation monies  which
      A was entitled to. That money was paid into court and subject to court
      funds office rules, the Appellant was not  custodian  of  it,  he  was
      clearly exaggerating his evidence (and  by  extension  his  connection
      with A) by claiming that he was a custodian. In those circumstances it
      was a matter for the Judge to decide what weight could  be  placed  on
      inconsistent  evidence.  The  Judge  was  well  aware  that  A  was  a
      qualifying child, she  considered  A's  health  status,  language  and
      education needs and directed herself that it would  be  reasonable  to
      expect A to leave the United Kingdom albeit that would  presumably  be
      in the context of the removal of A's mother.

  36. I do  not  accept  the  argument  that  the  Judge  failed  to  follow
      Devaseelan principles correctly. Judge Boardman had pointed to  a  gap
      in the original refusal  letter,  that  there  had  been  insufficient
      consideration of A's best interests and that this was required  before
      a lawful decision could be made. On  that  basis  the  Respondent  was
      prepared to grant the Appellant limited leave  to  pursue  his  family
      life with A. The difficulty for the Appellant was that  the  situation
      did not improve from what it was  at  the  time  of  Judge  Boardman's
      decision, indeed it did not  even  remain  the  same  but  rather  the
      position deteriorated.

  37. The evidence of contact  showed  that  contact  was  sparse  and  that
      whatever may have been the relationship between A and the Appellant at
      the time of the hearing before Judge Boardman, matters had now come to
      such a pass that it could not be said that the Appellant had a genuine
      and subsisting relationship with A. The appeal in this case amounts to
      no more than a disagreement with the decision at  first  instance.  No
      material errors of law have been pointed out in the determination. The
      Judge was aware that she had to consider the  best  interests  of  the
      child in this case and she did so with some care.

  38. The position had changed since the decision of Judge Boardman and  the
      Judge was correct to look at what the up to date position was  at  the
      date of the hearing before her. She arrived at the conclusion that the
      Appellant did not have a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  A
      but such relationship as he did have could be continued upon return to
      Nigeria.

  39. The Appellant raises a concern that upon return to Nigeria A's  mother
      might continue to be difficult as he says she is at the  present  time
      about allowing contact. He fears he says that if she were obstructive,
      he would not be able to obtain legal redress in Nigeria as he  can  in
      this country. There are two difficulties with this argument. The first
      is that there is  an  element  of  speculation  on  the  part  of  the
      Appellant that upon return to Nigeria he would be unable  to  continue
      to see his daughter and Nigerian law would not help  him.  The  second
      difficulty is that the Appellant's case on contact  is  contradictory.
      On the one hand the Appellant  claimed  to  Judge  Courtney  that  A's
      mother was being very difficult about contact but on  the  other  hand
      his evidence was that A was staying with him  during  school  holidays
      and occasional weekends and he was participating in school activities.



  40. These alternatives could not both be true. The Judge evidently decided
      that the lack of contact was the true position and held that that  was
      because the Appellant could not demonstrate contact.  The  Appellant's
      concerns that he might not be able to see the child  in  Nigeria  were
      entirely speculative and the evidence of contact in this  country  was
      sparse. In those circumstances it was open to the Judge to find as she
      did both that it would be reasonable to expect A to return to  Nigeria
      with her mother and that in any event the  Appellant's  removal  would
      not be unduly harsh were A to remain in this country.

  41. If as was suggested to me in argument A is granted British citizenship
      in the near future that may or may not affect any further claim by A's
      mother, but it would not affect the position as  found  by  the  Judge
      because she did not find that the Appellant  had  a  genuine  parental
      relationship with A. Even if he had it was still reasonable to  expect
      A to leave the United Kingdom for the reasons the Judge gave. I do not
      find that there was a material error of law in  the  Judge's  decision
      and I dismiss the appeal against that decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 3 December 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 3 December 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
