
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/24557/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28th July 2017                        |On 11th August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                         ms STELLA OLA-AYO OGUNBAJO
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie, instructed by J Stifford Law Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Amin  who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's  refusal  dated  18h  October  2016  of  an  entry  clearance
    application to join her sponsor as an adult dependent relative.

 2. The appeal was pursued on human rights grounds although it  was  argued
    in the application for permission to appeal that  the  judge  in  error
    considered the Immigration Rules.  It was also submitted that the judge
    had erred in considering the review date of  the  application  and  had
    specifically erred in the assessment of human rights  and  whether  the
    Article 8 was  engaged.   It  was  submitted  that  the  reasoning  was
    confused and the  judge  had  not  sufficiently  defined  the  boundary
    between the engagement of Article 8 and  whether  infringement  of  the
    right was lawful and proportionate.

 3. At paragraph 27 the judge found that it  was  not  reasonable  for  the
    appellant to continue to enjoy  her  life  in  Nigeria,  and  yet  then
    concludes that it was not sufficient to amount to a breach  of  Article
    8.

 4. The judge concluded there were no exceptional factors for the appellant
    to rely on Article 8 but failed to explain why this was so  and  failed
    to make clear findings that the relationship between the appellant  and
    her son engaged Article 8 and failed to make clear findings of why  the
    refusal was proportionate.

 5. The judge failed to consider the age of the appellant and the care that
    the appellant required and  failed  to  give  adequate  weight  to  the
    documentary evidence.

 6. The appellant was a 71 year old woman who lived in Nigeria and lost her
    husband on 1st November 2015 as evidenced by the death certificate  and
    the refusal would have a demoralising and devastating effect on her.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    the basis that there was an  arguable  error  as  the  judge  found  at
    paragraph 27 that the appellant could not  reasonably  be  expected  to
    enjoy her life in Nigeria but went on to  find  this  would  not  be  a
    breach of Article 8.  Further the judge was unclear in the findings and
    failed to make any proper findings as to the appellant's  circumstances
    and why these were not exceptional.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr  Otchie  submitted  that  the  findings  at
    paragraph 27 were contradictory and insufficient  and  that  there  had
    been a failure to conclude the determination in a careful and effective
    way.  For example, there  seemed  to  be  a  lack  of  continuation  or
    finality to paragraph 30.  Mr Otchie made reference to the  appellant's
    medical condition, that she was unwell and her  eyesight  problems  had
    deteriorated.  The judge had made findings regarding the Rules and  had
    not made specific findings with regard to Article 8.

 9. Mr Nath submitted that there was no error.  The judge had looked at the
    determination and looked at the evidence in the round and that  it  had
    made sense.  The evidence had been considered correctly and had set out
    the information.  There was a balanced determination and all the points
    were indeed in the determination.

10. Mr Otchie submitted that there were a  lack  of  findings  although  he
    accepted that some of the medical evidence was illegible.

11. I find that the judge  properly  set  out  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    addressed the medical evidence in relation to the Immigration Rules and
    the appellant as a whole.  There is no material error in  this  section
    of the judgment and I preserve and set out these  findings.  The  judge
    recorded in the decision as follows:

    9.     I have already noted above that this is a Human Rights appeal.

    10.    In considering the Human Rights  application  I  first  consider
         whether the Appellant has met the Immigration Rules.

    11.    The relevant Rules are contained in Paragraph EC-DR.1.1. of  the
         Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.   This  provides  that  the
         requirements to be met for entry clearance as  an  adult  dependent
         relative are that:

         (a)      the applicant must be outside the UK;

         (b)      the applicant must have made a valid application for entry
             clearance as an adult dependent relative;

         (c)      the applicant must not fall for refusal under any  of  the
             grounds in Section S-EC: suitability for entry clearance; and

         (d)      the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section
             E-ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult  dependent
             relative.

         E-ECDR.2.5 provides:

         The application or... must be unable, even with the  practical  and
         financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care
         in the country where they are living, because

         (a)      it is not available and there is no person in that country
             who can reasonably provide it;

         or

         (b)      it is not affordable.

    12.    The Respondent has accepted in the  refusal  decision  that  the
         Appellant meets the financial and accommodation requirements of the
         rules.

    13.    The Appellant claims that she requires long term  personal  care
         to perform everyday tasks because of her old age, sight defect  and
         body morphology aches.  In support, she provided a letter  from  St
         Mary's Catholic Eye Hospital in Nigeria.  The letter  is  dated  29
         June 2016 and confirms that the Appellant presented herself to  the
         hospital 6 years ago with complaints of  blurring  vision  she  had
         suffered for four months prior.  A diagnosis of bilateral  immature
         cataract was made and she was booked for pre operation  assessment.
         She was prescribed medications and routine check-ups.  The  surgery
         was uneventful and she was prescribed spectacles.  All other follow
         up appointments were uneventful with vision markedly improved.

    14.    There was a further letter from dated 10 November 2016 (although
         the copy supplied was difficult to read).  It  confirmed  that  the
         Appellant has been a patient of the hospital  since  2011  and  had
         been admitted to the hospital with a history of aches and pains  in
         her body with blurred vision in both eyes. She  was  being  treated
         for her aches and pains.  She had an operation in the right eye for
         the removal of a cataracts and a  lens  had  been  inserted  on  16
         February 2010.   The Appellant had  yet  to  be  operated  for  the
         cataract removal on the left eye.   However, due to  the  state  of
         the eyes which had aggravated she needed a  consistent,  better  an
         affordable and standardised treatment for corrective surgery before
         it comes in correctable.

    15.    This second  letter  was  not  before  the  decision  maker  and
         postdates the decision.  However, as this is an Article 8 appeal  I
         have had regard to all the evidence as at the date of the decision.
          The letter does not state that  such  corrective  surgery  is  not
         available in Nigeria or that the Appellant cannot afford it or that
         it would not be up to the standard required even if available.

    16.    The Appellant claims in her grounds of appeal that her  passport
         shows she is old; the letter from the eye clinic would not  mention
         body aches as it was an eye specialist and she now  relied  on  the
         recent letter to show  that  she  suffers  from  body  aches.   The
         Appellant agrees that the  time  of  her  eye  surgery  her  vision
         improved but now this has changed and  she  cannot  afford  further
         surgery.  The Appellant claims that she has not been able  to  meet
         the follow up appointments or medications as she cannot afford this
         treatment.  She has not been able to  have  the  operation  on  her
         other eye as she cannot afford the cost of the  treatment  and  she
         continues to experience blurred vision.

    17.    The Appellant claims that she is unable, even with the financial
         support of her sponsor son, to obtain the required  level  of  care
         because  such  care  is  not  available  in   Nigeria   and/or   is
         unaffordable.

    18.    The Appellant stated that she has a family life with her son and
         it was disproportionate to refuse her application.

    19.     I  have  carefully  considered  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
         conclude that she has not shown on a balance of probabilities  that
         the level of care that she requires for her  medical  condition  is
         not available in Nigeria or  not  affordable  even  with  financial
         support.  On the contrary, as the ECO noted it is available and was
         accessed by the Appellant in Nigeria when she had surgery on one of
         her eyes to remove a cataract 6 years ago.  The surgery was clearly
         affordable as otherwise it would not have taken place.

    20.    There is no evidence that  the  standard  of  medical  care  the
         Appellant needs is not available in Nigeria. The Appellant has  not
         provided any evidence of financial support that she has received to
         show that despite that support the  level  of  care  is  still  not
         affordable or to the required level of  care.   The  recent  letter
         from the hospital merely repeats the words of the immigration rules
         but does not explain what level  of  care  is  needed  or  how  the
         standard of care is inferior to the  UK  and  why  this  cannot  be
         accessed in Nigeria.

    21.    I have no evidence in the  Appellant's  evidence  to  show  what
         financial contributions or efforts have been  made  to  access  the
         level of care the Appellant needs or evidence to show why it is not
         available other than general generic statements.

    22.    The Appellant's son has been visiting his mother in Nigeria  and
         he has not obtained further evidence on this issue.  The  Appellant
         has not denied that she is able to carry out daily  tasks  even  at
         her age and she  has  clearly  been  able  to  visit  the  hospital
         recently to obtain a letter in support of this appeal.

    23.     I  have  seen  the  photograph  of  a  gentleman  sent  by  the
         Appellant's son to show that his father has died. I do not see  how
         this assists the Appellant in her appeal.

12. The judge clearly  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  fulfil  the
    Immigration Rules as she had not shown that the personal care  was  not
    available and there was no person in that country who could  reasonably
    provide it or it was not affordable;  but  as  indicated  this  was  an
    appeal on the basis of the human rights grounds.  The Immigration Rules
    are relevant, however, in any Article 8 assessment  on  proportionality
    in that they set out the position of the Secretary of  State  (in  this
    instance by the Entry Clearance Officer),R (on the App of MM Lebanon) v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC  10.   I  take  these  findings  into  account  below.
    Britcits v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368  has  upheld  the  adult  dependent
    relative Immigration Rules, they are not incapable of being operated in
    a proportionate way and  are  incapable  of  fulfilment.   The  balance
    depends on the particular facts.

13. I accept that in relation to Article 8 the judge  may  have  made  some
    contradictory findings by indicating at paragraph 27 that the appellant
    cannot reasonably be expected to enjoy her life in Nigeria.  I  suspect
    that this was merely a typographical error but the final assessment, as
    pointed out by Mr Otchie tails off so that there is no final  sentence.
    It is also necessary to be quite clear as to findings.  It is not clear
    whether something was missed at the close of the analysis.   As such  I
    find an error of law in the Article 8 assessment.

14. I do not accept that there was any error by the judge in his assessment
    of the medical evidence in relation to the Immigration  Rules  and  the
    medical evidence in relation  to the appeal as it affects Article 8 and
    therefore I preserve the findings which I have set out above from 13 to
    23.

15. In the event that I found an error of law I elicited  further  evidence
    from the sponsor, the appellant's son.  He confirmed that he  last  saw
    his mother two weeks ago and prior to that he saw her in December  2015
    for the funeral of his father.  When I asked him when prior to 2015  he
    had seen his mother he did not respond.  He stated that there would  be
    an emotional effect on his mother and he had also been  to  Nigeria  in
    October 2015.  He gave evidence he had a constant  active  relationship
    with his mother and he supported her "from  time  to  time".   He  also
    stated that she received a Government pension  and  she  lived  in  the
    father's house.  He then gave evidence that he had  siblings,  brothers
    and sisters in Nigeria but they did not live close  to  her.   It  then
    transpired that one of his brothers worked for the state Government and
    the other two were in school and all three lived in Lagos.  Two sisters
    lived in Ogu State and both were working.

16. He gave evidence that the state of her health was impaired and would be
    worsened if she did not come to the UK to obtain the required  standard
    of medical treatment.

17. Initially the witness and sponsor stated that his family  and  siblings
    lived far away from his mother but he then confirmed that in  fact  his
    mother lived in Lagos as well.

18. In order to assess whether there are any compelling  circumstances  and
    to assess all the relevant evidence further to Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA
    Civ 74.  I apply the five stage steps in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 .



19. At the outset although I accept that this is a mother and son, both are
    adults and I am not persuaded that on the evidence, which is sparse  to
    say the least, it has been established that the son has  such  a  close
    relationship with his mother as to go beyond the normal emotional  ties
    between a mother and a son (adult relatives)  such  that  there  is  an
    Article 8 protected life. Britcits v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368 confirms,
    as per Kugathas v UK [2003] EWCA 31,  that blood ties and  concern  and
    affection do not by themselves presume family life and that a challenge
    under Article 8 can only bite where those rights are engaged.

20. The son stated that he supported his  mother  from  time  to  time  and
    indeed twice did not respond when I asked him when before 2015  he  had
    seen his mother.  He saw her twice in 2015 (from whence the application
    dates) and once more recently in 2017.  Both mother and son are  adults
    and have been living in different countries for some  nine  years,  the
    sponsor came to the UK in 2008 according to the VAF,  and  his  witness
    statement dated 21st July 2017 did not expand on his relationship  with
    his mother.  Nor did the documents written by the appellant  expand  on
    the relationship but concentrated on the need for medical care.  As the
    son who was a witness before me emphasised he has five  other  siblings
    in Nigeria, three of whom live in Lagos. They are the children  of  the
    appellant.  Initially the witness stated that these  siblings  did  not
    live near the mother at all but it then transpired that  that  was  not
    correct and that in fact three of them lived in Lagos.  I do not accept
    that the sponsor was being entirely candid or that it was credible that
    the mother of 70 would not be in contact with her children  in  Nigeria
    particularly if they lived in Lagos.   There  was  no  indication  that
    there was any rift between the family.

21. I therefore do not accept  that  there  is  a  protected  family  life.
    However even if I am wrong about that I accept that the  threshold  for
    the level of interference is low.  That said,  the  refusal  under  the
    Immigration Rules  appears  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    necessary for the protection of rights and freedoms of  others  through
    the maintenance of immigration control.

22. I turn to proportionality.

23. The appellant is in her early 70s and the medical evidence as  assessed
    above does not suggest that the appellant is unable to  access  medical
    care or that medical facilities are not available in Nigeria.  That the
    standard of medical facilities is lower in Nigeria is not a  reason  to
    suggest  that  the  appellant  would  not  be  given  adequate  medical
    assistance in Nigeria.  She is clearly housed in  the  family  home  in
    Lagos and as the appellant told me he gives her money only  from  'time
    to time' and she has a pension.  On the evidence  presented  there  are
    five other siblings in Nigeria, three of whom work and  three  of  whom
    live in Lagos.  I therefore conclude that there are family available to
    oversee and consider the circumstances of the  mother  and  assist  her
    where required.  There was nothing to show to the contrary.

24. I have taken account of the further  evidence  presented  to  me  which
    included medical  letters of 23rd May 2017 and 25th May 2017. For human
    rights purposes I have taken  into  account  the  evidence  before  me.
    Section 85A(4) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  has
    been repealed and the evidence  does  not  appear  to  be  excluded  by
    Section 85(6). The letter of 23rd  May  from  St  Mary's  Catholic  Eye
    Hospital states that "this current status of the eye is  the  level  of
    care and treatment required is not available at  our  disposal  (sic)".
    There was no indication  that  this  was  not  available  elsewhere  in
    Nigeria.

25. The letter of 25th May  2017  entitled  the  'Lagos  State  Government'
    concluded

         "However due to the state of the eye which had  aggravated  to  the
         end stage cataract she needs a consistent, better,  affordable  and
         standardised treatment for corrective surgery before it becomes in-
         correctable and  level  of  care  and  treatment  required  is  not
         available here in Nigeria".

26. Not only was this letter almost illegible but it did not clearly  state
    the specialty of the medical practitioner.  Clearly  it  was  from  the
    Lagos  University  Teaching  Hospital  but,  without  more  independent
    evidence, I do not accept that I can place credence on  the  conclusion
    that the level of treatment was not available in Nigeria.

27. The United Kingdom has no responsibility for the treatment  of  foreign
    nationals and  I  specifically  have  regard  to  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  There  is  no  indication
    that the appellant would be financially  independent  in  view  of  the
    suggested requirements of her medical  treatment  or  that  indeed  she
    could speak English.

28. The  appellant  has  clearly  accessed  medical  treatment  in  Nigeria
    hitherto, has a level of accommodation, has her remaining family and an
    income in Nigeria.  The sponsor stated that he had supported  her  from
    time to time and she received a pension.  I conclude that the appellant
    wishes access to the United Kingdom for medical  treatment  and  it  is
    open to her to make an application for a medical visa should  she  wish
    to do so.  There was overall a paucity of evidence on which to base and
    further clear findings but in the event I refuse the appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

29. Further to Huang v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2007]
    UKHL 11, taking full account of all considerations, I did not  consider
    that any family or private life of the claimant  was  prejudiced  in  a
    manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental
    right protected by Article 8. I find the respondent has shown that  the
    immigration policy is a necessary and  proportionate  response  to  any
    interference  in  this  case.  I  consider  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's refusal is proportionate.

30. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007), indicating the preserved findings, and
    remake the decision under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the  TCE  2007  and
    dismiss the appeal of the appellant.

No anonymity direction is made.

Order

Appeal dismissed.



Signed      Helen Rimington                  Signed 10th August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

