
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24575/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2019                 |On 19 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal, representative from Global Migration
Solutions
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant, a child of Eritrean  nationality,
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon ("the  judge"),
    promulgated on 28 May 2019, by which he dismissed  her  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision of 12 November 2018, which  in  turn  refused
    her application for entry clearance to join her mother ("the  sponsor")
    in the United Kingdom.

 2. The essence of the application was as follows.  The  sponsor  had  left
    Eritrea in 2008 and the Appellant was  residing  with  her  grandmother
    thereafter.  The Appellant then  went  to  Germany  to  live  with  her
    father.  Over the course of time the father, who had separated from the
    Appellant's mother years previously, decided to remarry.  For a  number
    of reasons, the father was not prepared to continue  to  care  for  the
    Appellant in light of his developing personal  circumstances.   It  was
    said that, as a consequence, the Appellant was to be sent  to  "Africa"
    to reside with her paternal uncle.

 3. Before the judge it was quite  properly  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    could not show sole responsibility  in  her  case,  with  reference  to
    paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration  Rules  and  TD  (Paragraph  297
    (i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.   However,  it
    was contended that there were "serious family or other  considerations"
    making the Appellant's exclusion from the United  Kingdom  undesirable,
    with reference to paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules.  It was  said  that
    the Appellant's best interests would clearly not be served by what  was
    in effect an enforced  return  to  Eritrea  from  Germany  and  ongoing
    separation from her mother.

 4. It is now accepted by the Respondent (through  Mr  Bramble's  fair  and
    realistic position at the hearing before me) that the judge  failed  to
    deal  with  the  basis  upon  which  the  "serious  family  and   other
    considerations" issue was put to him, namely a return  to  Africa.   Mr
    Bramble's position was entirely appropriate.   It  is  clear  that  the
    judge simply failed to address this issue at all and did not carry  out
    any best interests assessment in respect of the Appellant.  Mr  Bramble
    did not suggest that the reference to "Africa" related to  any  country
    other than Eritrea, but noted that there has been no  judicial  finding
    in this particular point.

 5. The judge's decision must be set aside.

 6. In terms of disposal, the default position should of course be  that  I
    would remake the decision in this appeal based on the  evidence  before
    me  and/or  in  light  of  any  further  evidence  provided  under   an
    application under Rule  15(2)(a)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  Procedure
    Rules.

 7. There has been no application for additional evidence in  this  matter,
    an omission which in  my  view  is  regrettable  given  the  particular
    circumstances of this case.  In my view  Mr  Bramble  makes  the  valid
    point that the judge's decision does not contain a  sufficient  factual
    matrix for me to go on and remake the decision at this stage.

 8. In light of this  and  the  various  other  issues  which  need  to  be
    reconsidered, I take the view, exceptionally, that this  case  must  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The issues for consideration on remittal shall be as follows:-

      1) precise identification of the country to which it  is  proposed  by
         the Appellant's father to send  her  and  live  with  her  paternal
         uncle;

      2) whether there are "serious family or other  considerations"  within
         the context of paragraph 297(i)(f)  of  the  Rules,  with  specific
         reference to the Appellant being sent to  the  country  identified,
         and whether this would be contrary to her best interests;

      3)  if   the   country   is   indeed   Eritrea,   issues   surrounding
         military/national service must be considered as part and parcel  of
         the best interests assessment. So  too  must  questions  of  living
         arrangements and overall safeguarding.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
it is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) This appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Birmingham
         hearing Centre) to be reconsidered, subject to what is said in this
         error of law decision;

      2) The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Nixon;

      3) In light of the particular circumstances of this case, the remitted
         hearing shall be listed as a matter of urgency.



Directions to the parties

 1) The Appellant's representatives shall file  and  serve  a  consolidated
    bundle of all evidence relied upon no later than 14 days from the  date
    that this error of law decision is sent out to the parties;

 2) Any further evidence relied upon by the Respondent shall be  filed  and
    served no later than 7 days before the remitted hearing.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 18 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
