
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24606/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th August 2019                            |On 11th September 2019        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         mrs Josephine Andrea Burke
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Miss H. Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gribble, promulgated on 26th February 2019, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham on 12th February 2019.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She was born on 21st July 1972.
     She is a female.  She appeals against the decision of the  Respondent,
    refusing her application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of
    her marriage to a British citizen, a Mr Gregory,  such  a  decision  to
    refuse being dated 29th November 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she left Jamaica  to  come
    to the UK when she was aged 26.  She arrived as a visitor.  Thereafter,
    she overstayed.  She married Mr Gregory.  However, she has since become
    separated from him, though not divorced.  She has a  job.   She  has  a
    strong set of community links with her friends and  family.   When  she
    left Jamaica, life was hard.  It  is  true  that  she  had  come  as  a
    visitor, but she did so in the hope that she could study, and  she  had
    relied upon her uncle to  fund  her  studies,  before  her  status  was
    regularised through her marriage.  She had  now  been  in  the  UK  for
    nineteen years.  She had worked  and  she  had  contributed.   She  had
    committed no crimes.  She had a wide network of family and friends.  If
    she was removed back  to  Jamaica  the  decision  to  do  so  would  be
    disproportionate and breach of human rights to privacy and family life.
     Significantly, the Appellant  also  relied  upon  the  fact  that  her
    estranged husband suffers  from  a  diagnosis  of  cancer.   There  was
    evidence to this effect dated 2014.   However,  she  was  not  directly
    involved in his care.  Nevertheless, her departure would be detrimental
    to his wellbeing.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge set out the Appellant's claim carefully and  in  detail.   It
    was noted that the Appellant had left behind in Jamaica a  partner  and
    children  aged  5  years  and  2  years,  the  latter  being  with  the
    Appellant's mother in Jamaica.  She stayed beyond her visit because she
    thought her uncle would pay for her study  in  the  UK  but  this  fell
    through.  (Paragraph 16).  Her daughter was now aged 25 and her son was
    aged 22 in Jamaica.  The daughter had qualified to become a  nurse  but
    could not find work in Jamaica and lived with her  partner.   Her  son,
    was a student and lived in university accommodation in Jamaica.   Since
    then, the Appellant's mother, with whom the children  had  stayed,  had
    died in 2016.  The Appellant herself had returned to  Jamaica  for  the
    funeral.  The Appellant's mother did not leave  her  house  in  Jamaica
    because she was living with her partner in his house.

 5. The judge considered the position at first under the Immigration  Rules
    (see paragraph 30), and concluded that the Appellant could not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules because she had not  been  in  the  UK  for
    twenty years as required.  Second, consideration was given  to  whether
    she could succeed outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  noted
    however the Appellant had made visits to  Jamaica  in  the  last  three
    years.  This being so,

         "She could not say she has no familiarity with her current  culture
         and how systems operate there.  I accept she would not find it easy
         to find work but she does have a positive work history  in  the  UK
         and has an impressive CV (page 1 to 4) which  includes  periods  of
         work in Jamaica as a nanny when she was in her early 20s.  It might
         be possible to get this sort of work again but in any event she has
         a useful UK qualification which would  stand  her  in  good  stead"
         (paragraph 38).

 6. In terms of how the Appellant would find accommodation in Jamaica,  the
    judge concluded that

         "She would also be able to stay with her daughter  or  one  of  her
         sisters in the short-term.  She may be able to access  support  via
         AVR and she is likely, given  she  has  such  good  and  supportive
         family and friends in the UK, to be able to access  some  financial
         support from her wide network here to assist her  financially  ..."
         (paragraph 39).

 7. The judge went on to consider exceptional circumstances (paragraphs  41
    to 42) and found that there were none  in  the  Appellant's  case.   In
    undertaking a "balancing exercise", the judge concluded that the public
    interest lay in the Appellant's removal and that she could not  succeed
    outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the Appellant has been in the  UK
    for nineteen years, has worked  hard,  has  contributed,  and  has  not
    received any public funds, and that she would not be able to find a job
    with higher employment in Jamaica, and that she supports her son in his
    studies financially at his university in Jamaica.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on 8th April 2019 on the basis that it
    was arguable that when assessing the  Appellant's  private  and  family
    life ties, including her  ties  to  her  husband,  with  whom  she  was
    separated, the judge had failed to consider the husband's diagnosis  of
    cancer.

Submissions

11. At the hearing  before  me  on  7th  August  2019,  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented.  I asked her if she had read the decision of the  judge
    below.  She confirmed that she had.  I asked her if she understood  why
    permission to appeal had been granted on the basis of  the  grounds  of
    application that she had herself drafted, and she  said  that  she  did
    understand this.  I asked her if she had anything to say in support  of
    her appeal today against her decision of the judge below.  The  witness
    said that she had nowhere to stay in Jamaica.  She said that she  would
    find it difficult to get work.  She said that she pays the fees of  her
    son who is at university from work that she undertakes in this country.
     She had been here almost twenty years and would find it  difficult  to
    return back to Jamaica.

12. For her part, Miss Aboni submitted that this was nothing more  than  an
    attempt to reargue the appeal.  The Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.  She could  not  satisfy  Appendix  FM  because  her
    marriage was no longer subsisting.  The judge had recognised that there
    would be obstacles but these were not "very significant  obstacles"  to
    her returning to Jamaica.   The  judge  had  also  had  regard  to  the
    "exceptional circumstances"  and  had  found  there  to  be  none.   At
    paragraph 46 the judge had set out the  Appellant's  private  life  and
    concluded that she could not succeed on that basis.  At  paragraph  50,
    the judge had summarised the Appellant's claimed human rights and noted
    that she had argued that she had been here almost twenty years, but the
    judge concluded that this did not comply either  with  the  Immigration
    Rules or with her right to remain here outside the Immigration Rules.

13. This was a case where the grant of permission today was  tied  up  with
    the cancer diagnosis of the Appellant's husband.  However, the marriage
    had broken down.  They were separated.  They were not living  together.
    The husband had not attended to give evidence at  the  hearing.   There
    were two  other  witnesses  but  the  husband  himself  had  not  given
    evidence.  What the other two witnesses had  said  was  properly  taken
    into account by the judge.  There was no error of law.

14. In reply, the Appellant said that  although  her  marriage  had  broken
    down, "but we  could  get  back  together  again",  and  that  she  was
    currently  only  three  months  away  from  completing  twenty   years'
    residence in this country.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a case where  the  judge
    below has given a clear,  comprehensive,  and  well-reasoned  decision.
    The judge has  actually  been  quite  sympathetic  to  the  Appellant's
    plight, noting that,

         "I have sympathy for Miss Burke in the situation she finds herself.
          She has almost reached the point where her length of residence  is
         determinative and any considerations  around  the  public  interest
         would not be relevant.  However, she has not reached that point yet
         and almost meeting the requirements of the Rules is not sufficient"
         (paragraph 52).

16. That said, the judge had taken into account the question as to  whether
    there were "particularly strong features of Miss Burke's private  life"
    and had concluded that "her private life  is  no  more  than  would  be
    expected of anyone who has been in the country for nineteen years.  She
    has friends, she sees her family, she goes  to  work"  (paragraph  50).
    She could on this basis not succeed under the Immigration Rules.  Going
    further afield from that, the judge observed that "Miss Burke's conduct
    in overstaying, whatever the reason, has been poor", and  although  she
    had worked and paid taxes, she had done so without permission  and  had
    remained here unlawfully (paragraph 51).




17. Ultimately, the judge had weighed the public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control, concluded that her private life falls to be  given
    little weight and that her conduct has been poor, before deciding  that
    the appeal could not succeed.  Those conclusions were entirely open  to
    the judge.  There is no error of law insofar as it  is  being  asserted
    that her husband has a diagnosis of cancer, because the husband did not
    give evidence at the hearing,  and  she  is  separated  from  him,  and
    provides him with no direct support or care.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not amount to an  error  of
    law.  The decision shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction is made.

20. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019



