
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24175/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 MUFUTAU [S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:              Mr. E. Pipi, instructed by Devine
Solicitors
For the Respondent:                 Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. He entered the United  Kingdom,
    as a family visitor, on 3 February 2011 and  remained  here  after  his
    visa expired on 22 May 2011.   He  married  a  British  citizen  on  14
    November 2013 and applied for leave to remain, as her  husband,  on  20
    October 2014. This application was refused on 10 December 2014. He made
    a further human rights claim on 29 March 2016.   This  application  was
    also refused on 6 October 2016.

2.   He appealed against this decision, but First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Obhi
    dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 9 January  2019.  The
    Appellant appealed and on  29  April  2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Zucker granted him permission to appeal.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING
3.   At the start of the hearing,  counsel  for  the  Appellant,  handed  up
    decision by the Conduct and Competence Committee of the Health and Care
    Professions Tribunal Service. It confirmed that on 5 November 2017, Dr.
    Ewa Oboho, a Registered and Chartered Forensic  Psychologist,  had  had
    been struck off from the Register of  Health  and  Care  Professionals.
    Therefore, he withdrew grounds 1(i) to (iii) of the grounds of  appeal,
    on the basis that they referred to reports prepared by Dr. Oboho  after
    he had been struck off.  We agreed to him  withdrawing  these  grounds.
    Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  then
    made oral submissions and we have referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in our decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker granted the Appellant permission to
    appeal on the basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi had failed to
    have regard to a medical report by Dr. Oboho, dated 15 December 2018,
    which was sent to the Tribunal after the hearing but before the
    decision was promulgated. First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker stated that
    there was rather less merit in the other grounds but nevertheless
    granted permission to appeal in relation to them. Two of these grounds
    related to the fact that First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi had not
    referred to another report by Dr. Oboho, dated 22 January 2018, in his
    decision.

5.   Counsel for the Appellant no longer relies on the content of the
    reports dated 22 January 2018 and 15 December 2018, which were written
    after Dr. Oboho had been struck off the Register of Health and Care
    Professionals.


6.   Counsel continued to rely on the fact that in paragraph 28 of her
    decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi found that there was no
    evidence of assessment using any known psychological tools or
    psychometric testing. She did accept that Dr. Oboho had referred to a
    number of psychological tests but noted that he had not set out the
    test or what was done. Counsel submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Obhi had failed to take into account the fact that in paragraph 4.2 of
    the report by Dr. Oboho, dated 4 July 2016, he had noted his
    observations of the Appellant's wife. He then went on to state that he
    used Million Clinical Multiaxial Inventor-III to screen for the
    presence of recognised mental and personality disorders and life-long
    personality traits.

7.   He added that the Appellant's wife's profile was based on all 24
    clinical scales interpreted to illustrate the interplay between
    longstanding characterological patterns and the distinctive clinical
    symptoms currently being manifested. However, the report did not
    include any scores obtained during this screening process or explain
    the significance of any such scores and how these were used to arrive
    at any assessment. Therefore, the criticism by the Judge of the
    methodology employed by Dr. Oboho was a cogent one in the light of the
    evidence before her.

8.   It is also clear that First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi questioned Dr.
    Oboho's level of expertise and whether he had the necessary
    qualifications to comment on the Appellant's wife's medical conditions.
    The Appellant has not addressed this issue or the fact that First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi queried the evidential value of the 2016 report,
    which contained no diagnosis of the Appellant's wife medical condition.
    Taken at its highest, Dr. Oboho stated in paragraph 8 of the 2016
    report:

         "On the basis of the test data obtained, it might be assumed that
         she is experiencing a severe mental disorder and further
         professional observation and inpatient care might be appropriate".

9.   Ground 2 of the  grounds  of  appeal  also  submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi erred in paragraph 30  of  her  decision  when  she
    concluded that due to the lack of medical evidence the Appellant's wife
    was not sick in the  way  described.  The  medical  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's clinicians was limited to  an  Upper  GI  Urgent  Suspected
    Cancer Referral form attached to a letter from  St.  Thomas'  Hospital,
    dated 21 March 2016, which stated that she had chronic bleeding.

10.  It was clear that the Appellant had been  provided  with  a  number  of
    opportunities to provide further evidence but had failed to do so.  For
    example, a previous hearing set down for 1 February 2018 was  adjourned
    in order for the Appellant to obtain medical evidence about his  wife's
    medical condition. In particular, it had been  said  that  the  medical
    report would be from the NHS consultant treating his wife.  The hearing
    was set down for 7 June 2018 but was again adjourned on the basis  that
    his wife had collapsed  and  been  taken  the  hospital1.  However,  no
    medical evidence was subsequently provided to show that  this  was  the
    case. In addition, a bare assertion was made on 17 December  2018  that
    the Appellant's wife was too ill to attend the proceedings.

11.  As a consequence, and in the absence of any further  medical  evidence,
    the finding by First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi was one which was open to
    her.

12.  Ground 3 of the grounds of appeal submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Obhi erred in paragraphs  33  and  34  of  her  decision  as  her
    findings were predicated on her conclusion that there was nothing wrong
    with the Appellant's wife. For the reasons  given  above,  this  was  a
    finding which was open to her on the very limited evidence before  her.
    It was also submitted that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  erred  in
    paragraph 34 of her decision when she found that "even if  she  is  ill
    [her husband] would be able to afford treatment  for  her  through  his
    business". Counsel for the Appellant submitted that, as the Appellant's
    wife had not yet been diagnosed, the Judge  should  not  have  presumed
    that the Appellant's  savings  would  be  sufficient  to  pay  for  any
    treatment in Nigeria. However, this was a bare assertion in the absence
    of any diagnosis or indication of any treatment which may be needed and
    the cost of any such treatment. In any event, case law indicates that a
    married couple cannot necessarily choose the country in which they wish
    to continue their family life even if the quality of  medical  services
    differed to those to be found in the United Kingdom.

13.  In Ground 4 of the grounds of appeal it was submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi had erred in law in not giving any  weight  to  the
    fact that the Appellant speaks English and is financially  independent.
    However, although any inability to speak English or to  show  financial
    independence are factors which would weigh against  the  Appellant  for
    the purposes of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002, the fact  that  he  can  speak  English  and  is  financially
    independent are not determinative of any right to leave to remain.

14.  In the current case the Appellant had at best had precarious  leave  to
    remain for under four months in 2011 and had  been  unlawfully  present
    since then. Therefore, he would have needed some  very  strong  factors
    over and above the fact that he was  married  to  a  British  woman  to
    outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration  control  in  compliance  with  section  117C(1)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the fact that  section
    117B(4) states that little weight should be  given  to  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner that is established by a person  at  a
    time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

15.  For all of these reasons, we find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Obhi
    did not make errors of law in her decision.

 Decision

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date: 4 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


