
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24126/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 January 2018                         |On 23 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                               miss barta rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 27 September 1986, who
    applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK as the adult dependent
    child of a former Gurkha soldier who is present and settled (along with
    the appellant's mother) in the UK.  The application was refused on 22
    September 2016.  A subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was
    heard by Judge Nicholls who, in a decision promulgated on 13 September
    2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is now appealing against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The core issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether there is
    family life between the appellant and her parents in the UK that
    engages Article 8 ECHR.

 3. At paragraph 18 the judge concluded that:

              "[T]he appellant has not shown to the  required  standard  of
             probability that she continues to be  dependent  only  on  her
             parents who give her all  the  real  effective  and  committed
             support she receives. I find, therefore, that it has not  been
             shown that the appellant continues to have a family life  with
             her parents." (emphasis added)


   4. Before reaching this conclusion the judge made the following
      observations about the evidence of the appellant's father:




   a) At paragraph 14 the judge stated:

             "Mr Rai gave answers  to  questions  extremely  slowly,  often
             speaking very indistinctly and  frequently  giving  an  answer
             that was not to the question he had been asked".


   b) At paragraph 17 the judge stated:

             "I have looked very carefully at the testimony given by Mr Rai
             which was frankly, not very impressive.  One characteristic of
             former Gurkha soldiers whose evidence I have heard  through  a
             number of appeals is that they are precise and  accurate  when
             it comes to details, especially where that concerns money.  Mr
             Rai was not precise and accurate unless there was  a  document
             to confirm what he said.  I do not, for one moment, think that
             he was not telling the truth as he sees it but elements  began
             to emerge  during  his  evidence  which  conflicted  with  the
             initial basis.  One such was  the  mention  of  aunts  of  the
             Appellant by whom she was  brought  up  and  who  continue  to
             financially support her.  Counsel for the Appellant asked  for
             the opportunity, during the course  of  cross-examination,  to
             elicit evidence in chief  about  that  statement.   There  was
             nothing mentioned about  it  in  the  documents  submitted  by
             either party for the hearing of the appeal and, of course, the
             tribunal's procedure rules envisage that all the  evidence  to
             be given in support of an appeal will be set down  in  witness
             statements served before the commencement of the  hearing.   I
             was also mindful that by that time the hearing had been  going
             on for  quite  a  long  time  with  a  witness  who  might  be
             vulnerable and uncertain particularly when being questioned in
             a formal court  setting.   I  declined,  therefore,  to  allow
             counsel a further period of examination in chief."


The Grounds of Appeal

 5. The grounds contain three arguments.

 6. Firstly, it is argued that the judge applied too stringent a test as to
    the existence of family life.  At paragraph 18 of the decision the
    judge found against the appellant because she was not solely dependent
    on her parents.  The grounds submit that there is no requirement that
    the sponsor must be the only provider of support and it is sufficient
    that he provides support to the appellant that is real and committed.

 7. Secondly, it is argued that the judge erred by finding as damaging to
    the sponsor's credibility that his evidence was not as precise and
    accurate as other Gurkhas who had given evidence before the judge.

 8. Thirdly, it is submitted that it was unfair of the judge to prevent the
    sponsor being re-examined on a material matter.

Error of Law Hearing

 9. Before me, Mr Walker accepted there had been procedural unfairness.
    Both parties expressed the view that the matter should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Assessment

10. In my view, the decision contains three material errors of law.

11. The first error is the approach taken to the assessment of whether
    family life exists between the appellant and her parents.  It is clear
    from the Court of Appeal judgment in Rai v ECO New Delhi [2017] EWCA
    Civ 320 that the question to be asked is whether the sponsor provides
    the appellant with real, effective or committed support, not whether
    the sponsor is the appellant's only source of support; and that family
    life can exist even where a sponsor is not the only source of support.
    Accordingly, it was an error of law for the judge to dismiss the appeal
    because the appellant had failed to show that the sponsor was her only
    source of support.

12. The second error of law arises from the judge's approach to the
    evidence given by the sponsor.  The judge observed at paragraph 14 that
    the sponsor was having difficulty answering questions and there might
    be indications of mental decay.  However at paragraph 17 the judge
    appears to have held against the appellant that his evidence was not
    precise and accurate.  Given the judge's observations about the
    appellant's difficulty in answering questions and potential mental
    health problems there was clearly a good reason why his answers were
    not as precise and accurate as the judge appears to have expected.

13. The third error of law arises from the judge's decision to refuse to
    allow the appellant's Counsel to re-examine the sponsor on an issue
    that was material to the negative credibility finding.  The appellant
    should have been given a full opportunity to present her case.  An
    issue that arose in the course of proceedings concerned the extent to
    which she was supported by family members other than her parents. I
    cannot discern from the decision any reasonable basis for the sponsor
    to not have been given the opportunity to give evidence on this issue
    when Counsel for the appellant requested that he be given the
    opportunity to do so.  In these circumstances there has been a
    procedural unfairness which undermined the decision.

14. Both parties expressed the view that the appeal should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal as a full re-hearing on all factual issues will
    be necessary in order to re-make the decision.  I agree.

Decision

  15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
      law and is set aside.


  16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh
      before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Nicholls.

|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  19 February 2018     |







