
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/24432/2018
                                                               HU/24433/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Remote)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 11 May 2021                      |On 28 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     CML
                                     MW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, counsel instructed by House of
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is the remaking of an appeal against the  decisions  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 20 November 2018 to refuse the appellants entry
    to the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction is made owing  to  the  appellants'  both  being
    particularly vulnerable.

Background

 3. The appellants, who are father and son, applied for entry clearance  to
    the United Kingdom on 9 September 2018 in  order  to  settle  with  the
    sponsor, MA, who is the son of the first appellant and brother  of  the
    second. They made their applications  under  paragraph  E-EC-DR.1.1  of
    Appendix FM. The first appellant, who was aged 82 at the  time  of  the
    application, referred to his medical conditions which were hypertensive
    heart disease, peripheral neuropathy  and  osteoarthritis.  The  second
    appellant, who was aged 37 at the time of the application,  raised  his
    conditions of cerebral palsy and epilepsy

 4. In refusing the first appellant's application, the respondent  did  not
    accept that he required long term personal  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks owing to an absence of evidence both of his medical conditions or
    his inability to undertake various aspects of self-care.  The  ECO  did
    not  accept  that  there  were   any   exceptional   circumstances   or
    compassionate factors that warranted  a  grant  of  entry  outside  the
    Rules.

 5. In relation to  the  second  appellant's  application,  the  respondent
    acknowledged that medical records had been provided which  stated  that
    the appellant had mental and physical disabilities and that he required
    full-time care and assistance with  activities  of  daily  living.  The
    application was refused because the second appellant  had  a  full-time
    paid carer, (Z) and the appellant's siblings  had  declared  that  they
    were able to help  him  financially.  Consequently,  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that he was unable to obtain the required level  of  care  in
    his country of origin.  Again,  it  was  decided  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances or compassionate factors.

 6. An entry clearance manager (ECM) reviewed the decisions on 15  February
    2019. It was noted that  no  further  evidence  had  been  provided  in
    relation to either appellant. Consequently, the original decisions were
    maintained.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appeals were heard on 17  September  2019  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge French and dismissed.

 8. That decision was set aside in its entirety  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic in a decision promulgated on 9 July 2020.  Directions  were  made
    for the resumed hearing of the appeal to be held remotely,  subject  to
    representations from the parties.

Procedural matters

 9. On 14 October 2020, directions were issued from Upper Tribunal Judge  C
    N Lane which stated that the resumed hearing would be held remotely  on
    the first available date.

10. The above-mentioned directions stated that any  application  to  adduce
    new evidence was to be made to  the  judge  presiding  at  the  resumed
    hearing, that if fresh skeleton arguments were to be  relied  on  these
    should be filed and served no later than 5 days prior  to  the  resumed
    hearing and that no later  than  7  days  prior  to  the  hearing,  the
    appellant should serve  an  agreed  consolidated  paginated  bundle  of
    documents.

11. A transfer order was made on 13 April 2021 to enable any Judge  of  the
    Upper Tribunal to complete the hearing. This matter was  listed  for  a
    hearing on 11 May 2021.

The hearing

12. I heard oral evidence from three of the appellants' relatives. Each was
    a son of the first appellant and elder brother of the second appellant.
    Witness  MS  gave  evidence  remotely  from  Pakistan  in  English  and
    witnesses MA and AR  gave  their  evidence  remotely  from  the  United
    Kingdom, via an Urdu interpreter. Mr Tufan  had  no  objection  to  the
    evidence of MS being given from Pakistan. Thereafter I  heard  succinct
    submissions from both representatives.  A  note  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions made is set out in my note of the hearing  which  has  been
    taken into consideration along with the documentary evidence before me.



13. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

14. While this is a human rights' appeal it was common ground that  if  the
    appellants were able to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    for entry as Adult Dependent  Relatives  they  would  succeed  on  this
    basis. The sole matter  at  issue  was  whether  the  appellants  could
    satisfy the following requirement of the Rules:

         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where
         they are living, because-

         (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who
         can reasonably provide it; or

15. Guidance on the correct approach to the Adult Dependent Relative  Rules
    was also given by Sales LJ in Britcits [2017] EWCA Civ 368 at [59]:

         Second, as is apparent from the Rules and the Guidance,  the  focus
         is on whether the  care  required  by  the  ADR  applicant  can  be
         "reasonably" provided and to "the required  level"  in  their  home
         country. As Mr Sheldon  confirmed  in  his  oral  submissions,  the
         provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both  from
         the  perspective  of  the  provider  and  the  perspective  of  the
         applicant, and the standard of such care must be what  is  required
         for that particular applicant. It  is  possible  that  insufficient
         attention has been paid in the past to these considerations,  which
         focus on what  care  is  both  necessary  and  reasonable  for  the
         applicant to receive in their home  country.  Those  considerations
         include issues as to the accessibility and geographical location of
         the provision of care and the standard of care. They are capable of
         embracing emotional  and  psychological  requirements  verified  by
         expert medical evidence. What is reasonable is, of  course,  to  be
         objectively assessed.


16. It suffices to state that Mr Tufan argued that E-ECDR.2.5 (a)  was  not
    met and Mr Youssefian argued that  it  was.  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  his
    colleague's skeleton argument, arguing that there was care available in
    Pakistan and the objection of the sponsors was to the standard of  care
    available.  There  was  no  reasoned  criticism  by  Mr  Tufan  of  the
    reliability of the medical evidence adduced nor the credibility of  the
    accounts given by the witnesses.

17. I found the witnesses to be truthful. Indeed, I hear no  submission  to
    the contrary. MS, in particular, provided an account rich in detail and
    consistency as to the arrangements made for the  appellants'  care  and
    the difficulties in caring for the second appellant in particular.

18. The present position  of  the  appellants  is  as  follows.  The  first
    appellant continues to suffer  from  the  same  medical  conditions  as
    previously, is now aged 85 and is unable to undertake day to day  tasks
    which include bathing, dressing, and feeding  himself.  He  is  also  a
    wheelchair user and unable to provide care for  the  second  appellant.
    Evidence is available for  these  propositions  in  the  report  of  Dr
    Shafique dated 5 May 2019.

19. The second appellant remains profoundly disabled, uses a wheelchair and
    it is accepted by the  respondent  that  he  requires  full-time  care.
    Indeed, the detailed medical report of Dr Bajwa sets out the extent  of
    the second appellant's physical and mental disabilities and care needs.
    Also mentioned is the  negative  effect  upon  the  second  appellant's
    mental state caused by the death of his mother in 2016. The said report
    explains that the second appellant has limited  communication  and  was
    only able to converse with his immediate family and  former  carer,  Z,
    who had been  with  the  family  for  15  years  at  the  time  of  the
    application. The evidence before me was that Z left the employ  of  the
    family in early 2020 owing to the role being too demanding. The witness
    MS explained that owing to his mental disability, the second  appellant
    asks the same  questions  repetitively  and  becomes  agitated  if  not
    responded to. He also said that  prior  to  the  death  of  the  second
    appellant's mother she would spend time with the second  appellant  and
    had the patience to respond to his repeated queries and calm him  down.
    Dr Bajwa also confirms in his report that the second appellant  becomes
    frustrated and angry when his siblings have to return  to  the  UK  and
    that he requires  medication  to  manage  his  mental  state.  MS  also
    referred to the second appellant's agitation when his needs are not met
    by his carers. The evidence before me was that the carers who had  been
    engaged since Z left did not stay for long because they quickly  become
    "fed up" with the job. There are particular issues with the carers  not
    being able to communicate with the second appellant which adds  to  his
    frustration.

20. Owing to the inability to obtain carers, the appellants' relatives have
    been taking it in turns to care for them. After  Z  left,  MA  went  to
    Pakistan from February 2020 and remained there  until  August  2020  in
    order to provide care for the appellants. He was joined by two  of  his
    sisters for part of that time. Thereafter, MA returned to Pakistan from
    November to December and from January 2021 until April 2021 to care for
    the appellants. MS travelled to Pakistan on 7 May 2021.  I  heard  that
    the  first  appellant's  nephew  had  been  pressed  to  care  for  the
    appellants between August and November 2020 but that he had  only  been
    able to do so because his university  had  been  closed  owing  to  the
    pandemic.

21. I am satisfied that the appellants are unable to  obtain  the  required
    level of care in Pakistan because it is unavailable. That the family in
    the UK have engaged three carers since Z's departure and  have  had  to
    care for the appellants themselves for the majority of  2020  and  2021
    demonstrates that adequate care is not available.

22. All  the  evidence  before  me  points  to  the  second  appellant,  in
    particular, requiring particular care due to  his  cerebral  palsy  and
    mental  health  issues.  Consistent  with  Dr   Bajwa's   report,   the
    psychological report of Dr Shea of  23  August  2019  states  that  the
    second appellant "needs full time care for his daily personal needs  as
    he is  unable  to  do  anything  for  himself.  Mr  Waqas  has  limited
    communication due to his mental and physical disability and he is  only
    able to communicate with his immediate family"  I  do  not  accept  the
    respondent's argument that the care  is  simply  not  to  the  family's
    standards. The second appellant's limited  communication  skills  means
    that those unfamiliar with him are unable to understand him which leads
    to him becoming agitated to the point he requires medicating. Any  care
    provided by  an  employee  who  is  unable  to  understand  the  second
    appellant cannot reasonably be considered adequate or available.

23. The appellants' relatives in the UK all have  families  of  their  own,
    businesses, jobs and homes. That they  have  felt  obliged  to  abandon
    their lives in the UK for protracted periods of time strongly  supports
    the evidence that adequate care for the appellants is not available  in
    Pakistan. The coronavirus  pandemic  poses  further  obstacles  to  the
    practicality  of  the  appellants  receiving  the  required  care.   Dr
    Shafique's  letter  of  20  August  2020  explains  that  due  to   the
    coronavirus pandemic and the first appellant's vulnerabilities  it  has
    been difficult for even doctors and nurses to visit their house.

24. In view of the foregoing, I am satisfied that both  appellants  require
    long-term personal care to perform daily tasks and the required care is
    not available. While the second appellant's needs are more complex than
    those of the first appellant, it is  clearly  vital  that  they  remain
    together given the second appellant's vulnerability. Indeed, the mental
    state of the second appellant  deteriorated  since  the  death  of  his
    mother. Mr Tufan accepted  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellants and their relatives in the UK. It follows that their appeals
    can be allowed under Article 8 because they satisfy the requirements of
    the Rules.

25. In the alternative, even if the Rules were not  met,  this  is  a  case
    where the appellants have established that they have a family life with
    their close relatives in this country and that those relatives would be
    adversely affected by the decision to  exclude  them,  applying  Beoku-
    Betts [2008] UKHL 39. The support network  that  is  available  to  the
    appellants in the UK cannot be replicated in Pakistan. It  is  relevant
    that in Pakistan, it is a cultural expectation that the eldest son care
    for elderly parents. It is not a sustainable  solution  for  the  first
    appellant's sons to abandon their lives in the UK for months at a  time
    to care for the appellants. There is no issue as to the ability of  the
    family to adequately accommodate and maintain  the  appellant.  Indeed,
    two of the first appellants sons have extended their properties to make
    them appropriate for the appellants owing to their disabilities. I have
    had regard to the section 117B issues but these do not tip the  balance
    towards the respondent. I conclude that appellants exclusion  from  the
    UK in these circumstances would be unjustifiably harsh and unreasonable
    and would amount to a disproportionate interference with their  Article
    8 rights.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 14 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the following reason. The circumstances  at  the  time  of  the  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal were not  those  in  place  at  the  time  of  the
decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer.


Signed:                             Date: 14 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email


