
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24522/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 12 February 2020                 |On: 3 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 kabir ahmed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, instructed by Stirling Ackroyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 20 August  1992.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to refuse his application for entry clearance.

   2. The appellant applied on 4 May 2018 for entry clearance to  settle  in
      the UK as the spouse of a British national. The respondent refused the
      application on 20 November 2018. The respondent  considered  that  the
      appellant did not meet the eligibility requirements of  paragraphs  E-
      ECP.2.1 to 2.10 of Appendix  FM  as  it  was  not  accepted  that  his
      relationship with his sponsor was genuine and subsisting or that  they
      intended to live together permanently in the UK, given the limited and
      inadequate  evidence  of  contact.  The  respondent  noted  that   the
      appellant had failed  to  attend  his  pre-arranged  interview  on  10
      September 2018 and therefore it had  not  been  possible  to  put  any
      concerns to him. The respondent also refused the  application  on  the
      basis that the eligibility financial  requirements  in  paragraphs  E-
      ECP.3.1 to 3.4 were not met.

   3. The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Wilding on 20 August 2019. The  judge  heard  from
      the sponsor and her daughter and noted that the issue  of  maintenance
      and accommodation  was  not  being  pursued  by  the  respondent.  The
      appellant produced a large bundle of whatsapp messages at the  hearing
      and his representative, Mr Georget, gave  a  sample  of  them  to  the
      judge. The judge noted that the evidence from the sponsor was that she
      and the appellant had met online in 2012 but the relationship had  not
      become romantic until January 2018, and they married in February 2018.
      The sponsor had not been back to Bangladesh  to  visit  the  appellant
      since then. The judge noted that, in addition  to  not  attending  the
      marriage interview, the appellant had  also  not  produced  a  witness
      statement for the appeal. In light of the limited evidence  the  judge
      was not satisfied, on balance, that the appellant and his wife were in
      a genuine and subsisting relationship.

   4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on the following grounds: Firstly, that the judge  had  erred  in  his
      approach to the witness evidence of the sponsor and her  daughter  and
      failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting or placing very  limited
      weight on their evidence, particularly given that there had never been
      any suggestion that the marriage was a sham. The judge had  failed  to
      address the sponsor's explanation as to  why  the  appellant  had  not
      attended his marriage interview. Secondly, that the judge had erred in
      his approach to the substantial evidence of contact between the couple
      over a period of 15 months up to the date of the hearing,  namely  the
      whatsapp messages.

   5. Permission was granted on 17 December 2019 in the First-tier Tribunal.

Appeal Hearing

   6. At the hearing it was accepted by all  parties  that  the  only  issue
      before the judge had been whether the appellant's marriage was genuine
      and subsisting,  as  the  financial/  maintenance  concerns  were  not
      pursued by the respondent.

   7. Mr Georget expanded upon the two grounds of appeal. With regard to the
      first ground, he submitted that the judge had said that this  was  not
      an easy case to determine and also that the sponsor's evidence went in
      the appellant's  favour,  but  he  made  no  findings  on  credibility
      applying the basic principles and it was difficult to tell whether  or
      not he accepted the sponsor's evidence and that of her daughter. If it
      was inferred that the judge accepted the witness's  credibility,  then
      in order to find the relationship was not genuine he would have had to
      conclude that the appellant had deceived everyone including his  wife.
      Alternatively, he must have found that she was lying, in a ploy to get
      a visa for the appellant, yet  there  was  no  allegation  of  a  sham
      marriage. The fact that the appellant did not produce a statement  was
      irrelevant as he had made the application and had married the sponsor.
      The evidence of the sponsor, who was a  party  to  the  marriage,  was
      sufficient. The judge had failed to consider  the  sponsor's  evidence
      explaining why the appellant did not attend the interview, namely that
      she had told him  that  he  would  be  interviewed  by  telephone  and
      therefore he was waiting for a telephone  call.  That  undermined  his
      finding at [15] that it was a "weighty failure". With  regard  to  the
      second ground, Mr Georget submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  given
      sufficient weight to the  evidence  before  him,  which  included  the
      whatsapp messages, and which was sufficient  to  meet  the  burden  of
      proof.

   8. Ms Isherwood submitted that the basic principle was that the burden of
      proof was upon the appellant and he had not produced any evidence from
      himself. The witness statements from the sponsor and her daughter  did
      not address the genuine nature of the relationship  and  the  whatsapp
      messages all post-dated the entry clearance decision.  The  judge  was
      entitled to take account of the absence of a  witness  statement  from
      the appellant and to reject the explanation given for his  failure  to
      attend the interview. It was open to him to conclude that the evidence
      did not show that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship.

   9. Mr Georget, in response, reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and findings

  10. Mr Georget made much of the fact that the respondent had not found the
      appellant's  marriage  to  be  a  sham  marriage  or  a  marriage   of
      convenience and appeared to be suggesting that that in itself  carried
      considerable weight. I do not consider there to be any merit in such a
      suggestion. Not only is that the terminology associated with  the  EEA
      Regulations rather than the immigration rules, but  there  can  be  no
      doubt that the respondent did not believe that the marriage,  and  the
      appellant's intentions in relation to the marriage, were genuine.

  11. It appeared, furthermore, to be Mr Georget's suggestion that,  in  the
      absence of a specific finding by the judge that the  sponsor  and  her
      daughter were lying or that the appellant was seeking to deceive  them
      as well as the respondent,  the  judge  ought  to  have  accepted  the
      marriage as genuine. I find no merit in such a suggestion. Neither  do
      I find any merit in Mr Georget's assertion  that  the  judge  made  no
      clear findings on the credibility of the witnesses, when it was  plain
      from his findings  that  he  had  considerable  concerns  about  their
      reliability. Mr Georget relied on the judge's comment  that  the  case
      was not an easy one to determine and his finding  that  the  sponsor's
      evidence "was not inconsistent in any part" (at [10]), as well as  his
      comment at [16] that "going in the appellant's favour is the  evidence
      of his wife, who...did give some detail behind  how  the  relationship
      has developed". However, that was clearly  qualified  by  his  adverse
      findings in the same paragraphs and there can be  no  doubt  from  his
      findings overall that he had considerable doubts about the reliability
      of  the  witnesses  and  was  unable  to  accord  their  evidence  any
      significant weight.

  12. Having plainly found  that  the  witnesses'  evidence  itself  was  of
      limited weight, the judge considered the rest of the  evidence  before
      him. He was  concerned  by  the  absence  of  any  evidence  from  the
      appellant himself. Mr Georget submitted that that  was  not  a  proper
      basis to doubt the genuineness of the marriage and  that  a  statement
      from the appellant would carry little weight in any event  given  that
      he was not present to be cross-examined on  it.  I  disagree.  As  the
      judge properly found at [13] and [14], this was the appellant's  case,
      the burden of proof was upon him and the fact that he had provided  no
      personal evidence  in  support  of  his  application  was  a  material
      consideration.  Likewise,  the  appellant's  failure  to  attend   his
      interview was a weighty matter and the judge was  fully  and  properly
      entitled to consider that to be significant and material.  Mr  Georget
      submitted that the sponsor had provided a proper explanation for  that
      in her evidence which the judge had failed to consider,  but  that  is
      plainly not the case. The judge considered the sponsor's  evidence  at
      [15] and clearly did not accept the explanation  for  the  appellant's
      absence. Having myself considered the reasons given  by  the  sponsor,
      namely that she mistakenly told her husband that the  interview  would
      be by telephone, it seems to me that the judge was fully  entitled  to
      reject that explanation.

  13. Aside from his  concerns  about  the  reliability  of  the  witnesses'
      evidence and the absence of any personal evidence from the  appellant,
      the judge provided  further  reasons  for  having  doubts  as  to  the
      genuineness of the marriage. At [10] he noted the lack  of  persuasive
      evidence of how the relationship started and  developed;  at  [11]  he
      noted that the sponsor had not been back to Bangladesh  to  visit  the
      appellant since their marriage in February 2018, which I observe was a
      year and a half prior to the hearing and  nine  months  prior  to  the
      refusal decision; and at [17] he noted the absence of any evidence  of
      communication and contact prior to  the  marriage  or  evidence  of  a
      developing  relationship.  Whilst  Mr  Georget  submitted   that   the
      voluminous whatsapp messages  provided  substantial  evidence  of  the
      relationship,  the  judge,  having  plainly  fully   considered   that
      evidence, was entitled to accord it  little  weight  for  the  reasons
      given at [12]. Further, as Ms Isherwood submitted, that evidence post-
      dated the refusal of entry clearance, a further matter undermining its
      weight. The absence of supporting evidence was a matter highlighted by
      the  respondent  in  refusing  the  appellant's  application  and  the
      appellant was therefore fully aware of the  issues  which  had  to  be
      addressed.  The  absence  of  any  further  persuasive  evidence   was
      accordingly a matter the judge was entitled to take into  account  and
      from which he was entitled to draw the  adverse  conclusions  that  he
      did.

  14. For all of these reasons I find no merit in the appellant's grounds of
      challenge. The judge's decision took account of all the  evidence,  he
      accorded appropriate weight to the evidence that was available and was
      entitled to draw the adverse conclusions that he did from the evidence
      which was not available. His decision was fully and cogently  reasoned
      and was entirely and properly open to him on the evidence before  him.
      There are no errors of law in  the  judge's  decision.  I  uphold  his
      decision.

DECISION

  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  17 February
2020
