
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/24309/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Manchester                          Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On: 14th March 2018
    On: 1st May 2018
|                                                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  KA WAI MA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Muman, Counsel instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a British Overseas Citizen date of birth 4th  January
    1993. On the 12th April 2017 her appeal was allowed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Shergill) on human rights grounds.   The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  was  given  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision on the 31st October 2017.




 2. I need not deal with the Secretary  of  State's  complaints  about  the
    determination in any great detail since before  me  Mr  Muman,  counsel
    newly instructed by Ms Ma, recognised that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained legal errors such  that  it  could  not  stand.
    Those were, in summary, a failure to make clear  findings  on  material
    matters,  legal  misdirection  (in  particular  the  finding  that   an
    application for indefinite leave was not a 'human rights claim') and in
    the context of Article 8 'outside of the Rules' a failure  to  identify
    what the compelling features of the case were.


 3. I accept Mr Muman's submission that Ms Ma's case is  not  so  evidently
    without merit that it can simply be dismissed. She has  spent  a  large
    proportion of her life in the UK  with  leave  to  remain  and,  it  is
    accepted, has a well-established Article 8 private life.  I agree  that
    the appropriate disposal would therefore be remittal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal so that the appeal  can  be  heard  de  novo  and  appropriate
    findings of fact made.




    Decisions and Directions


 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a error  of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside.


 5. The decision is to be remade de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


 6. There is no order for anonymity.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             14th March 2018


