
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20772/2019
                                                               HU/24204/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Teams)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 May 2021                       |On 11 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             PREM BAHADUR KHADKA
                                ALISHA SHARMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondents:   Mr Z Jafferji, counsel, instructed by Greenwich
Solicitors


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Microsoft Teams. A face to face hearing was not  held  all
issues could be fairly determined in a remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  ("appellant")
         appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  R
         A Singer ("the judge") promulgated on 25 January 2021 allowing  the
         human  rights  appeals  of  Mr  Prem  Bahadur  Khadka   ("the   1st
         respondent") and Ms Alisha Sharma ("the  2nd  respondent")  against
         the decision of the appellant dated 3 December 2019 (in respect  of
         the 1st respondent) and against the decision of the appellant dated
         16 November 2018 (in respect of the 2nd respondent) refusing  their
         human rights claims.

      2. The respondents are both nationals of  Nepal.  The  1st  respondent
         arrived in the UK on 20 December 2008 as a student. He was  granted
         further periods of leave and last had lawful leave to remain on  11
         April 2017. The judge found that he  had  accrued  9  years  and  4
         months of continuous lawful residence until 11 April 2017 and  this
         finding  has  not  been  challenged.  On  13  April  2018  the  1st
         respondent made an out-of-time human rights application  which  was
         eventually varied to become an application for Indefinite Leave  to
         Remain ("ILR") under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules (which
         was also a human rights claim). The refusal of  this  human  rights
         application on 3 December 2019 is the first relevant decision under
         appeal.

      3. The 2nd respondent entered the UK on 26 April 2012 as the dependent
         of the 1st respondent who, at the material time, was a Tier 1 (Post
         Study) Migrant. She was granted further periods of leave to  remain
         as the dependent of the 1st respondent. She  made  a  human  rights
         claim on 13 April 2018 based  on  her  relationship  with  the  1st
         respondent and their child, AK, who was born in the UK on 30  April
         2014. This human rights claim was refused on 16 November  2018  and
         is the 2nd relevant decision under appeal.

      4. In her decisions the appellant was not satisfied that either of the
         respondents met the requirements for leave to remain based on their
         Article 8 private lives as expressed in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of
         the Immigration Rules. Nor was the  appellant  satisfied  that  the
         respondents met the requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
         Rules, relating to family life relationships. Noting the age of the
         respondents' child and the fact that he had not resided in  the  UK
         for at least 7 continuous years, the appellant  was  not  satisfied
         there were exceptional circumstances outside the Immigration  Rules
         that  would  cause  the  respondents'  removal  to   constitute   a
         disproportionate interference with Article 8.

      5. The respondents appealed the appellant's  refusal  of  their  human
         rights claims to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.





The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The judge had before him several bundles of documents  prepared  by
         the appellant and by the respondents. The judge heard oral evidence
         from both respondents, who adopted their statements  and  who  were
         then questioned by both representatives.

      7. At [20] the judge accurately set out the relevant  legal  framework
         for the assessment of human rights appeals and the correct standard
         and burden of proof. At [25] the judge  reminded  himself  that  he
         must have regard to the provisions of s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that he also had to  treat  the
         child's best interests "as a primary consideration, under  s.55  of
         the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009."

      8. When determining whether the respondents met  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) the judge set out factors both in favour of
         and opposing the existence of  'very  significant  obstacles'  (the
         relevant legal test).  One  of  the  factors  in  the  respondents'
         favour, identified at [29(b)], was a  finding  that  their  child's
         skills in the Nepalese language had diminished rather than improved
         since he commenced primary school and that, if he  attended  school
         in Nepal, the child would struggle initially, which could result in
         further difficulties for the respondents. Weighing up the competing
         factors, the judge found however that neither respondent  fulfilled
         the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  that  that  they
         would not face 'very significant obstacles' to their integration in
         Nepal.

      9. The judge proceeded to consider the factors set out  in  s.117B  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. At [35] the judge
         noted that  s.117B(6)  did  not  apply  as  the  child  was  not  a
         'qualifying  child'  as  understood  in  s.117D  (the   child   was
         approximately 3 months shy of his  seventh  birthday  and  had  not
         resided in the UK for a continuous period of at least 7 years).

     10. At [37] the judge again directed himself that the welfare and  best
         interests  of  the  child  was  "a   primary   consideration."   In
         subparagraphs (a) to (u) the judge set out factors relevant to  the
         assessment of the child's best interests. The  judge  noted,  inter
         alia, that the child had been born in the UK and had lived here his
         whole life, that he had never visited Nepal and  that  his  parents
         had not been back for many years (although the 2nd respondent still
         had family there). The judge further noted that the child  was  not
         British, that he was still  young  and  dependent  on  his  parents
         although he had started to develop his own  private  life  via  his
         attendance at nursery and primary  school,  and  that  the  child's
         connection  with  Nepal  could  be  developed  given  his  parent's
         connections and cultural  and  linguistic  ties  and  that  he  was
         sufficiently young to be able to adapt to life in  Nepal  (although
         it would  not  be  easy  for  him  and  he  would  face  linguistic
         challenges which were likely to set him back in his schooling). The
         judge again noted the child's linguistic  abilities  (that  he  was
         likely to speak  some  Nepalese)  and  referred  to  some  evidence
         relating to the diagnosis of an eye condition, and  that  requiring
         him to leave the  UK  would  result  in  the  loss  of  educational
         opportunities available to him here. A relevant factor in the  best
         interest's assessment was where the parents were expected to reside
         given that it was generally reasonable for children to reside  with
         their parents (by reference to KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53).
         The  judge  alluded  to  the  relevant  factors  detailed   in   EV
         (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874,  the  need  for  a  "real
         world" assessment given that the two respondents were  expected  to
         leave the UK and the child would be going with them, and  that  the
         child had no significant health or behavioural problems and that he
         would not be neglected if he was removed to Nepal.

     11. At [38] the judge stated:

             "Weighing everything, it is,  I  find,  more  in  [AK's]  best
             interests to continue to be brought up by both of his  parents
             together as a family unit  in  the  UK  and  to  continue  his
             education here, more than require  him  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom with his parents  and  live  in  Nepal.  That  is  the
             scenario which would best safeguard and promote his welfare."

     12. From [39] onwards the judge engaged  in  an  Article  8  assessment
         outside of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge  found  that  both
         respondents had established private lives in the UK  and  that  the
         critical issue was whether the  decisions  to  refuse  their  human
         rights claims were proportionate or disproportionate under  Article
         8. The judge indicated that his proportionality assessment  had  to
         be evaluated by reference to the factors set out in s.117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     13. At [40] and [41] the judge again noted  that  the  child  was  only
         three  months  away  from  being  a  "qualifying  child"  and  then
         cautioned himself against adopting a  "near  miss"  argument  (with
         reference to Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and SS  (Congo)  and  Ors  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 387). At [43] the judge again reminded  himself  that  the
         child was not a "qualifying child", and at [44] the judge  set  out
         an extract from the appellant's published policy guidelines "Family
         life (as  a  partner  or  parent),  private  life  and  exceptional
         circumstances Version 12.0", published on 31 December 2020. At [45]
         the judge indicated that, had the child been a "qualifying  child",
         and having regard to the judge's  findings  regarding  the  child's
         best interests, he would have found that it was not  reasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the UK and go to Nepal. The  judge  again
         reminded himself however that  the  child  was  not  a  "qualifying
         child" and that he had to assess matters as  of  the  date  of  his
         decision.

     14. At [46] to [48] the judge rejected  an  argument  advanced  by  the
         respondents' representative relating to the existence of a  claimed
         "historical injustice". Then at [49]  the  judge  set  out  factors
         weighing  in  favour  of  the   appellant   and   the   Article   8
         proportionality balancing exercise. The judge noted that Article  8
         was not a general dispensing exercise, that the  Immigration  Rules
         reflected the responsible Ministers assessment, at a general level,
         of the relative weight of the competing factors that would strike a
         fair balance under Article 8, and that considerable weight  had  to
         be  attached  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy   under   the
         Immigration Rules and the fact that the respondents  did  not  meet
         the requirements of  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge
         additionally noted that family life  between  the  respondents  and
         their child could continue in Nepal and that it would  be  possible
         for them to live with the child's maternal grandparents.

     15. At [50] the judge then set  out  the  points  in  the  respondents'
         favour. There were four principal points. The first  point  related
         to the child's best interests. The judge reminded himself  that  it
         was in the child's best interests that he continue to live  in  the
         UK with both of his parents. The judge once again  noted  that  the
         child's  best  interests  were  "a  primary  consideration  in  the
         balancing exercise, but they are not the only consideration and can
         be outweighed by other factors." The judge noted that the child had
         spent his entire life in the UK and was nearly  7  years  old,  and
         that he had considered the relevant jurisprudence relating  to  the
         "near miss" argument in respect  of  s.117B(6).  The  second  point
         related to the individual private lives developed by  each  of  the
         respondents whilst in the UK, albeit that those private  lives  had
         been developed  whilst  they  were  here  precariously.  The  judge
         indicated that he applied little  weight  to  it,  as  required  by
         s.117B(5). The judge nevertheless accepted that the respondents had
         established a network of friends in the UK  and  that  the  private
         lives they had established was deserving of some respect. The third
         factor considered by the judge was the nature and  length  of  each
         respondent's residence in the UK. The judge indicated that  he  had
         given this factor some weight in  the  balancing  exercise  because
         each of the respondents had lived  in  the  UK  for  a  substantial
         period of time and their child was born here nearly  7  years  ago.
         The  fourth  point  considered  by  the  judge  was  that  the  1st
         respondent  had  studied  in   the   UK   and   achieved   numerous
         qualifications, including an MSc in Information Systems Management,
         and had also passed the life in the UK test, and had worked in  the
         UK when he had a right to do so.

     16. At [51] the judge stated:

             "Weighing the arguments in  striking  a  balance  between  the
             competing public and individual interests on both  sides,  and
             having regard to the normative guidance  in  s.117B  above,  I
             find the scales fall on the side of both of the [respondents].
             I  find  that  the  circumstances  of  each  of  their  cases,
             particularly given  [AK's]  best  interests,  when  considered
             alongside the  length  and  nature  of  his  and  his  parents
             residence,  are  sufficiently  compelling  to   outweigh   the
             [appellant's]  public  interest  in  controlling  immigration.
             Evaluating the evidence as a whole, the refusal  of  the  [1st
             respondent], and the  removal  of  the  [2nd  respondent],  is
             unjustifiably harsh and disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR,
             I find."

     17. The judge consequently allowed the appeals on human rights grounds.





The challenge to the judge's decision

     18. The grounds of appeal, amplified  by  Mr  Tan's  oral  submissions,
         argue that the judge made  a  material  misdirection  of  law.  The
         grounds contend that the judge erred in law by treating the child's
         best interests as a "trump card".  It  is  argued  that  the  judge
         elevated the consideration of the child's best  interests  from  "a
         primary consideration" to "the primary consideration above that  of
         the  public  interest,  despite  reminding   himself   that   other
         considerations must be made." The judge's  balancing  exercise  was
         consequently flawed and unreliable. The judge essentially conflated
         the "best  interests"  assessment  with  question  whether  it  was
         reasonable for the child to leave the UK and  approached  s.117B(6)
         on the basis that the child's best interests were the sole relevant
         consideration. The judge's approach was not  consistent  with  long
         established  Article  8  jurisprudence   on   the   importance   of
         considering all relevant factors 'in the round'. The grounds  focus
         on a single factor  in  the  "best  interests"  assessment  [37(u)]
         relating to the loss of educational opportunities to the  child  in
         submitting that the judge erred  in  concluding  that  the  child's
         "best interests" were to remain in the  UK.  The  grounds  did  not
         raise a rationality challenge, a point confirmed by Mr  Tan  during
         the 'error  of  law'  hearing.  The  appellant's  grounds  did  not
         therefore contend that the judge's decision  was  perverse  or  one
         that was not rationally open to him,  but  that,  in  reaching  his
         decision,  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  respect   of   the
         applicable legal principles.

     19. I indicated at the conclusion  of  the  hearing  that,  whilst  the
         judge's conclusion was undoubtedly generous, it  did  not  disclose
         any legal error within the terms advanced by the appellant  in  her
         grounds.

Discussion

     20. No issue has been taken with the judge's actual assessment  of  the
         child's best  interests  at  [37].  In  this  paragraph  the  judge
         identified a number  of  factors  properly  relevant  to  the  best
         interests  assessment  (see  EV  (Philippines)].  Contrary  to  the
         assertion in the grounds of appeal, a careful  examination  of  the
         judge's decision discloses his acute  awareness  that  the  child's
         best interests was "a primary consideration" and not  "the  primary
         consideration". The judge  specifically  self-directed  himself  in
         respect of the correct test at [25], [37], and again at [50(a)].

     21. A consideration  of  the  content  and  structure  of  the  judge's
         decision confirms  that  the  judge  was  not  merely  paying  'lip
         service' to the appropriate test but applied it  in  practice.  The
         judge's assessment of the  child's  best  interests  was  conducted
         prior to and separately from the judge's subsequent proportionality
         assessment, which began at [39]. Significantly, at [50], the  judge
         made clear that the child's best interests  was  only  one  of  the
         factors  relevant  to  his  assessment  of  the   points   in   the
         respondents'  favour  when   he   undertook   his   proportionality
         assessment. In addition to the child's best  interests,  the  judge
         additionally took into account the private lives established by the
         respondents, the nature and length of their residence  in  the  UK,
         and the 1st respondent's achievements in the UK. The assessment  at
         [50], and the conclusion at [51] indicates that the judge  did  not
         regard the child's best interests as a "trump card" but that it was
         "a primary consideration" in his  assessment.  At  [51]  the  judge
         again indicated that the proportionality  assessment  fell  in  the
         respondents favour having regard  not  only  to  the  child's  best
         interests but also to the length and  nature  of  the  respondents'
         residence.

     22.  Whilst  the  judge's  proportionalty  assessment   was   certainly
         generous, the grounds of appeal did not contend that his conclusion
         was perverse. There  has  been  no  rationality  challenge  to  the
         judge's decision in the Wednesbury sense and  I  am  not  satisfied
         that his conclusion was one  that  no  reasonable  judge,  properly
         directing himself on  the  facts  and  the  law,  would  have  been
         entitled to reach.  The  decision  does  not  disclose  a  material
         misdirection. The appeal by the SSHD is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The judge did not make an error on a point of law.

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum

Signed   Date 1 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

