
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24953/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2019                  |On 16 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     FA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Yusuf, Kingswood, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1993  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Afghanistan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 11 October 2018  to  refuse  his  human
    rights claim. He was served with a notice of intention to deport him on
    1 October 2018.  The  appellant  had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    December 2007 when he claimed  asylum.  He  was  granted  discretionary
    leave on account of his age until 1 July 2010. Following refusal of  an
    application for further leave to remain, an appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against that refusal was dismissed  by  a  decision  dated  27
    January 2011. In March to 2017, the appellant was granted limited leave
    to remain and, in July 2015, he married his British citizen partner  in
    an Islamic ceremony. In April 2018, the appellant was sentenced  to  16
    months imprisonment having pleaded  guilty  to  the  charge  of  actual
    bodily harm. He had previously been convicted in 2015  of  resisting  a
    police officer. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 7
    June 2019, allowed the appellant's appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant and his British partner  have  three  children  now  aged
    four, three and one years respectively. The judge found that  it  would
    be unduly harsh for the  children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without the appellant. The Secretary of State challenges that  decision
    on the basis that the analysis is flawed  and  the  reasons  given  for
    allowing  the  appeal  inadequate.  Mr  Mills,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State, referred me to the decision at [62]:

    The decision  has  all  sorts  of  implications  for  these  children's
    futures, financial practical emotional and psychological. Children find
    themselves in a single-parent family in the care of a young mother  who
    will struggle to cope. Even this may not be enough to meet  the  unduly
    harsh test will stop but it is the fact that visits to spend time  with
    their  father  in  Afghanistan  will  be  practically  impossible   and
    potentially dangerous,  that  tips  the  case  into  the  unduly  harsh
    category.

 3.  As  the  judge  herself  plainly  states,  but  for   the   'practical
    impossibility' of any contact visits taking place, the  deportation  of
    the appellant would not result in and unduly harsh consequences for the
    children and partner remaining behind in the United Kingdom.  Mr  Mills
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  completely  failed  to  consider  the
    possibility of contact visits taking place in a third (less  dangerous)
    country, for example Pakistan. I agree with  that  submission.  I  find
    that the judge has been hasty in concluding that contacts visits simply
    cannot take place at all, particularly given that the previous Tribunal
    in January 2011 had clearly found [35] that  the  appellant  still  has
    family living in Pakistan, a finding which has  not  subsequently  been
    contradicted.

 4. There are other problems with the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  At
    [48], the judge found that the appellant and his partner had  not  been
    'entirely honest when they denied that they had received help from [the
    partner's]  family  members  while  the  appellant  was   in   prison.'
    Notwithstanding that finding, judge went on to find at [52]  that  such
    support would not 'be available...in the longer term due to  the  other
    commitments in her extended family.' No reasons have been given by  the
    judge for, on the one hand, refusing to accept  what  the  partner  had
    said about help extended by the family in the past whilst, on the other
    hand, accepting her claim that such help would not  be  forthcoming  in
    the future. In the light of the errors which  I  have  identified,  the
    judge's conclusion that the effect of  deportation  upon  the  children
    would be unduly harsh is rendered unsafe. Indeed, for reasons which  do
    not emerge clearly from the decision, the judge appears to have  formed
    the view that the separation of the children from the  appellant  would
    be nothing short of emotionally and financially catastrophic for  them,
    a conclusion which, given the availability of  family  support  in  the
    United Kingdom and the possibility of contact visits  taking  place  in
    Pakistan and in the absence of any support  for  such  a  view  in  the
    evidence, including the social workers report,  is  difficult,  on  the
    current evidence, to sustain.

 5. I have decided to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    have considered the matter of disposal. Mr  Mills  submitted  that,  if
    there is any fresh evidence regarding the  family  circumstances,  then
    the appropriate course would be to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade. He also submitted that, on  the
    basis of the existing evidence, it would be appropriate for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision dismissing the  appeal.  Unfortunately,
    the  appellant's  representative  was  not  forthcoming  regarding  the
    existence of fresh evidence. However, I am concerned that any  failings
    in respect of the preparation  of  this  appeal  on  the  part  of  the
    representatives should not result in any unfairness for  the  appellant
    and his family. Moreover, the primary error of the  judge  lay  in  her
    failure  to  consider  relevant  aspects  of  the  appeal,  namely  the
    feasibility of contact taking place in a third country. I am  satisfied
    that that is an aspect of the appeal which requires further examination
    and fact-finding. For that reason, I have decided to return the  appeal
    to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  decision  to  be  remade  at  or
    following a hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Ford) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                                       Date 31 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

