
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/24202/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2019                       |On 14 November 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                          Mrs MARVETTE ULANDA BOOTH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms. Miranda Butler, Counsel, instructed by
Ashraf Law
For the Respondent:       Ms. Julie Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lloyd-Smith ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 28  May  2019
    by which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
    to refuse to grant her entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled in this country was dismissed.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

Anonymity

 3. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and the  representatives
    made no request for such direction at the hearing.

Background

 4. The appellant is a national of Jamaica who sought  entry  clearance  in
    September 2018 to join her husband, Mr Deon Booth, in this country.  Mr
    Booth is settled for the purpose of the Immigration Rules.  The  couple
    first met at  high  school  in  Jamaica  and  contact  was  resumed  in
    adulthood. They were married in Jamaica on 19 May 2018.

 5. The respondent refused the application by means of a decision dated  19
    November 2018. It was decided that the appellant did not  meet  all  of
    the eligibility requirements  of  Section  E-ECP  of  Appendix  FM  and
    further that no exceptional circumstances  arose.  An  Entry  Clearance
    Manager accepted that the sponsor had provided a  copy  of  his  decree
    absolute in relation to his first marriage and so was content to accept
    that the marriage between the appellant and sponsor was valid. However,
    the initial decision to refuse entry was maintained.

         'The grounds of appeal state that the ECO failed  to  consider  the
         trips made by the sponsor to Jamaica, however evidence of travel is
         not sufficient to show the sponsor visited  the  appellant  on  the
         visits and therefore does not prove the relationship is genuine and
         subsisting.


         It is noteworthy that the  appellant  has  failed  to  address  the
         concerns raised by the ECO that there is no evidence of contact  or
         communication between the sponsor and appellant by phone/email etc.
         prior to June 2018 and this is still the case.  The  appellant  has
         just resubmitted the  same  WhatsApp  chat  messages  that  do  not
         contain messages of substance to indicate a  genuine  relationship.
         Accordingly I am not satisfied that the relationship is genuine and
         subsisting.


         I have considered under paragraphs GEN 3.1 and GEN 3.2 of  Appendix
         FM as applicable, whether there are  exceptional  circumstances  in
         the appellant's case which could or would render refusal  a  breach
         of Article 8 of the ECHR  because  it  could  or  would  result  in
         unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the   appellant   or   the
         appellant's family. Following a thorough assessment of the appeal I
         am satisfied that there is no basis for such claim.'


Hearing Before the FtT

 6. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Manchester on 21 May  2019.
    The sponsor attended and gave evidence. The  Judge  made  a  number  of
    adverse credibility findings and refused the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal raise two  discrete  challenges.  The
    first is detailed at [2]:

         'The First-tier Tribunal did not  approach  the  issue  of  whether
         there was a genuine and subsisting relationship between  the  First
         Appellant and the  Sponsor  in  accordance  with  GA  ("Subsisting"
         marriage) Ghana* [2006] UKAIT 00046, Goudey (subsisting marriage  -
         standard of proof) Sudan [2012] 00041  (IAC)  and  Naz  (subsisting
         marriage - sufficiency of protection) Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00040
         (IAC).'

 8. The second ground identifies several errors of  fact.  It  is  asserted
    that by misinterpreting  relevant  evidence  and  erring  in  fact  the
    Judge's decision is unsafe.

 9. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Reeds observed, at [2] and [3]:

         'The grounds challenge the findings made by the FtTJ that this  was
         not a genuine or subsisting marriage.   Whilst  the  FtTJ  made  no
         reference to the relevant jurisprudence relating to  the  issue  of
         where this was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  (see  Goudey
         (subsisting marriage-evidence) Sudan  [2012]  UKUT  00041  and  Naz
         (subsisting marriage-standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKT 00040),
         it is arguable that the FtTJ failed to apply those principles  when
         assessing the evidence.


         It is also the position that the FtTJ arguably misunderstood  parts
         of the evidence as set out in relation to the findings at paragraph
         20(a)-(c).  As the grounds set out, the letter at A4  did  not  say
         the marriage took place on the 13 May but gave  evidence  that  was
         consistent with the marriage taking place on the 19  May  2018  and
         the grounds  challenging  the  findings  at  21  and  22  are  also
         arguable.'


10. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

The Hearing

11. Both representatives at  the  hearing  before  me  confirmed  that  the
    parties considered the Judge's decision to be  flawed  by  legal  error
    such that it should be set aside.

Decision on Error of Law

12. I informed the parties as a preliminary matter that  I  considered  two
    further 'obvious' grounds of appeal arose  upon  consideration  of  the
    Judge's  decision.  I  observe  that  it  is   reasonable   to   expect
    professional  representatives  to  set  out  appeal  grounds  with   an
    appropriate degree of particularity and  legibility  and  the  Tribunal
    should be hesitant in forensically examining the decision  to  identify
    grounds  beyond  those  advanced  by  a  professional   representative.
    However,  there  remains  a  duty  to  consider  the  points  that  are
    'obvious': see R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte
    Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162. The Tribunal enjoys a power to consider any
    other point arising from a decision if  the  interests  of  justice  so
    require. In this matter I am  satisfied  that  two  additional  grounds
    arise: one consequent  to  the  application  of  a  repealed  statutory
    provision and the other a failure to apply the guidance offered by  the
    Equal Treatment Bench Book.

13.  The  erroneous  application  of  a  repealed  statutory  provision  is
    identifiable in the Judge's assessment  as  to  the  relevant  date  of
    consideration as to evidence:

         'Under section 85(4) of the 2002 Act an appeal under section  82(1)
         and 83 the Tribunal can consider evidence about any matter which it
         thinks is relevant to  the  substance  of  the  decision  including
         evidence  which  concerns  a  matter  arising  after  the  date  of
         decision.  However, section 85(4) of the 2002 Act is now subject to
         the exceptions contained in section 85A,  which  was  brought  into
         force by section 19 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2009.   Pursuant  to
         exception 1, in appeals against the refusal of entry clearance or a
         refusal of a  certificate  of  entitlement  under  section  10  the
         Tribunal 'may consider only the circumstances appertaining  at  the
         time of decision'.'

14. Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  was
    repealed by Schedule 9 of the Immigration Act 2014 as from  20  October
    2014 and the relevant  saving  provisions  are  not  relevant  to  this
    appeal. As the appellant enjoys a  right  of  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds against the  respondent's  decision  she  enjoys  the  benefits
    provided by Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act, namely that the Tribunal may
    consider any  matter  it  thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
    decision, including a matter arising after the date of decision. Though
    the Judge did look at post-decision evidence it is wholly unclear as to
    whether any weight was given to it in light of  the  Judge's  erroneous
    observations at paragraph 7. In such circumstances the Judge materially
    erred in law by precluding consideration  of  evidence  postdating  the
    respondent's decision of 19 November 2018.

15. The second ground arises in respect of an issue that arose  during  the
    course of the hearing, namely that the sponsor is dyslexic. Indeed, his
    evidence is recorded in the record of proceedings as being that he  has
    'really poor' dyslexia. The Judge observed, at [20]:

         'There were also other aspects of the evidence which I found to  be
             inconsistent:


             (a)  the sponsor  was  asked  to  provide  the  names  of  the
                appellant's children. He hesitated before giving  the  name
                Dejon, when asked to spell that he  wanted  to  look  at  a
                document in his wallet because he claimed to  be  dyslexic.
                He was asked to try without the aide-memoir.  The  daughter
                was said to be called Zana and he said that she lives  with
                the appellant. The application  form  has  their  names  as
                Dejour and Zonae (R). It may  be  that  he  struggles  with
                spelling but his need to refer to notes, when coupled  with
                the other findings has affected my  overall  assessment  of
                his credibility.'


16. The appellant's grounds of appeal complain:

         'It is stated that the sponsor asked to see  an  aide  memoir  when
         asked about the names of his stepchildren, although he stated he is
         unsure of the spelling he confirms he did not ask to  look  at  any
         aide memoir at any time during the hearing.'

17. The concern arising from the identification by the sponsor that  he  is
    dyslexic is wider than the stated ground of  appeal.  The  sponsor  was
    asked to spell the names of his two  stepchildren,  and  he  sought  to
    produce a paper document upon which the names were  written.  This  was
    the aide-memoir. This action, namely seeking to refer to the note,  has
    been  adversely  relied  upon  by  the  Judge  as  to  credibility   in
    circumstances where the Judge made no express reference  to  the  Equal
    Treatment Bench Book, February 2018 edition. Upon being  informed  that
    the sponsor was dyslexic, and this was not contested by the  respondent
    at the hearing, the Judge was on notice that the sponsor suffered  from
    a specific learning difficulty and should properly have made simple and
    relevant  enquiries  as  to  how  such  difficulty  impacts  upon   his
    functioning. As noted at page 305 of  the  Bench  Book  dyslexia  often
    manifests itself as a difficulty with reading,  writing  and  spelling.
    The core challenges however are the rapid processing of  language-based
    information and weaknesses in a short  term  and  working  memory.  The
    Bench Book reminds the judiciary that by adulthood many dyslexic people
    have equipped themselves with an array of coping  strategies  diverting
    some of their energy and ability into the operation  of  these  systems
    and thereby leaving themselves few extra resources to  call  upon  when
    they have to deal with situations  that  fall  within  their  areas  of
    weakness.  As  a  result  of  these  difficulties  inconsistencies  and
    inaccuracies may  occur  in  their  evidence.  The  guidance  expressly
    observes that difficulties arising with  dyslexia  includes:  'mistakes
    with routine information, e.g. giving the names of their children.'

18. The Judge not only made an adverse  finding  on  a  personal  inability
    arising from the sponsor's specific learning difficulty, despite having
    been made aware as to the  nature  of  such  difficulty,  but  she  was
    critical of him at the hearing  for  seeking  to  rely  upon  a  coping
    strategy, namely his having written the names down.  The  concern  with
    the approach of informing the sponsor that he could not rely  upon  his
    aide-memoir is not  limited  to  the  adverse  approach  taken  to  the
    developed coping strategy but also adds to a failure by  the  Judge  to
    observe the adverse impact of the approach taken towards the sponsor in
    a court setting. The Bench Book confirms at page 306 that persons  with
    specific learning difficulty  may  experience  a  build-up  of  stress,
    struggle to cope with a roomful of strangers in unfamiliar settings and
    feel panic resulting in the urge to provide any answer in order to  get
    the proceedings over with as quickly as possible.  The  Judge  in  this
    matter,  having  been  informed  by  the  sponsor  that  he  had  grave
    difficulties with dyslexia, failed entirely to take steps to  ascertain
    the impact of such concern upon his evidence and also  to  ensure  that
    stresses and strains arising within the hearing were  limited.  Rather,
    she asked him to act without his  coping  mechanism,  required  him  to
    proceed to spell the names of his stepchildren in a court  setting  and
    subsequently gave no consideration as to whether this request increased
    his stress and anxiety consequent to  his  learning  difficulty  before
    making an adverse finding.

19. The sponsor cannot be criticised for not informing the Tribunal  as  to
    his learning difficulty sooner. Many people  are  embarrassed  by  such
    difficulty and are unaware that the justice system is  sympathetic  and
    understanding as to such vulnerability.  It  is  unfortunate  that  the
    appellant's legal  representatives  did  not  establish  the  sponsor's
    vulnerability prior to the hearing but such failure does not  adversely
    impact upon the appellant's present appeal because once the  Judge  was
    notified as to the existence of a learning difficulty she was  required
    to act with procedural fairness.  Rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014  is
    clear that the Tribunal has to ensure that parties fully participate in
    proceedings and this extends to witnesses called to give oral  evidence
    on behalf of a party. A Judge is expected to act flexibly when an issue
    as to vulnerability arises during the course of a hearing. As noted  by
    the Bench Book, at [23]:

         'Judges should identify a situation in which a person may be  at  a
         disadvantage  owing  to  some  personal  attribute  of  no   direct
         relevance  to  the  proceedings,  and  take  steps  to  remedy  the
         disadvantage without prejudicing another party.'


20. I am satisfied that the failure of the Judge to consider the sponsor to
    be vulnerable consequent to his  dyslexia  adversely  flowed  into  her
    general assessment of his credibility. The Bench Book details  at  page
    305 that a person with specific learning difficulty may possess several
    difficulties including:

           . A weak short term memory.

           . Difficulty remembering what they have just said.

           . A poor working memory - this shows itself as the inability to:

             ?    Retain information without notes.

             ?    Hold on to several pieces  of  information  at  the  same
                  time.

             ?    Listen and take notes.

             ?    Cope with compound questions.

             ?    Difficulty carrying out instructions in sequence.

           . Inefficient processing of information which  could  relate  to
             written texts, oral responses or listening skills - there  may
             be a delay between hearing something, then  understanding  it,
             and then responding to it.

           . Difficulty presenting information in a logical sequential way.

           . Difficulty writing letters and reports.

           .   Difficulty   distinguishing   important   information   from
             unimportant details.

21. The Judge took no steps  to  address  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    learning difficulty with the sponsor nor to carefully identify concerns
    that he may have in appearing before her that  could  adversely  impact
    upon his ability to provide suitable evidence in the Tribunal  setting.
    Rather, she proceeded to be critical of his evidence as to the WhatsApp
    messages after having required him to work through several of  them  in
    the appellant's bundle and having read them to address their  contents.
    The Judge should have been immediately aware  when  subsequently  being
    informed by the sponsor that he was dyslexic that she was  required  to
    take steps to assess the impact of such condition  upon  not  only  the
    evidence to come but also the evidence already presented,  particularly
    in circumstances where she had required him to read and then to address
    documents in a court setting. Overall,  the  failure  to  consider  the
    sponsor to be vulnerable and to apply the guidance offered by the Equal
    Treatment Bench Book is a material error of law and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

22. It is appropriate that I further  observe  that  the  Judge  materially
    erred in law as to her finding as  to  an  inconsistency,  at  [20(b)],
    between the undated letter from Pastor Lincoln Dennis referring to  the
    marriage of the appellant and sponsor taking place on 19 May 2018 and a
    letter of support from a cousin stating that the marriage took place on
    13 May 2018. The Judge noted that this was 'not  an  inconsistency  one
    would expect if the marriage was genuine'. The letter from the relative
    confirms that she attended the wedding on 19 May 2018. The reference to
    13 May 2018 is with regard to the date she flew to Jamaica and this  is
    confirmed by the entry stamp in her passport. This is a clear error  of
    fact and in light of the finding as to inconsistency it is  a  material
    error of law. A further material error of law is identifiable  at  [21]
    of the decision where the  Judge  speculates  that  she  placed  little
    weight upon the video of the wedding because:

         'The video that was played showed a very limited number  of  guests
         in attendance at the ceremony. There were several  bridesmaids  (8)
         and partners but there were only about 8 people that could be  seen
         in the audience. Considering the sponsor said that his family  live
         in Jamaica, as do the appellant's, one would have  expected  a  far
         larger ceremony if their intentions were  genuine.  The  submission
         that because there was a cake, the setting was beautiful  and  they
         shared a passionate kiss is not one I find has weight.  The  couple
         would have known that such evidence  would  be  required  and  many
         staged marriages occur. If there was more evidence to  support  the
         subsistence of their marriage and contact between them then  I  may
         have had less reservations about the video evidence but when  added
         to the other areas of  concern  I  place  little  weight  upon  the
         evidence and do not find that it addresses the concerns  raised  in
         the Refusal letter.'


23. There is no set minimum figure as to the number  of  wedding  attendees
    required to establish the genuineness of  a  marriage  for  immigration
    purposes. Domestic law requires that the marriage must be conducted  by
    a person or  in  the  presence  of  a  person  authorised  to  register
    marriages in the district and that the marriage must be entered in  the
    marriage register and signed by both parties, two witnesses, the person
    who conducted the ceremony and, if that person  is  not  authorised  to
    register  marriages,  the  person  who  is  registering  the  marriage.
    Consequently, a lawful marriage in this country only requires two other
    persons other than the officiate  to  attend.  There  was  no  evidence
    before the Judge that any other minimum requirement was established  in
    Jamaica. The Judge simply entered into unlawful speculation as  to  how
    many people should attend a wedding before it could be considered to be
    genuine and so materially erred in law.

Remaking the decision

24. As to the re-making of this decision I note the fundamental  nature  of
    the material errors identified and observe the submissions made by both
    Ms Isherwood and Ms Butler that clear findings of fact will have to  be
    made when this decision is re-made. Both representatives advocated that
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. I have  given
    careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in  this
    Tribunal that reads as follows at paragraph 7.2:

         'The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-


             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other
                opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to  be
                re-made is such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
                the First-tier Tribunal.'


25. I have reached the conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  matters.
    The appellant has enjoyed no adequate consideration of  her  appeal  to
    date and has not yet had a fair hearing.

26. The sponsor will be  expected  to  file  evidence  as  to  his  medical
    condition, namely dyslexia, and the parties will further be expected to
    draw the  Tribunal's  attention  to  relevant  sections  of  the  Equal
    Treatment Bench Book.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    28 May 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

28. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any Judge other than Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lloyd-
    Smith.

29. No findings of fact are preserved.

 Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 November 2019


