
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24117/2016
                                                               HU/24105/2016
                                                               HU/24108/2016
                                                               HU/24113/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 05 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                1) HP (INDIA)
                                2) RP (INDIA)
                                3) VP (INDIA)
                                4) SP (INDIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Tilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, who are a family comprising a mother and father and two
    qualifying  children,  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge C.A.S. O'Garro sitting at Hatton Cross  on  15  October
    2018) dismissing their appeals against the decision to refuse to  grant
    them leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  family  and  private  life
    established in the UK.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction.  However, as the principal issue  is  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in  finding  that,  despite  the
    children having resided in the UK for seven years or more,  nonetheless
    it would be reasonable to expect  them  to  leave  the  UK  with  their
    parents, I consider that an  anonymity  direction  is  appropriate  for
    these proceedings in  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to  protect  the
    children from harmful publicity.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellants are all  nationals  of  India.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are married partners.  The first  appellant  gave  birth  to
    their daughter, 'V', on 14 February 2008 in India, and  to  their  son,
    'S', in the UK on 1 July 2010.  As the  first  appellant  is  the  main
    appellant, I shall hereafter refer to  her  as  'the  appellant',  save
    where the context otherwise requires.

 3. The appellant was born in India on 1 April 1979.  She arrived in the UK
    on 31 January 2009 with valid entry clearance as a student.  On 30 July
    2009 she was joined in the UK by her spouse, 'R', and  their  child  V.
    They were granted entry clearance as student dependants.  The appellant
    successfully applied to extend her stay in the UK as a student  on  two
    occasions, and the rest of her family were  granted  limited  leave  to
    remain in line with her.  The appellant last held valid leave to remain
    until 27 April 2015, and the remaining appellants held valid  leave  to
    remain as her dependants until the same date.

 4. On 4 April 2015 the appellant sought further leave to remain as a  Tier
    2 migrant, but her application was refused on 24  June  2015,  and  the
    remaining appellants were all refused in line with her.

 5. On 28 April 2016 Charles Simmons Solicitors submitted an application on
    behalf of the appellant and her husband for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  The  children  joined  in  the  application  as  "non-
    applicant dependants".

 6. On 3 August 2016 the same solicitors served a statement  of  additional
    grounds relying on the fact that V had now accrued  over  seven  years'
    residence in the UK since entering the UK with her father  on  30  July
    2009.

 7. On 28 September 2016 the Department gave their reasons for refusing the
    appellant's application.  Notwithstanding the fact  that  her  daughter
    had been in the UK for seven years, it was reasonable to expect her  to
    return to India with her, her husband  and  her  son,  and  under  such
    circumstances there would be no significant interference with  her  and
    their family life under Article 8 ECHR.  Education services and  access
    to health care were available for her  children  on  return  to  India.
    Both children were at an age where they could be expected to  adapt  to
    life in India, and given that both she and her husband were educated to
    tertiary level, it is reasonable to expect her and  her  spouse  to  be
    able to obtain employment and earn enough money to  provide  for  their
    children in India. Under these circumstances, it was in the  children's
    best interests to remain with her and her husband on  their  return  to
    India.  Furthermore, the children were both citizens of India "with all
    that this implies for their right to know their own  cultural  identity
    and have contact with any extended family in India".

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Both parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  O'Garro.   The
    appellant and her husband gave oral  evidence,  and  they  were  cross-
    examined by the Presenting Officer.

 9. In  her  subsequent  decision,  the  Judge  set  out  her  findings  at
    paragraphs [20] onwards.  She began by considering the claim that there
    would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  reintegration  of  the
    appellant  and  her  partner  into  life  and  society  in  India.   At
    paragraphs [25]-[30] she gave her reasons for  finding  that  the  case
    under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi) was not made out.  The  reasons  included  the
    fact that the appellant had worked in India prior to coming to the  UK,
    and that both parents had transferable skills.  Her husband had  worked
    in the UK as an IT Engineer.  They  had  cousins  in  India  who  could
    assist them in finding accommodation to rent.

10. At paragraphs [31] to [49] (comprising three closely-typed  pages)  the
    Judge undertook a very detailed assessment of the best interests of the
    two children, making  extensive  reference  to  Azimi-Moayad  &  Others
    [2013] UKUT, EV (Philippines & Others) [2014] EWCA Civ  874,  MT  &  ET
    (Child's best interests; extempore pilot)  Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  00088
    (IAC). She concluded at paragraph [49] that overall the children's best
    interests would be for them to remain in the UK "because it  will  mean
    that ties in the United Kingdom formed through  their  residence  would
    not  be  disrupted  and  they  are  likely  to   have   better   future
    opportunities, both educational and economically, by continuing to live
    in a first world country."

11. However, she did not find this to be a case where the best interests of
    the children pointed overwhelmingly in favour of them remaining in  the
    UK "because of  the  factors  I  have  already  mentioned  above  which
    indicate that they would be  able  to  form  a  connection  with  their
    country of nationality".

12. At paragraph [50], the Judge directed herself that because  it  was  in
    the children's best interests to remain in the UK  this  did  not  mean
    that it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK.

13. At paragraph [51] she referred to the Home  Office  Guidance  that  had
    been quoted in PD (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT 106 to the  effect  that  the
    longer the child has resided in the UK, the more balance will begin  to
    swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
    the UK.  Nevertheless, the Judge observed, this  Home  Office  Guidance
    had to be looked at as a whole.  The Judge continued:  "The  respondent
    considers that it is generally reasonable to expect a  child  to  leave
    the UK with their parents, particularly if the parents have no right to
    remain in the United Kingdom."

14. At paragraph [52], the Judge said that it was apparent from the case of
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 that, when considering whether it  is
    reasonable to expect a child to leave the United Kingdom,  regard  must
    be had to the wider public interest in effective immigration control.

15. At paragraph [53], the Judge held that there were powerful  reasons  as
    to why leave should not be granted to the children: "In this  case  the
    appellant has no right to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her  leave
    ended as long ago as 2015, but  she  deliberately  remained,  no  doubt
    waiting until her eldest child had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  7
    years to make her application for leave to remain."

16. At paragraph [54], she said that she was fortified in her findings that
    it was reasonable to expect the appellant's children to  leave  the  UK
    with her and her partner  by  the  judgment  of  Lord  Carnwath  in  KO
    (Nigeria) -v-  SSDH  [2018]  UKSC  53.   The  Judge  went  on  to  cite
    paragraphs [18] and [19] of his speech in their entirety.

17. At paragraph [56] the Judge held that it  was  reasonable,  bearing  in
    mind the public interests in the maintenance  of  immigration  control,
    for the children to go to India with their parents, as  they  were  all
    citizens of India and they had no right  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The
    children were not in their teens.  They were fit and  well.   Schooling
    could resume in their home country before V reached  a  critical  stage
    and their parents, who were bright and able, would be able  to  support
    their children in  every  way,  as  they  wanted  the  best  for  their
    children.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

18. The application for permission to appeal was settled by Counsel who had
    not appeared at the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal.   She  pleaded
    that the Judge had failed to understand and apply correctly  the  ratio
    of KO (Nigeria) and had erroneously taken into account the  appellant's
    immigration history in reaching a perverse decision that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the two qualifying children to leave the UK.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

19. On 27 December 2018 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  gave
    lengthy reasons for granting the appellants' permission to appeal on  a
    much broader basis than that pleaded by Counsel. He made  no  reference
    to KO (Nigeria).  His reasons included the following: "The Judge saw no
    reason why they could not establish a connection with  the  country  of
    their  nationality.   It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has  attached
    insufficient weight to the benchmark policy period of  seven  years  in
    relation to the question of integration across the social, cultural and
    educational spectrum.  It is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has  attached
    insufficient to the effect of deracination.  It is  arguable  that  the
    Judge has  attributed  too  much  weight  to  factors  in  relation  to
    integration in India...At paragraph 56 the Judge considered  that  even
    though it was in the children's best interests to remain in the UK,  it
    was reasonable for the children to go to India with their parents.   It
    is arguable that this conclusion had been diluted by the  reference  to
    best interests at paragraph 49 of the decision.  It is arguably unclear
    what unequivocal  conclusion  is  being  applied  in  relation  to  the
    application of  section  55.   It  is  arguable  that  an  insufficient
    analysis has been set out in  relation  to  proportionality  where  the
    history of the first appellant is concerned in contradistinction to the
    wider  public  policy  considerations  arguably  not  relevant  to  the
    application of section 55 or  to  the  question  of  reasonableness  in
    relation to [V]."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Gilbert developed both the  case  advanced  in  the  permission
    application  and  the  concerns  raised  by  the  Judge   who   granted
    permission.  On behalf of the respondent, Ms Everett submitted that  it
    was quite a challenge for any judge to accommodate the decision  in  KO
    within the earlier jurisprudence relating  to  the  best  interests  of
    children and the 7-year Rule.  However,  having  regard  to  paragraphs
    [46]-[52] of KO, in which Lord Carnwath gave his reasons for dismissing
    the appeals of NS and AR, she submitted that any error in  the  Judge's
    approach was not material, and that her  conclusion  on  reasonableness
    was sustainable and entirely in line with KO.

Discussion

21. On 24 October 2018 the Supreme Court gave their judgment in the case of
    KO (Nigeria) & Others -v- Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53.  Lord Carnwath, with whom the  other  Justices  agreed,
    said at paragraph  [16]  that,  unlike  its  predecessor  DP5/96,  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) contains no requirement to consider  the  criminality  or
    misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor and that it was impossible
    in his view to read it as importing such a requirement by  implication.
    At paragraph [17],  he  said  that  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
    substance of the Rule without material change, but  this  time  in  the
    context of the right of a parent to remain.  He inferred  that  it  was
    intended to have the same effect.  The  question  again  was  what  was
    reasonable for the child.

22. In assessing what was reasonable for the child, Lord Carnwath  endorsed
    as a highly relevant consideration the following guidance contained  in
    an Immigration Directorate Instruction (IDI) of the Home  Office  cited
    at paragraph [10]:

         "It is generally the case that it is in a child's best interests to
         remain with their parents.  Unless special  factors  apply,  it  is
         generally reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK  with  their
         parents, particularly if the parents have no right to remain in the
         UK (my emphasis)."

23. At paragraph [17], Lord Carnwath said:

         "The list of relevant factors set out in the IDI Guidance (para  10
         above) seems to me wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the
         context of section 117B(6) as with paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)."

24. At paragraph [18], he continued:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI Guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it would normally be reasonable for  the  child  to  be  with
         them.  To that  extent,  the  record  of  the  parents  may  become
         indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have  a  right
         to remain here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even  on  that
         hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to leave  that
         the provision may give the parents a right to remain."

25. Lord Carnwath went on to say that the point was well expressed by  Lord
    Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) -v- SSHD [2007] SLT 1245 at  22,  and  also  by
    Lewison LJ in  EV  (Philippines)  -v-  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  at
    paragraph [58].  Lewison LJ said, inter alia, as follows:  "If  neither
    parent has the right to remain, then that is a background against which
    the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question would  be:  is
    it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to
    remain to the country of origin?"

26. Lord Carnwath said, at [19], that, to the extent that Elias LJ may have
    suggested otherwise in  MA  (Pakistan)  at  paragraph  [40],  he  would
    respectfully disagree.  There was nothing in  the  section  to  suggest
    that "reasonableness" was considered otherwise than in the  real  world
    in which the children find themselves.

27. At paragraphs [46]-[52], in which Lord Carnwath gave  his  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeals of NS and AR.  Both appeals  featured  blameless
    children who had resided in the UK for over 10 years at the time of the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 5 November 2014.

28. Both claimants had entered the UK as students, on 19 February 2004  and
    4 February 2003 respectively.  NS's wife and older child had entered as
    dependants of NS in December 2004.  AR's wife and child had entered  as
    AR's dependants in February 2004.  In October 2008, NS and AR had  made
    separate applications for leave to remain as Tier 1  (Post-study  work)
    migrants.  In early 2009 the SSHD refused  these  applications  on  the
    basis that both NS and AR were involved in a scam  by  which  they  and
    numerous others falsely claimed to have  successfully  completed  post-
    graduate courses at an institution  called  The  Cambridge  College  of
    Learning.

29. NS and AR both appealed against the SSHD's decision, and their  appeals
    were ultimately joined, and came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins.
    In his decision issued on 5 November 2014, he  dismissed  the  appeals.
    With regard to the children, he had no difficulty  in  concluding  that
    the best interests of the children required that they remain in the  UK
    with their parents. That, from their point of view, would be  an  ideal
    result.  He reminded himself that one of  the  children,  particularly,
    had been in the UK for more than 10 years,  and  this  represented  the
    greater part of her young  life  and  she  was  someone  who  could  be
    expected to be establishing a private and family life outside the home.
     He also reminded himself that none of the children had any  experience
    of life outside the UK and they were happy,  settled  and  doing  well.
    But the fact was that their parents  had  no  right  to  remain  unless
    removal would contravene their human rights. Given their behaviour,  it
    would be outrageous for them to be permitted to remain in the UK: "They
    must go and in all the circumstances I find that the  other  appellants
    must go with them."

30. Mr Knafler QC, on behalf of the children, submitted that  the  decision
    of UTJ Perkins was erroneous in law as parental misconduct should  have
    been disregarded.  However, Lord Carnwath said at paragraph [51]:

         "I accept that UTJ Perkins' final conclusion is  arguably  open  to
         the  interpretation  that  the  "outrageousness"  of  the  parents'
         conduct was  somehow  relevant  to  the  conclusion  under  section
         117B(6).  However, read in its full context,  I  do  not  think  he
         erred in that respect.  He correctly directed  himself  as  to  the
         wording of the subsection.  The parents' conduct  was  relevant  in
         that it meant that they had  to  leave  the  country.   As  I  have
         explained (para 18 above) it is in that context that it had  to  be
         considered whether it is reasonable for the children to leave  with
         them. Their best interests would have been for the whole family  to
         remain here.  But in the context where the parents  had  to  leave,
         the natural expectation would be that the children  would  go  with
         them, and there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by  the  Judge
         to suggest that that would be other than reasonable (my emphasis)".

The Pleaded Error of Law Challenge

31. The case advanced in the permission application is  that  the  powerful
    reason identified by the Judge at  paragraph  [53]  for  expecting  the
    children to leave the UK was their  mother's  absence  of  a  right  to
    remain in the UK  since  2015,  and  her  deliberately  remaining  here
    (unlawfully) with a view to waiting until the eldest child had been  in
    the UK for seven years.  The pleader acknowledges that the Judge  gives
    further reasons as to why it is reasonable for the children to go  back
    to India with their parents at paragraph [56], but submits that "it  is
    plain from paragraph 53 that it is the appellant's immigration  history
    that forms the key basis of her decision."

32. The pleading overlooks the fact that between paragraphs [53]  and  [56]
    falls paragraph [54], in which the Judge explains  why  the  speech  of
    Lord Carnwath in KO fortifies her findings that  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant's children to  leave  the  UK  with  her  and  her
    partner. By citing paragraphs [18] and [19] of KO  in  their  entirety,
    the Judge identified the crucial ratio of  KO  which  I  have  set  out
    above.  This includes the Supreme Court's  endorsement  of  the  policy
    guidance position of the Department that the Judge cites with  approval
    at paragraph [51], namely that it is generally reasonable to  expect  a
    child to leave the United Kingdom with their parents,  particularly  if
    the parents have no right to remain in the UK.

33. It was not an error of law for the Judge to bring into the equation the
    immigration history of the mother, as this was a necessary precursor to
    the real world assessment that was required.  The  immigration  history
    of the mother and father led to their ceasing to have a right to remain
    here, and having to leave.

34. By citing paragraph [19] of KO, the Judge rightly identified  that  the
    background against which the assessment of  reasonableness  was  to  be
    conducted was that neither parent had the right to remain, and thus the
    ultimate question was: "Is it reasonable to expect the child to  follow
    the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

35. Given this starting point, there was  nothing  perverse  in  the  Judge
    concluding that it was reasonable for the children to go to India  with
    their parents.  Such a conclusion  was  entirely  consonant  with  Lord
    Carnwath's general line of reasoning in KO, and it  is  also  congruent
    with his disposal of the appeals of  NS  and  AR,  whose  children  had
    objectively much stronger private life claims than the children in this
    appeal based on their length of residence.

Whether error in taking into account wider public policy considerations

36. Judge Hollingworth's concerns appear primarily  to  relate  to  matters
    lying outside the pleaded error of law challenge.  The  only  point  of
    intersection  is  his  observation  that  it  is   arguable   that   an
    insufficient analysis has been  set  out  relating  to  proportionality
    where  the  history  of   the   first   appellant   is   concerned   in
    contradistinction to the wider public  policy  considerations  arguably
    not relevant to the application of section 55, or to  the  question  of
    reasonableness in relation to V.

37. Wider public policy considerations do not impact upon the  question  of
    reasonableness, following KO.  The principle from MA  (Pakistan)  cited
    by Judge O'Garro at paragraph [52] of her decision is  no  longer  good
    law. But insofar as the reasoning of Judge O'Garro on the  question  of
    reasonableness is at times contaminated by  her  incorrectly  following
    earlier Court of Appeal jurisprudence which stated the  contrary,  this
    does not translate into a material error of law.   To  paraphrase  Lord
    Carnwath, the parents' illegal status since 24 June 2015  was  relevant
    in that it meant they had to leave the country. In  the  context  where
    both parents had to leave the UK, the natural expectation would be that
    the children would go with them, and there was nothing in the  evidence
    reviewed by the  Judge  to  suggest  that  this  would  be  other  than
    reasonable in the real world, notwithstanding the fact they  were  both
    qualifying children under the statute  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    (Neither of them potentially qualified for leave to remain  under  Rule
    276ADE (1)(iv) as neither had accrued seven years residence at the date
    of application, although V had accrued seven  years  residence  by  the
    date of decision.)

Whether the finding that the best interests of  the  children  lay  in  them
remaining in the UK is inconsistent  with  the  later  finding  that  it  is
reasonable to expect them to leave the UK with their parents

38. There is no inconsistency in the Judge  concluding  at  paragraph  [49]
    that overall it was in the children's best interest to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with the subsequent conclusion that  it  is  nonetheless
    reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK  with  their  parents.   The
    conclusion reached  at  paragraph  [49]  was  the  product  of  a  best
    interests assessment conducted in an ideal world scenario, following MA
    (Pakistan), whereas the conclusion of reasonableness reflects the  real
    world in which the children find themselves, which is one  where  their
    parents have no right to remain, and there are no other family  members
    who can step in to take care of  them  in  the  UK  in  their  parents'
    absence.





Whether Judge erred in finding that the best interests of the  children  did
not point overwhelmingly in favour of them remaining in the UK

39. Another asserted error raised by Mr Gilbert is that the Judge  did  not
    give adequate reasons for  finding  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children did not point overwhelmingly in favour of  them  remaining  in
    the UK; and that the Judge did not adequately engage with the report of
    the Expert Psychologist who, as pleaded in Counsel's skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal, opined that removing the children  from
    the UK would "seriously affect them  emotionally  from  their  loss  of
    identity" and that they would "suffer grief and depression arising  out
    of the loss of the familiar, the loss of their friends and schooling."

40. The permission application does  not  feature  a  complaint  about  not
    giving enough weight to a particular piece of evidence, or  giving  too
    much weight to another piece of evidence.  Still less does it feature a
    complaint that the Judge has failed to take into account  a  particular
    piece of evidence.

41. On the topic of the report of  Dr  Kevin  Wright,  the  Judge  said  as
    follows at paragraph [45]: "I noted Dr Wright has  looked  at  all  the
    negative implications of the children moving, paying no regard  to  the
    fact that children are resilient  and  are  able  to  adapt  to  change
    provided their parents are there to support and  guide  them  as  these
    children's parents will be.  I find Dr Wright's report is not objective
    and for that reason I place limited weight on it."

42. I consider that it was open to the Judge to place limited weight on  Dr
    Wright's report for the reasons which  she  gave.   More  generally,  I
    consider that the Judge gave adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    children could establish a connection  with  India,  despite  S  having
    never lived there and V not being able to  recall  living  there.   Her
    reasoning included the fact that they would have had contact with their
    parents' friends who formed part of the Indian  community  in  the  UK,
    "which means that they have  some  knowledge  and  familiarity  of  the
    Indian culture."  The Judge further observed that  the  children  would
    have spoken and understood Gujarati prior to going to school, when they
    communicated mainly in Gujarati with their parents, whose main language
    remained Gujarati. So they would be able to speak Gujarati even if they
    were not able to read and write it.  There was  no  reason  to  suppose
    that either  of  the  children  would  have  particular  difficulty  in
    learning to read and write in Gujarati.   They  would  be  educated  in
    India and, to the Judge's knowledge, India had a good education system.
     Indeed, the appellant had her husband were educated to a high standard
    and had both qualified in India as Mechanical Engineers.  In  addition,
    the appellant's own father was a doctor, and her husband's  father  was
    an accountant.

43. For the above reasons, I find that no error of law is made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
     Date 21 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

