


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/24426/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 March 2018                          | On 27 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Kumarasamy Sivakaran
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).   The  appellant,  Kumarasamy  Sivakaran,  was  born  on  13
    February 1971 and is a  male  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  appellant
    appealed against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    deportation order against him on 29 June 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Doyle) in a decision promulgated on 18 April 2017,  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary of State now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. A previous hearing before the Upper Tribunal  was  aborted.   When  the
    appeal came before me at Bradford on  26  March  2018,  Mr  McVeety,  a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared for  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The appellant appeared in person and spoke with the  assistance
    of a Tamil interpreter.  I explained to the appellant that the previous
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal were null and void and  that  the
    Upper Tribunal would  be  starting  the  case  from  the  beginning  by
    considering whether the First-tier Tribunal had made any error of  law.
    I told the appellant that no part of the deliberations of the  previous
    panel of the Upper Tribunal would affect my decision.  I was  satisfied
    that the appellant could understand what I was saying and I am grateful
    also to Mr McVeety for making his submissions clearly and in a  way  in
    which I believe the appellant plainly understood.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first ground of  appeal  concerns
    what the Secretary of State describes as inconsistent findings by Judge
    Doyle.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom in 1990 when he was 19
    years old.  He has, therefore, lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  more
    than half of his life.  In 2000, the appellant  married  a  Sri  Lankan
    woman and the couple have two children.  The appellant is now estranged
    from his wife and children who continue to live in the United  Kingdom.
    It has not been argued by the appellant nor was it found by Judge Doyle
    that the appellant enjoys family life  with  any  other  individual  or
    individuals in this country.  At [10] of Judge  Doyle's  decision,  the
    particulars of the appellant's offending are set  out.   The  offending
    dates back to June 2008.  The appellant has been convicted of a  number
    of driving offences and also dishonesty and vandalism.  He has breached
    a non-molestation order and community orders.  He has  been  imprisoned
    for various periods  in  connection,  in  particular  for  the  driving
    offences.

 4. In his decision at [24], Judge Doyle considered whether  the  appellant
    fell within the definition of a "persistent offender. " He  did  so  in
    order to consider the operation in this case of  Section  117C  of  the
    2002 Act (as amended):

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

         (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
         C's life,

         (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
         and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

 5. At [25], Judge Doyle wrote:

         The number and nature of the appellant's convictions indicate  that
         he is a persistent offender.   The  appellant  had  the  threat  of
         deportation hanging over him from 2011 to 2015.  In  July  2015  he
         was told that he would not be deported.  He was convicted  a  month
         before  he  received  the  respondent's  decision.   He  has   been
         convicted five times since he received that decision.

 6. At [27], Judge Doyle concluded:

         I therefore find that the appellant is a  persistent  offender  who
         has shown a particular disregard for the law for seven years  as  a
         mature adult.  Such  offending  behaviour  is  unusual.   A  normal
         pattern is for offending behaviour to start early in a  man's  life
         and to tail off as  middle  age  approaches.   In  this  case,  the
         appellant's offending behaviour started as a middle-aged man.   His
         offending has been at the lesser end of the criminal spectrum.

 7. Judge Doyle, therefore, made an unequivocal finding that the  appellant
    is a persistent offender.  Having concluded at [29] that the  appellant
    could not fall within the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of HC  395  or
    Appendix FM, the judge turned to Article 8 ECHR.  At  [39],  the  judge
    wrote:

         Ultimately,   this   case   comes   down   to   consideration    of
         proportionality.  The appellant has established private life in the
         UK.  The problem for the appellant  is  the  private  life  is  now
         tainted by his offending behaviour.  The respondent's  decision  is
         in pursuit of a legitimate aim.  The decision to  deport  has  been
         made  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's   behaviour   requires
         deportation for the promotion of the public  good.   The  appellant
         has never been sentenced to a period of  custody  which  approaches
         twelve months.  He is therefore not a  "foreign  criminal"  however
         Section 117C of the 2002 Act provides some guidance.

 8.  At  [42],  the  judge  considered  "the  extent  of  the   appellant's
    criminality  does  not   reach   the   threshold   for   Section   117C
    considerations.  He has made a nuisance of himself over the last  seven
    years".  The judge considered the appellant had been  "lucky"  to  have
    received relatively lenient sentences for his driving offences.

 9.  The  Secretary  of  State  argues  that  the  judge's   reasoning   is
    inconsistent.  As I read [42] (see above) the judge has found that  the
    appellant does not fall within the definition of "a  foreign  criminal"
    for the purposes of Section 117C.  The judge appears to have overlooked
    the interpretation section in the 2002 Act, in particular Section  117D
    (2):

         (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a) who is not a British citizen,

         (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

         (c) who-

         (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12
         months,

         (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm,
         or

         (iii) is a persistent offender. [my emphasis]

10. It follows that, having found that  the  appellant  was  "a  persistent
    offender", the judge should have treated him as a  "foreign  criminal".
    It is clear from  the  reasoning  at  [42]-[43],  that  the  judge  has
    overlooked the fact  that  a  persistent  offender  may  be  a  foreign
    criminal as much as an individual who has been convicted  of  at  least
    twelve months' imprisonment.  The judge's misunderstanding has led  him
    into legal error.  In particular, the judge should have applied Section
    117C(4) (Exception 1):

    (4) Exception 1 applies where-

    (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of  C's
    life,

    (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

    (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's  integration  into
    the country to which C is proposed to be deported.




11. The judge's analysis is incomplete and flawed. In the circumstances,  I
    find that his decision should be set aside.

12. The second ground of appeal concerns the judge's alleged curtailing  of
    the Presenting Officer's submissions.  Mr Andrew Bell,  the  Presenting
    Officer before the First-tier Tribunal, has provided a statement  which
    is dated 19 May 2017.  At [9], Mr Bell states that he was "preparing to
    make my closing submissions" which  would  include  "[the  appellant's]
    progressive criminal  history  in  the  UK  as  a  primary  reason  for
    deportation".  Mr Bell says that the judge did not allow  him  to  make
    the submissions because the appellant was unrepresented.   Judge  Doyle
    himself has been invited by the Resident Judge of the Upper Tribunal to
    make comments which he has duly sent and which have been distributed to
    the parties.  Judge Doyle has said that, "[the Presenting Officer] made
    no attempt to make any other submissions [beyond paragraphs 398 and 399
    of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR] because I  made  it  clear
    that I wanted him to restrict his submissions".  Judge Doyle said  that
    he "did so because I wanted to ensure that both  parties  were  treated
    fairly and to preserve  equality  of  arms".   Judge  Doyle  relies  on
    paragraphs 2(2)(b) and (c) and 4(3)(g) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014:

         Overriding objective and parties' obligation to co-operate with the
         Tribunal

         2. (1) The overriding objective of these Rules  is  to  enable  the
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.




         (2) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-




         (a) dealing with the case in ways which are  proportionate  to  the
         importance  of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,   the
         anticipated costs and the resources  of  the  parties  and  of  the
         Tribunal;

         (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility  in  the
         proceedings;

         (c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are  able  to
         participate fully in the proceedings;

         (d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; and

         (e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper  consideration
         of the issues.

         (3) The Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the  overriding
         objective when it-




         (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or

         (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.

         Case management powers

         4. (1) Subject to the provisions of the  2007  Act  and  any  other
         enactment, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.




         (2) The Tribunal may give a direction in relation to the conduct or
         disposal  of  proceedings  at  any  time,  including  a   direction
         amending, suspending or setting aside an earlier direction.




         (3) In particular, and without restricting the  general  powers  in
         paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal may-




         (a) extend or  shorten  the  time  for  complying  with  any  rule,
         practice direction or direction;

         (b) consolidate or hear together two or more sets of proceedings or
         parts of proceedings raising common issues;

         (c) permit or require a party to amend a document;

         (d) permit  or  require  a  party  or  another  person  to  provide
         documents, information, evidence or submissions to the Tribunal  or
         a party;

         (e) provide  for  a  particular  matter  to  be  dealt  with  as  a
         preliminary issue;

         (f) hold a  hearing  to  consider  any  matter,  including  a  case
         management issue;

         (g) decide the form of any hearing;

         (h) adjourn or postpone a hearing;

         (i) require a party to produce a bundle for a hearing;

         (j) stay (or, in Scotland, sist) proceedings;

         (k) transfer proceedings to another court or tribunal if that other
         court or tribunal has jurisdiction in relation to  the  proceedings
         and-

         (i) because of a change of circumstances since the proceedings were
         started, the Tribunal no longer has jurisdiction in relation to the
         proceedings; or

         (ii) the Tribunal considers that the other court or tribunal  is  a
         more appropriate forum for the determination of the case; or

         (l)  suspend  the  effect  of  its   own   decision   pending   the
         determination  by  the  Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal  of   an
         application for permission to appeal against,  and  any  appeal  or
         review of, that decision.

13. Judge Doyle's reliance on paragraph 2(2)(c)  is  puzzling  given  that,
    according to Mr Bell, the judge prevented him from "participating fully
    in the proceedings".  I appreciate that  Judge  Doyle  was  seeking  to
    establish an  environment  in  the  court  in  which  an  unrepresented
    appellant which might be able to  put  across  his  case  in  the  most
    effective way.  I fail to see, however, how restricting the submissions
    of the Presenting Officer might achieve that end.  Indeed, in the light
    of the issues which  Mr Bell now says he would have referred to in  his
    submissions,  the  judge  might  have  benefited  from  hearing   those
    submissions regarding the appellant's persistent offending and how such
    offending might result in his being treated  as  a  "foreign  criminal"
    notwithstanding the short periods of imprisonment to which he had  been
    sentenced.  Whilst I accept that Judge Doyle's intentions were entirely
    laudable, I find that he has,  unwittingly,  perpetrated  a  procedural
    unfairness.

14. For the reasons I have  set  out  above,  I  set  aside  Judge  Doyle's
    decision.  The question remains as to which, if any, of his findings of
    fact should remain.  Neither of the two errors  of  law  which  I  have
    identified infect the fact-finding in this case.   Indeed,  as  I  have
    recorded above, the judge did find unequivocally that the appellant  is
    a  persistent  offender.   Likewise,   the   findings   regarding   the
    appellant's  estrangement  from  his  wife   and   children   are   not
    controversial.  Those findings are  preserved.   I  have  proceeded  to
    remake the decision.

15. I refer to the provisions of Section 117 of the 2002 Act which  I  have
    set out above.  The appellant told me that he had not seen his children
    for three years.  He is currently living with his sister.  He confirmed
    that he was not in any  relationship  at  the  present  time.   I  have
    considered whether the appellant falls within Exception  1.   I  accept
    that he has lived in the United Kingdom for most of his life.  However,
    there is little evidence that he is socially and culturally  integrated
    into the United Kingdom.  He has shown a persistent disregard  for  the
    laws of this country.  He lives with his Tamil sister and there was  no
    evidence  before  me  that  he  has  any  integration  with  the  wider
    community.  As regards the obstacles facing  him  upon  return  to  Sri
    Lanka, this aspect of the case was addressed in some  detail  by  Judge
    Doyle.  Again, there is no suggestion that the errors of law  in  Judge
    Doyle's decision have infected those  findings.   At  [45],  the  judge
    acknowledged that the appellant in Sri Lanka would "have to start  from
    scratch from the moment he arrives there.  The  appellant's  family  of
    origin and his estranged wife and children remain in the UK so that the
    appellant will be isolated.  The purpose  of  isolating  a  middle-aged
    vulnerable man in his country of  origin  is  to  stop  him  committing
    another offence which might attract a financial penalty  or  community-
    based disposal".  The judge went on to say that he did not consider the
    appellant presented a risk to the  public;  that  finding  is  puzzling
    given the  appellant's  persistence  in  driving  whilst  disqualified.
    Moreover, at [22], the judge wrote:

         [The appellant] has a history of employment.  Although he  suffered
         a head injury in 1998 he has recovered sufficiently to be  able  to
         live independently and has survived in the  British  penal  system.
         The  appellant  had  already   demonstrated   that   he   has   the
         resourcefulness to come to the UK and establish himself as a  young
         man.  His experience and maturity have not diminished  his  ability
         to re-establish himself in his country of origin where he is fluent
         in the language of that country.

16. The appellant has not disputed that  finding.   In  the  light  of  the
    finding, it is difficult for  me  to  conclude  that  there  are  "very
    significant obstacles" preventing the  appellant's  reintegration  into
    Sri Lanka.  I find that the appellant does not fall within Exception 1.
     His deportation, therefore, is in the public  interest.   Further,  in
    the light of the fact that he has not shown  integration  into  British
    society and notwithstanding his lengthy residence in  this  country,  I
    conclude that there would be no disproportionate interference with  his
    private life if he were to be removed to Sri  Lanka.   The  appellant's
    appeal against the decision to deport him is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 18 April 2017 is  set
aside.  I have remade the decision.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
decision to deport him dated 29 June 2016 is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018



Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
