
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24910/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2019                         |On 4th February 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                 Kemoko [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Blair, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Guinea whose date of birth is recorded as
    30th June 1981.

 2. On 16th June 2016 he made application for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom based on Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.
    In that application, however he made mention of his sexual orientation.

 3. The Secretary of  State  refused  the  application  and  the  Appellant
    appealed.  His appeal was heard on 21st February 2018 by Judge Buckwell
    sitting at Taylor House.  Judge Buckwell had regard to paragraph 276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules but was unwilling to give "any weight" to  the
    Appellant's claimed sexual orientation in his overall assessment of the
    competing factors material to the  proportionality  assessment.   Judge
    Buckwell went on to dismiss the appeal.

 4.  Not  content  with  that  decision,  by  Notice  the  Appellant   made
    application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    application was refused in the First-tier.  However,  on  16th  October
    2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede, on a  renewed  application,  granted
    permission.  There were a number of grounds but  within  those  grounds
    was the submission that Judge Buckwell had erred in not  having  regard
    to the Appellant's sexual orientation in his considerations.

 5. Ms Everett quite properly concedes that the judge was simply wrong  not
    to give weight to that issue.  That the Appellant  might  have  claimed
    international protection was not relevant to the  human  rights  claim.
    It is difficult to conceive of an international protection  claim  that
    does not have within it the contention that there has been a  violation
    of human rights, usually Article 3, but necessarily Article 8.

 6. In my judgment the decision simply cannot stand and I set it aside.  In
    remaking the decision, I note that at paragraph 21 of the Decision  the
    Appellant is recorded as having given evidence that he had been in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully for ten years from 2007 to 2017.  It was  noted
    that on 21st April 2016 his leave had been curtailed but he had made an
    "in-time" application such that leave continued.

 7. The Immigration Rules [276B] provide that where a person  has  lawfully
    been in the United Kingdom for ten years, and I paraphrase,  but  where
    there are no other sufficient factors which would make  it  undesirable
    to grant the relief, then a person is entitled to indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom.   Clearly  when  considering  the  wider
    application of Article 8, the starting point has to be whether there is
    an Immigration Rule which is met by the Appellant; that is a factor  in
    the proportionality assessment.

 8. The judge was right to have regard to  the  guidance  in  the  case  of
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and to the five tests.  So often one  however  is
    left with the proportionality assessment. In this case the Appellant is
    in a position where he  has  an  entitlement  to  indefinite  leave  to
    remain. I so find because as Ms Everett points out she is not  able  to
    point to any factor to counter that entitlement.

 9. I am required as a matter of law to have regard to Section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but there are  no  factors
    there set out material to my decision and no submissions have been made
    by Ms Everett that I ought not to allow the appeal, I allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.


The decision is set aside and remade such that the appeal in the  First-tier
Tribunal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.


Signed                              Date:  28 January 2019





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
