



















                                                        [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24003/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2020                          |On 27 February 2020           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                            ANNATOLIA CHINGWAWALA

                                                            Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                             Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr. A. Khan of counsel, instructed by
Longfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe and is now 63  years  old.  She
    first entered the United Kingdom on 24 November 2003, as a visitor, and
    subsequently had leave to remain as a student until 30 September  2007.
    It is the Appellant's case that she has been in a relationship with her
    British partner since January 2004 and has lived with him  since  2005.
    He                                is                                now

                                                        82  years  old  and
    originally came from Trinidad and Tobago.

2.   The Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  her  family
    and private life on 29 January 2018, but her application was refused on
    14 November 2018.

3.   She appealed and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frantzis,  dismissed  her
    appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  17  July  2019.  The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lever
    granted her permission to appeal on 24 September 2019. He found that it
    was arguable that, given the findings made in relation  to  their  time
    together and their respective ages and time  in  the  UK,  insufficient
    consideration was given to the issue of obstacles on return to Zimbabwe
    for the Appellant when conducting the balancing exercise.

4.   At a hearing on 11 November 2019, I found that there  had  been  errors
    of law in First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Frantzis'  decision  and  set  it
    aside. I also retained the appeal in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  re-
    hearing and provided the Appellant with permission to  file  and  serve
    additional evidence.

RESUMED HEARING

5.   On 13 January 2020  the  Appellant's  solicitors  filed  and  served  a
    letter from Dr. Patel at Goodmayes Medical Practice, dated  10  January
    2020.  They had been granted an extension of time to do so on 6 January
    2020.  The Respondent did not file and serve any evidence in response.

6.   The Appellant had not complied with my previous directions  in  so  far
    as she had not provided any medical evidence  detailing  the  treatment
    provided to her partner for each of  his  medical  conditions  and  the
    prognosis for these conditions.  She had also  failed  to  provide  any
    objective evidence relating to the provision  of  treatment  for  these
    conditions in Zimbabwe and the cost of any such treatment. Counsel  for
    the Appellant explained that he had  only  been  instructed  the  night
    before and acknowledged that the directions had not been complied with.
    I indicated that it was my view that the Appellant's solicitors had not
    provided her with the quality of advice and representation I would have
    expected in relation  to  the  failure  to  comply  with  the  detailed
    directions given at the error of law hearing.

7.   At  that  hearing,  the  Appellant  had  sought  to  rely  on  a  small
    additional bundle of material, but I had not admitted this material, as
    it had not been before First-tier Tribunal Judge Frantzis.  But  I  did
    give the Appellant permission to rely upon it at the current hearing as
    it was in the interests of  justice  for  there  to  be  more  detailed
    medical evidence and some objective material before the Tribunal.

8.   Counsel for the Appellant called both the  Appellant  and  she  adopted
    her  witness  statement.  The  Appellant  explained  that  her  partner
    suffered from heart and kidney failure, a cataract  and  diabetes.  She
    also said that he had no balance, had swollen feet  and  could  not  do
    things. In addition, she said that she washed him, cooked for  him  and
    managed his medication and that he was at home with her all  the  time.
    She also said that he took medication for his heart and kidneys and his
    diabetes and had to be helped up the stairs. In addition, she said that
    she currently put drops in his eyes four times a day as he had just had
    a cataract operation and that he had to go for a  post-operation  check
    up the following week.

9.   The Appellant also said that she would not be able to live in  Zimbabwe
    as she had no family or friends there and there were  no  hospitals  or
    doctors there, as most hospitals had closed.  When  cross-examined  she
    asserted that the Appellant asserted that she  would  not  be  able  to
    return to Zimbabwe to apply for entry clearance as a  partner,  as  she
    did not know anyone in Zimbabwe and her partner would not  be  able  to
    travel and start a new life there.  In addition, she asserted that  she
    did not have a passport, could not afford to  travel  there  and  would
    have nowhere to stay there.  She also said that  she  and  her  partner
    could not live together in Trinidad and Tobago as her partner's parents
    had died and he had  no  other  contacts  or  property  there.  In  re-
    examination she  said  that  her  partner's  Trinidadian  passport  had
    expired.

10.  The Appellant's partner adopted his witness  statement  and  also  said
    that he had recently had a cataract operation, takes  tablets  for  his
    diabetes and had had a stroke. He added that he  did  not  receive  any
    treatment as a result of his stroke but that his heart condition  meant
    that he could not walk fast or climb up stairs. He also  said  that  he
    took medication for a prostrate condition but this and his tablets  for
    his diabetes were the only pills that he took. He then  explained  that
    his partner cleans their house, cooks for him, takes him to the GP  and
    puts drops in his eyes.  He added that, if she had to go to Zimbabwe to
    apply for entry clearance, he would have no-one  else  who  could  look
    after him. However, he confirmed that he had  not  made  any  enquiries
    about assistance from social services or other sources and said that he
    did not want to do so. He also confirmed that he had no family  members
    or friends in Trinidad and Tobago.

11.  Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for  the  Appellant
    then made their submissions and I have referred to  these  submissions,
    where relevant, in my findings below.

DECISION

ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE WITHIN THE IMMIGRATION RULES

12.  The Respondent now accepts that the  Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her British partner, that they  had  lived
    together for more than two  years  before  she  made  her  most  recent
    application for leave to remain and had lived in a relationship akin to
    marriage since 2005.

13.  She also accepts that the Appellant's  application  did  not  fall  for
    refusal on grounds of suitability under section S-LTR of Appendix FM to
    the Immigration Rules. However, it is still the case that the Appellant
    could not meet the immigration status requirements contained in section
    E-LTR.P.2.2 of Appendix FM as she was present in the United Kingdom  in
    breach of the immigration laws and had been since 1 October 2007.

14.  However, it was the Appellant's case that she was entitled to leave  to
    remain under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM, which states that:

     "This paragraph applies if
     ...
     (b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner who is in the UK and  is  a  British  citizen...and  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK".

15.  EX.2. of Appendix FM also states:

     "For the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  'insurmountable  obstacles'
    means the very significant difficulties which would  be  faced  by  the
    applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family  life  together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner".

16.  I have reminded myself of the decision in Agyarko v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 and the need to apply this  test
    in a practical and realistic sense. In particular, Reed LJ noted that:

     "42. In Jeunesse,  the  Grand  Chamber  identified,  consistently  with
    earlier judgments of the court, a number of factors to  be  taken  into
    account in assessing the proportionality under article 8 of the removal
    of non-settled migrants from a contracting state  in  which  they  have
    family members. Relevant factors were said to  include  the  extent  to
    which family life would effectively be ruptured, the extent of the ties
    in the contracting state, whether there were "insurmountable obstacles"
    in the way of the family living in the country of origin  of  the  non-
    national concerned, and  whether  there  were  factors  of  immigration
    control (for example, a history of  breaches  of  immigration  law)  or
    considerations of public order weighing in favour  of  exclusion  (para
    107).

      43.  It  appears  that  the   European   court   intends   the   words
    "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  be  understood  in  a  practical   and
    realistic sense, rather than as referring  solely  to  obstacles  which
    make it literally impossible for the family to  live  together  in  the
    country of origin of the non-national concerned.  In  some  cases,  the
    court has  used other expressions which make that clearer: for example,
    referring to "un obstacle majeur" (Sen v The Netherlands (2003) 36 EHRR
    7, para 40), or to "major impediments" (Tuquabo-Tekle v The Netherlands
    [2006] 1 FLR  798,  para  48),  or  to  "the  test  of  'insurmountable
    obstacles' or 'major impediments'" (IAA v United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR
    SE 19, paras 40 and 44), or asking  itself  whether  the  family  could
    "realistically" be expected to move (Sezen v The Netherlands (2006)  43
    EHRR  30,  para  47).  "Insurmountable  obstacles"  is,  however,   the
    expression employed by the Grand Chamber; and the  court's  application
    of it indicates that it is a stringent test. In Jeunesse, for  example,
    there were said to be no insurmountable obstacles to the relocation  of
    the family to Suriname, although the children, the eldest of  whom  was
    at secondary school, were Dutch nationals who had lived there all their
    lives, had never visited Suriname, and would  experience  a  degree  of
    hardship if forced to move, and the applicant's partner  was  in  full-
    time employment in the Netherlands: see paras 117 and 119.

     44. Domestically, the expression "insurmountable obstacles" appears  in
    paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the Rules. As explained in para  15
    above, that paragraph applies in cases where an applicant for leave  to
    remain under the partner route is in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
    laws, and requires that there should  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with that partner continuing outside the UK. The expression
    "insurmountable obstacles" is now defined by paragraph EX.2 as  meaning
    "very significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or
    their partner in continuing their family life together outside  the  UK
    and which could not be overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship
    for the applicant or their partner." That definition appears to  me  to
    be consistent with the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg
    case law...

     45. By virtue of  paragraph  EX.1(b),  "insurmountable  obstacles"  are
    treated as a requirement for the grant of  leave  under  the  Rules  in
    cases to which that paragraph applies.  Accordingly,  interpreting  the
    expression in the same sense as in the Strasbourg case  law,  leave  to
    remain would not normally be granted in cases where  an  applicant  for
    leave to remain under the partner route was in  the  UK  in  breach  of
    immigration laws, unless the applicant or their partner would face very
    serious difficulties in continuing their family life  together  outside
    the UK, which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious
    hardship..."

17.  In addition, as explained in Agyarko Section GEN sets the  context  for
    decisions made under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and,  in
    particular, paragraph GEN.1. states:

     "This route is for those seeking to enter or remain in the  UK  on  the
    basis of their family life with a person who is a British  citizen...It
    sets  out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and,  in   considering   the
    applications under this route, it reflects how, under Article 8 of  the
    Human Rights Convention, the balance will be struck between  the  right
    to respect for private and family  life  and  the  legitimate  aims  of
    protecting national security, public safety and economic well-being  of
    the UK; the prevent of disorder and crime; the protection of health and
    morals; and the protection of the rights and freedoms of others and  in
    doing so reflects the relevant public interest  considerations  as  set
    out in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002..."

18.  The Respondent has  also  published  relevant  policy  entitled  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0:  Family  life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life - 10 Year Route Version 3.0 23  January  2019.
    This states that:

     "...an insurmountable obstacle can take 2 forms:

     . a very significant difficulty which would be literally impossible  to
    overcome,  so  it  would  be  impossible  for  family  life  with   the
    applicant's partner to continue overseas -  for  example  because  they
    would not be able to gain entry to the proposed country of return
      . a very significant difficulty which would be faced by the  applicant
    or their partner in continuing their family life together  outside  the
    UK and which could be overcome but to do so would entail  very  serious
    hardship for one or both of them

      When  assessing  an  application  under  paragraph   EX.1.   (b)   and
    determining whether there are "insurmountable obstacles", the  decision
    maker should  have  regard  to  the  individual  circumstances  of  the
    applicant and their partner, based on all the information that has been
    provided. The  onus  is  on  the  applicant  to  show  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles, not on the decision maker to show that  there
    are not.

     The assessment of whether there are  "insurmountable  obstacles"  is  a
    different and more  stringent  assessment  than  whether  it  would  be
    "reasonable to expect" the applicant's partner to join  them  overseas.
    For example, a British citizen partner who has  lived  in  the  UK  all
    their life, has friends and family here, works  here  and  speaks  only
    English may not wish to uproot and relocate halfway across  the  world,
    and it may be very difficult for them to do so. However, a  significant
    degree  of  hardship  or  inconvenience   does   not   amount   to   an
    insurmountable obstacle. ECHR Article 8  does  not  oblige  the  UK  to
    accept the choice of a couple as to which country they would prefer  to
    reside in.

     Relevant country of origin  information  should  be  referred  to  when
    assessing insurmountable obstacles. The decision maker should  consider
    the specific claim made and the relevant national laws,  attitudes  and
    situation in the relevant country.

     The assessment of  whether  family  life  can  continue  overseas  will
    generally consider the likely situation  in  the  proposed  country  of
    return unless there is information to suggest  that  the  applicant  or
    their partner might have a choice about where they choose  to  relocate
    to, such as where one or both of them has or have a right to reside  in
    a country other than the country of proposed return, or  where  one  or
    both of them has or have more than one nationality. In  that  case  the
    decision  maker  should  consider  whether  there  are   insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in any of the  relevant  countries.



     Lack of knowledge of a language spoken in  the  country  in  which  the
    couple would be required  to  live  would  not  usually  amount  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle. It is reasonable to  assume  that  the  couple
    have a language in which they can communicate together.  Therefore,  it
    is possible for family life to continue outside the UK, whether or  not
    the partner chooses to also learn a language spoken in the  country  of
    proposed return. Although inability  to  speak  the  language  of  that
    country may cause difficulties for the partner, it is very unlikely  to
    amount to very serious hardship: many people  successfully  move  to  a
    country where, at first, they do not speak the language.

     Being separated from extended  family  members  -  such  as  where  the
    partner's parents, their siblings or both live here - would not usually
    amount to an insurmountable  obstacle,  unless  there  were  particular
    factors in the case to establish the unusual or exceptional  dependency
    required for Article 8 to be engaged.

     A material change in quality  of  life  for  the  applicant  and  their
    partner in the country of return, such as  the  type  of  accommodation
    they would live in, or a reduction  in  their  income  or  standard  of
    living, would not usually amount to an insurmountable obstacle,  unless
    this would  lead  to  particular  hardship  or  there  were  particular
    exceptional factors in the case.

     The factors  which  might  be  relevant  when  considering  whether  an
    insurmountable obstacle exists include but are not limited to:

     Ability to lawfully enter and stay in another country

     The decision maker should consider the ability of the  members  of  the
    family unit (both the applicant and others) to lawfully enter and  stay
    in another country. The onus is on the applicant to show that it is not
    feasible for them and their family to enter and stay in another country
    for this to amount to an insurmountable obstacle. A mere  wish,  desire
    or preference to live in the UK is not sufficient.

     An example of where it might not be feasible for  the  family  to  live
    together elsewhere might be where the sponsor has gained their  settled
    status in the UK through a refugee route, and the applicant is  of  the
    same  nationality.  In  the  absence  of  a  realistic  third   country
    alternative, the settled person's  inability  to  resume  life  in  the
    country of origin is likely to constitute an obstacle  to  family  life
    continuing  overseas.  The  decision  maker  should  consider  relevant
    country information (but may not seek to  go  behind  any  decision  to
    grant refugee status).

     Serious cultural barriers to relocation overseas

     This might be relevant in situations where  the  partner  would  be  so
    disadvantaged by the social,  religious  or  cultural  situation  in  a
    particular country that they could not be expected to live there.

     The impact of a mental or physical disability or of a  serious  illness
    which requires ongoing medical treatment

     Moving to another country may involve a  period  of  hardship  for  any
    person as they adjust to their new surroundings, whether  or  not  they
    have a mental  or  physical  disability  or  a  serious  illness  which
    requires ongoing medical treatment. But  independent  medical  evidence
    could establish that a physical or  mental  disability,  or  a  serious
    illness which requires ongoing medical treatment, would  lead  to  very
    serious hardship: for example, due to the lack of adequate health  care
    in the country where the family would be required to live. As such,  in
    the absence of a third country  alternative,  it  could  amount  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle to family life continuing overseas"

19.  The test I have to apply  is  a  stringent  one  and  I  must  consider
    whether the Appellant and  her  partner  would  face  very  significant
    difficulties entailing very serious hardship if they  had  to  continue
    their family life in Zimbabwe.

20.  I have taken into account the Appellant's partner's  age  but  this  of
    itself is not sufficient to meet such a stringent test. It is also  the
    case that he has a number of medical conditions. I  had  directed  that
    the Appellant provide medical evidence explaining  what  treatment  her
    partner presently had for  each  of  his  medical  conditions  and  the
    prognosis for each. However, this was not done. Therefore, I  have  had
    to rely on a letter from Mr K. Patel, dated 11 June 2019, which  stated
    that he was suffering from left  ventricular  systolic  dysfunction,  a
    cataract, stage 3 chronic kidney disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus  and
    acute non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction.  In  his  further
    letter, dated 10 January 2020,  Dr  Patel  said  that  the  Appellant's
    partner was suffering from ischaemic heart disease,  poorly  controlled
    diabetes, heart failure, progressive and  chronic  kidney  disease  and
    raised PSA levels which had led to him being  under  investigation  for
    prostrate malignancy. He went on to say that he was unable  to  comment
    on his prognosis and in terms of providing further evidence  about  his
    treatment he merely said that he was on anti-diabetic and heart failure
    medication and his progress  was  followed  up  by  a  cardiologist,  a
    nephrologist and a urologist.

21.  He also made a bald assertion that he would not advise the  Appellant's
    partner to fly but it was not clear which  of  his  medical  conditions
    meant that he was not fit to fly or the basis upon which this assertion
    was made.

22.  Due to the limitations of these letters, I have also  had  to  rely  on
    the oral evidence of the Appellant and her partner, to  try  to  assess
    his capabilities and his present treatment.

23.  The oral evidence indicated that the Appellant's partner  has  now  had
    his cataract operation and there is no evidence to show  that  he  will
    need any further treatment to his eyes in the  foreseeable  future.   I
    have also taken into account the  fact  that  although  he  has  had  a
    stroke, he stated that he is not receiving any treatment for  this  and
    that the only tablets he takes are for his diabetes and  his  prostrate
    condition. However, I have taken into account the fact that the GP also
    said that he took medication for his heart condition. The Appellant had
    not provided any further objective evidence about the  availability  of
    treatment for these conditions in Zimbabwe and I note that  the  burden
    of proof lies on the Appellant to do so, if she asserts  that  no  such
    treatment would be available.

24.  The small bundle of documents, which were handed in to the Tribunal  at
    the error of law hearing, contained some newspaper reports relating  to
    a potential food crisis and hyperinflation in  the  economy  but  these
    articles were not relied upon at the resumed hearing.  There were other
    articles which were critical of the public health service  in  Zimbabwe
    and the fact that it was seriously underfunded. They also referred to a
    dispute about doctor's pay but the majority of these dated back to 2018
    or the beginning of 2019 and I was not  provided  with  any  up-to-date
    evidence about any such strikes or the general availability  of  either
    public or private health care facilities in Zimbabwe.

25.  The Appellant  asserted  in  her  oral  evidence  that  there  were  no
    hospitals in Zimbabwe but this  assertion  was  not  supported  by  any
    objective or expert evidence and there was no evidence  that,  even  if
    public facilities were under-funded, her partner could not  access  the
    medication he required in the private sector.

26.  The Appellant stated in her oral evidence that her partner had  swollen
    feet, lost his balance and needed  assistance  when  going  up  stairs.
    However, I note that in his evidence he  merely  said  that  his  heart
    condition meant that he could not walk fast and could not climb stairs.
    In addition, during the hearing he walked out of the courtroom unaided.



27.  It is also the case that the Appellant's partner is a  British  citizen
    and has lived in the United Kingdom  for  many  years.  However,  these
    factors on their own are not capable of giving rise  to  insurmountable
    obstacles. I also note that the  Appellant's  partner  is  retired  and
    according to the Appellant's application form has an annual  income  of
    �30,000 and also owns his own house. This suggests that they would  not
    face very serious hardship in Zimbabwe, even taking  into  account  his
    current medical conditions. In addition, I have taken into account  the
    fact that English is widely spoken there and that the Appellant and her
    partner are not relying on any family and private life which  they  may
    have with any relatives living in the United Kingdom.

28.  Furthermore, it has not been  asserted  that  the  Appellant's  partner
    would not be able to  enter  Zimbabwe  or  that  they  would  face  any
    cultural barriers there, a country where the Appellant  had  lived  and
    worked until 2003.

29.  It is also the case that, even though the Appellant's partner  may  not
    have a current passport for Trinidad and Tobago, he is also a  national
    of that state. He may not  have  any  remaining  friends  or  relatives
    there, but this does not mean that they could not  live  there  without
    experiencing very serious hardship. There was  simply  no  evidence  to
    suggest that any such hardship would arise.

30.  For all of these reasons and applying a  balance  of  probabilities,  I
    find that there are no insurmountable obstacles to  the  Appellant  and
    her partner continuing a family life together in Zimbabwe.

ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE OUTSIDE THE IMMIGRATION RULES

31.  However, in paragraph 45 of Agyarko Reed LJ also found that even  where
    it was not possible to show that there were  insurmountable  obstacles,
    leave to remain could nevertheless be  granted  outside  the  Rules  in
    "exceptional circumstances". He then continued by finding that:

     "46. In considering that question, it is important to  appreciate  that
    the Rules are not simply the product of a legal analysis: they are  not
    intended to be a summary of the Strasbourg case law on  article  8.  As
    was explained at para 10 above, they are statements of the practice  to
    be followed, which are approved by Parliament, and  are  based  on  the
    Secretary of State's policy as to how individual rights under article 8
    should be balanced against the competing  public  interests.  They  are
    designed to operate on the basis that  decisions  taken  in  accordance
    with them are compatible with article 8 in all but  exceptional  cases.
    The Secretary of State is in principle entitled to have a policy of the
    kind which underpins the Rules. While the European court  has  provided
    guidance as to factors which should  be  taken  into  account,  it  has
    acknowledged  that  the  weight  to  be  attached  to   the   competing
    considerations, in striking a fair balance, falls within the margin  of
    appreciation of the national authorities, subject to supervision at the
    European level. The margin of appreciation of national  authorities  is
    not unlimited, but it is nevertheless real and  important.  Immigration
    control is an intensely political issue, on which differing  views  are
    held within the contracting states, and as between  those  states.  The
    ECHR has therefore to be applied  in  a  manner  which  is  capable  of
    accommodating  different   approaches,   within   limits.   Under   the
    constitutional arrangements existing within  the  UK,  the  courts  can
    review the compatibility of decision-making in relation to  immigration
    with  the  Convention  rights,  but  the  authorities  responsible  for
    determining policy in relation to immigration, within the limits of the
    national margin  of  appreciation,  are  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    Parliament.

     47. The Rules therefore reflect the responsible Minister's  assessment,
    at a general level, of the relative weight  of  the  competing  factors
    when striking a fair balance under article 8.  The  courts  can  review
    that general assessment in the event that the  decision-making  process
    is challenged as being incompatible with Convention rights or based  on
    an erroneous understanding of the law, but they have to  bear  in  mind
    the Secretary of State's constitutional responsibility  for  policy  in
    this area, and the endorsement of the Rules by Parliament. It  is  also
    the function of the courts to  consider  individual  cases  which  come
    before them on appeal or by way  of  judicial  review,  and  that  will
    require them to consider how the balance is struck in individual cases.
    In doing so, they have to take the Secretary  of  State's  policy  into
    account and to attach considerable weight to it at a general level,  as
    well  as  considering  all  the  factors  which  are  relevant  to  the
    particular case. This was explained in Hesham Ali at  paras  44-46,  50
    and 53.

     48. The Secretary of State's view  that  the  public  interest  in  the
    removal of persons who are in the UK in breach of immigration laws  is,
    in  all  but  exceptional  circumstances,  sufficiently  compelling  to
    outweigh the individual's interest in family life with a partner in the
    UK, unless there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that
    partner continuing outside the UK, is challenged in  these  proceedings
    as being too stringent to be compatible with article 8...

     49. In Jeunesse, the Grand  Chamber  said,  consistently  with  earlier
    judgments of the court, that an important consideration when  assessing
    the proportionality under article  8  of  the  removal  of  non-settled
    migrants from a contracting state in which they have family members, is
    whether family life was created at a time  when  the  persons  involved
    were aware that the immigration status of one of them was such that the
    persistence of that family life within the host state  would  from  the
    outset be "precarious". Where this is the case, the court said, "it  is
    likely only to be in exceptional circumstances that the removal of  the
    non-national family member will constitute a violation  of  article  8"
    (para 108).

     50. Domestically, officials  who  are  determining  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances as defined in the Instructions,  and  whether
    leave to remain should therefore be  granted  outside  the  Rules,  are
    directed  by  the  Instructions  to  consider  all  relevant   factors,
    including whether the applicant "[formed] their relationship with their
    partner at a time when they had  no  immigration  status  or  this  was
    precarious". They are instructed:

     "Family life which involves the applicant putting down roots in the  UK
    in the full knowledge that their stay here is unlawful  or  precarious,
    should be given less weight, when balanced against the factors weighing
    in favour of removal, than family life  formed  by  a  person  lawfully
    present in the UK."

     That instruction is consistent  with  the  case  law  of  the  European
    court, such as its judgment  in  Jeunesse.  As  the  instruction  makes
    clear, "precariousness" is not a preliminary  hurdle  to  be  overcome.
    Rather, the fact that family life has been established by an  applicant
    in the full  knowledge  that  his  stay  in  the  UK  was  unlawful  or
    precarious affects the weight to be attached to  it  in  the  balancing
    exercise.

     51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or  is  entitled  to
    remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the  significance  of  this
    consideration depends on what the outcome of immigration control  might
    otherwise  be.  For  example,  if  an  applicant  would  otherwise   be
    automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the  weight  of  the
    public  interest  in  his  or  her  removal  will  generally  be   very
    considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in
    the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter,
    at least if an application were made from outside the  UK,  then  there
    might be no public interest  in  his  or  her  removal.  The  point  is
    illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department.

     52. It is also necessary to bear  in  mind  that  the  cogency  of  the
    public interest in the removal of a person living in the UK  unlawfully
    is liable to diminish - or, looking at the  matter  from  the  opposite
    perspective, the weight to be given to precarious family life is liable
    to increase - if there is a protracted  delay  in  the  enforcement  of
    immigration control. This point was made by Lord Bingham and Lord Brown
    of Eaton-under-Heywood in EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 41; [2009] AC 1159, paras 15 and 37. It is  also
    illustrated by the judgment of the European court in Jeunesse.

     53.  Finally,  in  relation  to  this  matter,  the  reference  in  the
    instruction to "full knowledge that their  stay  here  is  unlawful  or
    precarious" is also consistent with the case law of the European court,
    which refers to the persons concerned being aware that the  persistence
    of family life in the host state would be precarious  from  the  outset
    (as  in  Jeunesse,  para  108).  One   can,   for   example,   envisage
    circumstances  in  which   people   might   be   under   a   reasonable
    misapprehension as to their ability to maintain a family  life  in  the
    UK,  and  in  which  a  less  stringent  approach  might  therefore  be
    appropriate.

     54. As explained in para 49 above, the European court  has  said  that,
    in cases concerned with precarious family life, it is "likely" only  to
    be in exceptional circumstances that the removal  of  the  non-national
    family member will constitute a violation of article 8.  That  reflects
    the weight attached to the contracting states' right to  control  their
    borders, as an attribute of their sovereignty, and the  limited  weight
    which is generally attached to family  life  established  in  the  full
    knowledge that its continuation in the contracting state is unlawful or
    precarious. The court has repeatedly  acknowledged  that  "a  state  is
    entitled, as  a  matter  of  well-established  international  law,  and
    subject to its treaty obligations, to control the entry of nonnationals
    into its territory and their residence there" (Jeunesse, para 100).  As
    the court has made clear, the Convention is not intended  to  undermine
    that right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control  by
    establishing a family life while present in the host  state  unlawfully
    or temporarily, and then presenting it with a  fait  accompli.  On  the
    contrary, "where confronted with a fait accompli the removal of the non-
    national family member by the authorities would  be  incompatible  with
    article 8 only in exceptional circumstances" (Jeunesse, para 114).

     55. That statement reflects  the  strength  of  the  claim  which  will
    normally  be  required,  if  the  contracting   state's   interest   in
    immigration control is to be outweighed.  In  the  Jeunesse  case,  for
    example, the Dutch authorities' tolerance of the  applicant's  unlawful
    presence in that country for a very prolonged period, during which  she
    developed strong family  and  social  ties  there,  led  the  court  to
    conclude that the  circumstances  were  exceptional  and  that  a  fair
    balance had not been struck (paras 121-122). As the court  put  it,  in
    view of the particular circumstances of the case, it  was  questionable
    whether  general  immigration  considerations  could  be  regarded   as
    sufficient justification for refusing the applicant  residence  in  the
    host state (para 121).

     56. The European court's use of the phrase "exceptional  circumstances"
    in this context was considered by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014]
    1 WLR 544. Lord Dyson MR, giving the judgment of the court, said:
     "In our view, that is not to say  that  a  test  of  exceptionality  is
    being applied. Rather it  is  that,  in  approaching  the  question  of
    whether removal is a proportionate interference  with  an  individual's
    article 8  rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
    deportation and something very compelling (which will be 'exceptional')
    is required to outweigh the public interest in removal." (para 42)
     Cases are not, therefore, to be approached by searching  for  a  unique
    or unusual feature,  and  in  its  absence  rejecting  the  application
    without further examination. Rather, as the Master of  the  Rolls  made
    clear, the test is one of proportionality. The reference to exceptional
    circumstances in the European case law means that, in  cases  involving
    precarious family life, "something very compelling ... is  required  to
    outweigh the public interest", applying  a  proportionality  test.  The
    Court of Appeal went on to apply that approach to the interpretation of
    the Rules concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  where  the
    same phrase appears; and their approach was approved by this court,  in
    that context, in Hesham Ali.

     57. That approach is also appropriate  when  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    considering whether a refusal of leave to  remain  is  compatible  with
    article 8 in the context of precarious family life. Ultimately, it  has
    to decide whether the refusal is proportionate in the  particular  case
    before it, balancing the strength of the public interest in the removal
    of the person in question against the  impact  on  private  and  family
    life. In doing so, it should give appropriate weight to  the  Secretary
    of State's policy, expressed in the Rules and  the  Instructions,  that
    the public interest in immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when
    considering an application for leave to remain brought by a  person  in
    the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration  laws,  only   where   there   are
    "insurmountable obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances"  as  defined.
    It must also consider all factors relevant  to  the  specific  case  in
    question, including, where relevant, the matters discussed in paras 51-
    52 above. The critical issue will  generally  be  whether,  giving  due
    weight to the strength of the public interest in  the  removal  of  the
    person in the case before it,  the  article  8  claim  is  sufficiently
    strong to outweigh it. In general, in cases concerned  with  precarious
    family life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to  outweigh
    the public interest in immigration control.
     ...
     60. It remains the position that the ultimate question is  how  a  fair
    balance should be struck between the competing  public  and  individual
    interests involved, applying a proportionality test..."

32.  The Policy referred to above also states that:

     "If an applicant for the 10-year partner route does not otherwise  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  the  decision  maker  must
    consider, under paragraph GEN.3.2. of Appendix FM,  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances which would render refusal of the application
    a breach of ECHR Article 8 because it  would  result  in  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences for the applicant or their family"

     Decision  to  grant  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
    circumstances under GEN.3.2. of Appendix FM

     Where an application made or considered  under  Appendix  FM  does  not
    otherwise meet the relevant requirements of that Appendix or of Part  9
    of the rules, but it is considered, under paragraph  GEN.3.2.(2),  that
    there are exceptional circumstance which would render refusal a  breach
    of ECHR Article 8 (because  it  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the applicant, their  partner,  a  relevant  child  or
    another family member whose Article 8 rights it  is  evident  from  the
    information provided by the applicant  would  be  affected),  leave  to
    remain

33.  When considering whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances  which
    would entitle the Appellant to leave to remain outside the  Immigration
    Rules, I have reminded myself of the case  law  and  policy  above.  In
    particular,  I  have  reminded  myself  that  I  have  to   conduct   a
    proportionality exercise balancing the public interest  in  immigration
    control against the Appellant's own individual circumstances and  those
    of her partner. This proportionately exercise relates to  Article  8(2)
    of the European Convention on Human Rights as it has been accepted that
    for the purposes of Article 8(1) the Appellant and her partner do enjoy
    a family life together.

34.  I have reminded myself of the weight to be given to the fact  that  the
    Appellant's initial immigration status was precarious, that  thereafter
    she remained here without leave to do so and that she and  her  partner
    continued their relationship in the knowledge that she had no leave  to
    remain. I have also reminded myself that this  should  not  attract  as
    much weight as would have been applied if she was liable to deportation
    due to criminal convictions.

35.  In addition, this was not a case where the Respondent  had  delayed  in
    making a decision about the Appellant's status. It  was  the  Appellant
    who failed to apply for further leave to remain between 2007  and  2010
    and 2010 and 2018 and, when she did apply, her applications were  dealt
    with promptly.

 36. In  addition,  the  Appellant  has  not  provided  sufficient  medical,
    objective or  expert  evidence  to  show  that  her  partner's  medical
    conditions  will  result   in   him   suffering   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences if he lives in Zimbabwe. There is no evidence to show that
    he will not be able to access the medication he requires there  and  he
    is not receiving any other regular treatment at  the  moment.  (I  note
    that his cataract operation has  already  taken  place.)  There  is  no
    explanation of the bald statement by Dr Patel that he is unfit to fly.

37.  The Appellant herself lived and worked  in  Zimbabwe  until  2003  and,
    even though she says that she has no friends or  relatives  there  now,
    her partner's income and assets suggest that  they  would  be  able  to
    support themselves there.

38.   For  all  the  reasons  given  above  and  applying   a   balance   of
    probabilities,  I  find  that  there  are  no  strong  and   compelling
    circumstances to suggest that she should be granted leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, as neither  the  Appellant  nor  her  partner  would
    suffer unjustifiably harsh consequences if they had to live together in
    Zimbabwe. I find that this broad conclusion would also  apply  to  them
    living in Trinidad and Tobago in the light of the paucity  of  evidence
    provided by the Appellant in the context of this potential option.

39.  The Appellant and her partner were also asked whether it would  not  be
    possible for the Appellant to return to Zimbabwe on her own  and  apply
    for entry clearance in the context where it would appear that  she  met
    all of the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  apart  from  the
    immigration status requirement.  They  asserted  that  the  Appellant's
    partner could not remain here without her care but it  was  also  their
    evidence that they had not make  any  enquiries  about  obtaining  some
    assistance for him from either public or private services  if  she  did
    return to obtain entry clearance.

40.  It may be the case that the Appellant's  partner  would  prefer  to  be
    cared for by her but there was  no  evidence  that  having  alternative
    assistance for a short period of time  would  cause  him  any  harm  or
    unjustifiably harsh consequences or that appropriate care  to  met  his
    needs could not be found.

41.   In  the  light  of  the  Appellant   and   her   partner's   financial
    circumstances it was also likely that she would be able to  accommodate
    and maintain herself during any period in which she had  to  remain  in
    Zimbabwe to apply for entry clearance and that they would  be  able  to
    pay for her return ticket.

 42. I have also reminded myself that in R (on the application  of  Chen)  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (Appendix  FM  -  IDI  -
    Chikwamba - temporary separation  proportionality)  [2015]  UKUT  00189
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

     "(i) Appendix  FM  does  not  include  consideration  of  the  question
    whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to  return
    to his home country to make an entry clearance application  to  re-join
    family members in the U.K. There may be cases in  which  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the  U.K.
    but where temporary separation to  enable  an  individual  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all  cases,
    it will be for the individual to place before the  Secretary  of  State
    evidence   that    such    temporary    separation    will    interfere
    disproportionately with protected rights. It will not be enough to rely
    solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

     (ii)     Lord Brown was not laying down a legal test when he suggested
      in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant  to  make  an  application  for
      entry clearance would only "comparatively rarely" be proportionate  in
      a case involving children (per  Burnett  J,  as  he  then  was,  in  R
      (Kotecha and Das v SSHD [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin))".


 43. For all of these reasons and applying a  balance  of  probabilities  I
      find that a temporary separation whilst the  Appellant's  seeks  entry
      clearance would not amount to a disproportionate breach of  Article  8
      and entitle her to leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.






















DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 20 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


