
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24669/2018
     HU/24667/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 May 2019                       |On 2 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         VIKAS BHASHARBHAI NANDURKAR
                                     and
                             MRUNAL VIJAY AMBADE
                       (Anonymity Directions not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Knafler, Queens Counsel for Eldons Berkeley
                    Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of India born on 28  February  1985  and  4
    August 1987 respectively.  They appealed against the decisions  of  the
    respondent dated  29  November  2018  refusing  the  first  appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain on a  10  year  basis.   The
    second appellant is the first appellant's dependant.  The appeals  were
    heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Housego on  22  January  2019
    and allowed on human rights grounds in a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    February 2019.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal O'Brien on  9  April  2019.
    The permission refers to the grounds which state that the Judge  failed
    to make his findings  regarding  dishonesty  in  accordance  with  Khan
    [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC).  The grounds state  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    assess the first appellant's motive and failed to make findings on  his
    character.  They also state that the Judge made no findings in  respect
    of the absence of any real income from the first appellant or regarding
    his approach to HMRC.  The underlying refusal  was  predicated  on  the
    alternative bases of a false under-declaration of income to HMRC  or  a
    false over-declaration of income to the Home Office.  At  paragraph  52
    of the decision it was found that the first appellant's account of  his
    earnings, through company dividends, was not reasonably  likely  to  be
    true and was not credible.  The Judge found on two occasions  that  the
    amount in question was immaterial to the application but does not  give
    any reasons why he found that that was the  case.   The  grounds  state
    that that is an arguable error of law  and  it  is  arguable  that  the
    dividend earnings must have been material  for  the  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant application.  They state  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  a
    finding on the material issue of the  first  appellant's  motives  when
    providing the information.  The permission states that all the  grounds
    are arguable.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response which refers to the provenance of the first
    appellant's  consultancy  earnings  and  states  that   on   a   proper
    examination  of  all  the  evidence,  the  first  appellant  was   paid
    consultancy earnings exactly  as  he  said  he  was  and  there  was  a
    significant amount of evidence in the  bundles  before  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal about this.


 5. A preliminary issue was raised at  the  hearing.   This  was  that  the
    grounds were drafted  before  the  case  of  Balajigari  &  Others  -v-
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673  was
    issued and as this is the highest authority on this type of  issue  the
    grounds are  not  benefitting  from  this  case.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs 32, 37, 66, 67 and 69 of that case.

 6. Counsel directed me to the First-Tier Judge's decision at paragraph  52
    onwards and in particular the last sentences of paragraph  54  and  the
    fact that the first appellant had under-declared  income  in  2011/2012
    which led to additional tax being due,  but  HMRC  taxed  him  on  this
    through his PAYE code in the next year which meant that when  he  filed
    his return in 2016 he had nothing more to pay,  although  there  was  a
    further small error.  He paid the extra tax  relating  to  this.   This
    paragraph states that the first amount of undeclared income cannot be a
    deception because HMRC knew about it and collected the  tax  without  a
    return the next year, imposed no penalty and took no  action.   It  was
    pointed out that at paragraph 66 of Balajigari it is stated that if tax
    is underpaid there is always an obligation to pay  a  penalty  and  one
    should always be imposed and it was submitted  that  in  this  case  no
    penalty was imposed so HMRC could not have found that the appellant was
    dishonest.  At paragraph 67 of Balajigari it is stated that there is no
    duty on HMRC to impose a penalty in every case where it might  fall  to
    be imposed.

 7. I was referred to paragraph 54 of the First-Tier Judge's decision which
    states that there was no deception involved and HMRC did not regard any
    underpayment as serious.

 8. Counsel pointed out that the appellants' applications were refused  and
    reliance was placed on paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules.   It
    was submitted that this is not a purpose which that rule is intended to
    cover.  It was submitted that Rule 322(5) is  inappropriate  as  it  is
    intended  for  sham   marriages,   national   security   and   criminal
    convictions.  In the First-Tier Judge's decision it is stated that  the
    first appellant in this case has been employed for years and it  cannot
    be correct to say that someone  who  is  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  is
    gainfully employed is unsuitable to remain by reasons of errors in  tax
    returns involving small sums in the past years.

 9. There were earnings discrepancies but the  First-Tier  Judge  does  not
    find that these were deliberate or were dishonest submissions of  false
    earnings.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge's approach is based  on
    the wrong premise and that when the case of Balajigari,  is  considered
    the fact that there has been no enforcement action  by  HMRC  does  not
    mean that there has been  no  dishonesty  on  the  part  of  the  first
    appellant. He submitted that Rule 3225(5) does apply to  someone  under
    or over-declaring income.

11. Counsel submitted that the application for  permission  to  appeal  was
    made late and he submitted that the Judge did not make the  errors  the
    Home Office states  he  made.   He  submitted  that  when  the  Judge's
    conclusions are considered at paragraphs 55 and 56 the Judge finds that
    there is no dishonesty.  He submitted that the First-Tier  Judge  found
    that, because matters had been remedied, the first  appellant  had  not
    been dishonest so there is no error of law. He submitted that if I find
    there is an error of law, it will not be material.  He  submitted  that
    HMRC knew about the additional income and collected tax on it the  next
    year.  The First-Tier Judge found that as HMRC did not charge a penalty
    and took no action against the first appellant, they clearly found  the
    first appellant was not guilty of any  serious  matter.   He  submitted
    that there is no error of law and certainly no material error of law in
    the  First-Tier  Judge's  decision  and  that  the  First-Tier  Judge's
    decision should stand.

12. Counsel submitted that although the Judge accepted that  there  was  no
    dishonesty relating to HRMC he stated that he was  not  satisfied  with
    the source of the earnings as set out by the first appellant.   Counsel
    submitted that this is only an aside and it is  clear  that  the  first
    appellant had earned money at that  level  and  had  paid  tax  on  his
    earnings.  He submitted that the respondent has not made any mention of
    the source of income when considering whether the  first  appellant  is
    suitable.

13. The first appellant is now stating that he has an account of where  his
    income came from and this has been supplied.

14. Counsel submitted that the Judge has taken everything into account when
    making his decision, although the way he has done this is unusual.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that new evidence was sent in the week
    before this hearing and no reasons have been given as to why it was not
    submitted to the First-Tier Tribunal.  I  was  asked  to  consider  the
    payslips and the dates  and  I  was  asked  to  consider  the  skeleton
    argument.


Decision and Reasons

16. No explanation has been given for late  submission  of  the  additional
    evidence on behalf of the first  appellant  as  clearly  this  evidence
    should and could have been before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.   I  have
    however no reason to doubt this evidence.  Had it been before the First-
    Tier Judge it would have strengthened  his  reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal.  The Judge finds that the appellant did not dishonestly  under-
    declare income to HMRC or over-declare income to the respondent.

17. With regard to the credibility of the appellant's  account  of  how  he
    earned  the  company  money,  the  additional  evidence  supports   the
    appellant's evidence.  In any case the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  took
    this into account and did not find that the way  the  appellant  earned
    his income could be relied on as a basis for rejecting the  application
    for leave to remain.  The Judge  also  found  that  it  was  definitely
    genuine income on which the full tax had been paid.

18. Again with regard to the lack of evidence  substantiating  his  income,
    this has now been  provided.   The  First-Tier  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant had earned sufficient income to qualify for leave to  remain,
    without relying on the company income.

19. It cannot be right to say that the First-Tier Judge failed  to  make  a
    finding about whether the appellant had dealt honestly with HMRC.   The
    Judge carefully considered this in his decision.

20. The First-Tier Judge therefore  found  that  the  appellant  had  dealt
    honestly with the respondent and the HMRC in  terms  of  declaring  his
    company income.  This was the issue that had to be decided by the Judge
    and proper reasons are given for reaching the decision he  did.   Based
    on what was before the Judge and the grounds of application, the  Judge
    could not have dismissed the appeal based on how the appellant said  he
    earned his money.


Notice of Decision

21. I find that there is no material error of law in the First-Tier Judge's
    decision and that it should stand. The appeals by the first and  second
    appellants on human rights grounds should are allowed.

22. Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                  Date 28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray








