
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24209/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th June 2019                     |On 24 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                ms ximeng guo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Jacqiss, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of China born on 7th September 1994.  On 8th
    November 2018 the Appellant made an application based on  human  rights
    for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  ten  years'
    continuous and lawful residence and on the  basis  of  her  family  and
    private life in the UK.  That application  was  refused  by  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 15th November 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal C H  Bennett  determining  the  matter  without  an  oral
    hearing whereby the learned judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 3. I note that at that time the Appellant was not legally represented  and
    the decision to ask for the appeal to be dealt with on the  papers  was
    taken by herself.

 4. On 18th February 2019 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds  are  made  by  legal  representatives.   They
    contend therein:-

      i) That the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  exercise  discretion
         based on Home Office  policy  language  guidance:  long  residence,
         version 15.0.

     ii) Proportionality.

    iii) An Article 8 right to private and family life.

 5. On 11th April 2019 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Hollingworth  considered  that  it
    was arguable that  insufficient  weight  had  been  attached  to  those
    factors identified in the permission application in the  light  of  the
    chronology and the Appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  that  any
    proportionality  exercise  has  thereby  been  affected.   He   further
    considered that it was arguable that an insufficient analysis has  been
    set out of the question as to whether or not there would be a breach of
    Article 8.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel, Miss Jacqiss.  Miss Jacqiss has also produced  to  me  a  most
    useful skeleton argument in support of  the  Appellant's  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer,  Miss
    Isherwood.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Jacqiss relies on the Grounds of Appeal and her  skeleton  argument.
    She submits that the paramount question to be addressed is whether  the
    judge had adequately assessed the Home  Office  long  residence  policy
    when considering proportionality.  In addressing this issue  she  makes
    effectively three contentions.

      i) That the judge has failed to give  adequate  consideration  to  the
         time spent by the Appellant in the UK as a child.

     ii) To the absences spent by the Appellant when a minor.

    iii) A failure to adequately assess the medical absence issues.

 8. She points out that the  law  is  relatively  straightforward  in  this
    matter.  The Appellant sought to rely on having  at  least  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the UK in  support  of  her  application
    pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  It was noted both
    by the Secretary of State and by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
    continuous residence is considered as  broken  if  a  person  has  been
    absent from the UK for a period of more than six months at any one time
    or a period of eighteen months in total throughout the ten year period.
     It was further noted by the Secretary of State (and his figures differ
    slightly from those of the judge) that the Appellant's  absence  record
    indicated that she had been absent from the UK for 733  days  and  that
    stamps in her passport match this record.

 9. The Appellant asked for discretion to be authorised and  for  the  Home
    Office to wholly excuse  absences  from  12th  December  2014  to  10th
    January 2015, from 16th June 2015 to 11th September 2015 and from  31st
    May 2016 to 10th July 2016, a period of 215 days.  The Appellant stated
    that she returned to China to seek medical  treatment  for  endometrial
    hyperplasia.  The Secretary of State noted that he was unable to locate
    any supporting medical letters or records but nevertheless continued to
    review  the  absences  to  determine  whether   discretion   would   be
    appropriate.  He  concluded  that  even  if  he  were  to  authorise  a
    discretion for 71 days absence which  is  what  is  in  excess  of  the
    Appellant's normal routine absences for  remaining  in  China  to  seek
    medical treatment, it would still mean  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    absent for 662 days and that that would still  be  122  days  over  the
    required limit for residence history.  In addition,  the  Secretary  of
    State considered and rejected that there were exceptional circumstances
    which would render a breach of Article 8 of the European Convention  of
    Human Rights on the basis that it would result in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences to the Appellant.

10. Miss Jacqiss takes me to both her skeleton argument and to  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   I  think  at  this  stage  it   is
    appropriate to make reference to that  decision  for  it  is  a  fairly
    extraordinary one.  Albeit that the decision was made on the papers the
    decision extends to some 36 pages with  numerous  paragraphs  and  sub-
    clauses and even more surprisingly references  to  numerous  footnotes.
    It is in anyone's consideration a very substantial document and shows a
    very substantial consideration of the issues albeit that the length  of
    the decision does not in itself mean that the clarity and reasoning  of
    the decision is correct.  What it does do  however  is  to  expose  the
    decision  to  greater  scrutiny  because  of  the  constant  references
    therein.

11. Firstly, I am taken to paragraph 20(c).  That paragraph  sets  out  the
    reasons for which the Appellant returned to China  for  her  treatment.
    Paragraph 20 in its entirety sets  out  the  factual  matrix  which  is
    accepted by the judge.  Miss Jacqiss takes me then to paragraph  36(f).
    This is an immensely extensive paragraph which runs to some  six  pages
    in the decision.  The part however which she particularly asked  me  to
    consider is the judge's analysis as to why he reaches conclusions  that
    the Appellant would not suffer unjustifiably harsh  consequences  as  a
    result of the refusal of her application such as to render the  refusal
    disproportionate and a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under
    Article 8.  He analyses at paragraph 36(f) that scenario with regard to
    exceptional circumstances when  considered  alongside  the  basis  upon
    which  the  Appellant  received  treatment  in  China  for  endometrial
    hyperplasia.   Miss  Jacqiss  points  out  to  me  that  it  is  not  a
    requirement of the Immigration Rules for an overseas applicant to  take
    out  insurance  cover  which  would  enable  medical  treatment  to  be
    undertaken in the UK and further points out that unlike  EEA  nationals
    non-EEA nationals are not entitled as of right to medical treatment  on
    the NHS.   What  consequently  happened  here  is  that  the  Appellant
    therefore returns to China for her medical treatment where she would be
    entitled to receive it paid by the state.   The  judge  concludes  that
    this does not mean that the Appellant was not prevented from  returning
    to the United Kingdom through unavoidable circumstances  and  that  the
    evidence does not show that the Appellant could  not  travel  back  and
    that it was her choice to remain in China for the full duration of  her
    treatment.  She submits that that finding is at odds with  the  finding
    made at paragraph 20(c) as to the reason that she returned to China  in
    particular,  that  if  she  had  not  undergone  treatment  there  were
    particularly serious adverse consequences over and above the  immediate
    pain and discomfort.  It is Miss Jacqiss'  argument  that  in  reaching
    that finding the judge erred in law and that it is material.

12. She then turns to the issue of the policy  submitting  and  considering
    whether there are compelling and compassionate circumstances  by  which
    the Appellant should be allowed to stay and she takes me  to  paragraph
    36(g) which apart from other matters sets out a detailed analysis as to
    how the judge has come to a conclusion as to the number  of  days  that
    the Appellant had spent outside the UK  and  goes  on  to  analyse  the
    Appellant's absence from the UK and conclude that she  would  not  have
    spent time outside the UK during the summer of 2015 or additional  time
    over and above the ten days she spent in Malaysia in July 2016  if  she
    had not suffered from,  and  required,  treatment  for  her  condition.
    Consequently, he was not satisfied as set out at paragraph  36(7)  that
    the Appellant's cause for treatment was not justifying  an  absence  in
    excess of the eighteen months.  Miss Jacqiss contends that  whether  or
    not the judge has analysed the issue under the policy she submits  that
    he had failed to address proportionality along with time spent  when  a
    minor and whether for medical reasons it was appropriate for her to  be
    absent.  On that basis she submits that there are  material  errors  of
    law.

13. Miss Isherwood submits that the grounds do no more  than  seek  to  re-
    argue the case on different parameters to that looked at by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  She reminds me that at first instance the Secretary  of
    State considered the Appellant's absence based on medical  grounds  and
    the findings that the Secretary of  State  made  regarding  same.   She
    takes me to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  paragraph
    15 where the judge sets out the facts and points out that this is not a
    finding of the judge.  What is in issue she  submits  is  the  lack  of
    evidence that is available regarding medical treatment and the question
    as to whether or not the Appellant is prevented from travelling back to
    the UK.  She submits that the history set out at page 15 of the judge's
    decision is purely factual  and  I  am  specifically  referred  to  the
    footnote therein and the historical basis which thereafter sets out the
    total number of  days  in  which  the  Appellant  is,  on  the  judge's
    calculations, absent from the UK.

14. She takes me through the determination pointing out that  at  paragraph
    17 Dr Liu has given his factual account of  the  Appellant's  condition
    and treatment and reminds me that the judge has found that Dr  Liu  had
    no apparent motive to misrepresent the facts of what had  occurred  and
    what he did was merely correct within  his  course  of  practice.   She
    thereafter takes me through paragraphs 20(h), 22 and 23 where the judge
    refers  to  Home  Office  guidance  and   looks   at   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances and that of her  general  circumstances  in
    the UK  and  then  to  paragraph  32  where  the  judge  considers  the
    Immigration Rules and the case law and points out that  none  of  these
    issues are actually challenged.

15. She concludes by submitting that the judge has dealt with  all  factors
    and made findings regarding the calculation and has taken into  account
    the medical issues that were before him  and  the  Appellant's  current
    circumstances in coming to his conclusion.  To such extent she  submits
    that there are no material errors in law in the decision and  she  asks
    me to dismiss the appeal.

16. In brief response Miss Jacqiss submits again that the judge had  failed
    to give appropriate weight to the time that the Appellant spent in  the
    UK as a minor and that there was evidence referring me  to  the  letter
    from Dr Liu as to when the Appellant's treatment stopped and  that  the
    judge has failed to criticise or dispute the contents of those letters.
     She submits that there are material errors of law and asked me to  set
    aside the decision.

The Law

17.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

19. Part of the problem of this appeal stems from the manner in  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge has written his decision.  This was  a  paper
    appeal.  The judge's decision extends to some 36 pages and is  in  many
    respects repetitive and sets out an analysis that  is  hard  to  follow
    purely and simply because of the length and detail into  which  he  has
    gone.  Having said that, that does not mean that as a matter of law the
    judge has erred.  The thrust of the  Appellant's  appeal  is  that  the
    judge has failed initially to take into account the  periods  that  the
    Appellant spent in the UK as a minor.  That submission is quite  simply
    unsustainable.  It is clear from the decision that the judge  was  well
    aware of the period of time that the Appellant was in the UK as a minor
    and has given detailed consideration  to  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history.  He has noted the date when the Appellant came to  the  UK  in
    September 2008 and that at that stage she was  a  child  visitor  three
    days prior to her 14th  birthday.   He  accepts  in  its  entirety  the
    Appellant's immigration history.  Secondly there is the  issue  of  the
    periods that the Appellant spent out of the UK and this is inextricably
    linked to the medical evidence.  Much is made of  the  finding  of  the
    judge at paragraph 36(f)(ii) where the judge concludes firstly that had
    the Appellant obtained medical insurance she would have  been  able  to
    obtain the treatment in the United Kingdom  and  would  not  have  been
    obliged to return to China to obtain it and secondly that the judge was
    not satisfied that the absences during  which  she  received  treatment
    between  December  2014  and  September  2016  were  not   in   reality
    attributable to her not having obtained  medical  insurance  cover  and
    that she was not prevented from returning to the United Kingdom through
    "unavoidable circumstances".

20. I have read the letter from Dr Liu.  Perhaps  more  importantly  it  is
    clear from the detailed decision that that had been read by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The fact remains  that  it  was  the  Appellant's
    choice not to take  out  private  medical  insurance.   The  Rules  are
    absolutely clear.  The  Appellant  perhaps  understandably  having  not
    taken out that insurance opted to return to China for treatment.  It is
    also clear that she decided  to  stay  in  China  waiting  reviews  and
    further follow up check-ups rather than  merely  returning  immediately
    after she had had the treatment.  That was her choice.  It is difficult
    to criticise the judge for making his conclusion that the Appellant was
    not prevented from returning to the United Kingdom through  unavoidable
    circumstances.  These unavoidable circumstances were brought  about  by
    the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to  take  out  health  insurance   or
    alternatively to pay for her treatment in the UK or to  stay  in  China
    between  medical  checkups.   If  that  were  to  be  accepted  as   an
    unavoidable circumstance it would seemingly  open  the  flood  gate  to
    foreign  nationals  flaunting  the  requirement  of  obtaining   health
    insurance for treatment in this country as a basis for being out of the
    country in excess of the Home Office guideline when making applications
    based under this Rule.  That cannot clearly be  the  intention  of  the
    legislation or the case law.

21. Despite the convoluting nature of the decision the  fact  remains  that
    this is a judge who has ultimately very carefully indeed  analysed  the
    basis upon which the Appellant's claim  is  made  and  has  given  very
    detailed reasoned findings as to his conclusions.  Consequently,  I  am
    satisfied that this is not a decision that shows any material errors of
    law and as such the arguments made on behalf of the  Appellant  amount,
    as Miss Isherwood has pointed  out,  is  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the
    decision and the case generally.  In such circumstances and for all the
    above reasons  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  are
    sustainable, the decision discloses no material errors of law  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  no  material  errors
of law.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 21 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 21 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

