
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24574/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 May 2019                                 |On 23 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               FATIMAZOHRA [A]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L King, instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant is a citizen of Morocco who was born on  23  August  1995.
    She came to the United Kingdom on 17 June 2015 as  a  visitor  together
    with her son.  They had previously lived in Spain and her son, who  was
    born on 28 November 2017, is a Spanish citizen.  Prior to coming to the
    UK, on 29 May 2014, she went  through  an  Islamic  marriage  with  the
    sponsor (Mr [IM]).  The claimant's son is from a  former  relationship.
    When they came to the UK, they lived with the  sponsor.   The  claimant
    and sponsor married at the Cardiff  Registry  Office  on  22  September
    2015.

 2. On 11 November 2015, the claimant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain based upon  her  private  and  family  life  in  the  UK.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 22 January 2016.

 3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  decision  sent
    on 20 October 2017, Judge Rolt allowed the claimant's appeal under  Art
    8 of the ECHR.

 4. The Secretary of State was granted permission to  appeal  against  that
    decision by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) on 3 April 2018.

 5. The appeal was initially listed before me on 3 January 2019.

 6. At that hearing, it was accepted by the Secretary of State  that  Judge
    Rolt was entitled to find that it would be disproportionate  to  expect
    the claimant to permanently relocate to Morocco to live there with  her
    son.  However, Judge Rolt's finding, based upon Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]
    UKHL 40, that it would also be disproportionate to expect the  claimant
    temporarily to go to Morocco in  order  to  seek  entry  clearance  was
    flawed as the judge had wrongly determined that issue on the basis that
    the claimant met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  for  entry
    clearance as a partner.  It had been conceded before  Judge  Rolt  that
    she did not have the required English language qualification.

 7. In a decision dated 16 January 2019, I concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  on  the
    basis of Chikwamba.  To that extent, I set aside Judge Rolt's  decision
    and directed that the matter be re-listed in the Upper Tribunal  for  a
    resumed  hearing  in  order  to  re-make  the  decision  under  Art   8
    exclusively on the issue  of  whether  it  was  proportionate  for  the
    claimant to return to Morocco in order to seek entry clearance.

 8. At the resumed hearing on 9 May 2019, Mr Howells, who  represented  the
    Secretary of State, invited me to allow the appeal outright  under  Art
    8.  He accepted that, on the evidence  now  before  the  Tribunal,  the
    claimant had the required English language certificate.  He  also  drew
    my attention to the evidence showing an impact upon the sponsor if  the
    claimant was required to return to Morocco and upon her son if removed.
     He accepted, referring to the view of Lord Reed  in  R  (Agyarko)  and
    Another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [51] that as the claimant  was  likely
    to succeed in gaining entry clearance under the Immigration Rules there
    was no public interest in her removal.  When taken  with  Judge  Rolt's
    unchallenged finding that it would be disproportionate  to  remove  her
    permanently to Morocco, Mr Howells accepted that the appeal  should  be
    allowed under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 9. In the light of that concession, which, on the evidence now before  the
    Upper Tribunal, is entirely properly made,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse the claimant  leave  to  remain
    breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

10. For these reasons, I  re-make  the  decision  allowing  the  claimant's
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

11. The claimant's appeal is allowed under Art 8 of the ECHR.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 22 May 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Rolt, despite allowing the appeal, did not make a fee  award.   As  my
decision to allow the appeal turns upon evidence only now available  at  the
time of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  not  at  the  date  of  the  claimant's
application for leave, I do not consider this an appropriate case to make  a
fee award and I do not do so.






                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 22 May 2019

