
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24762/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd April 2019                      |On 04th April 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                               MRS SAFIA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Woodhouse (HS Immigration Consultants)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  appellant,  permission
    having been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 29th  August  2018.
    It relates to a  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-kemp
    promulgated on 4th January 2018 in which he dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9th August 1984. She had
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under Appendix FM  on
    the basis of  her  marriage,  which  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 14th October 2016.

 3. There is a considerable history to this case. The appellant came to the
    UK on 12 December 2013 with entry clearance as  a  spouse  valid  until
    March 2016. The appellant made an in-time application in March 2016 for
    further limited leave to  remain.  That  application  was  rejected  as
    invalid on 3 May 2016 because she had not paid the  Immigration  Health
    Surcharge (IHS). She made a further application on 9 May 2016 but  that
    application was again rejected as invalid on 14  July  2016.  That  was
    also rejected on the basis that she had not paid the IHS. The appellant
    did not challenge either of those decisions but rather made  a  further
    application on 1 August  2016.  That  application  was  refused  on  14
    October 2016 on the  basis  that  she  did  not  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements of Appendix FM and that paragraph Ex.1 did not apply.

 4. The appellant argued that the Secretary of  State  had  been  wrong  to
    reject as invalid the application made in May 2016 because she had paid
    the IHS on the same day she submitted the application. She produced  an
    email confirming that she had paid the IHS on 9 May 2016, the same  day
    she lodged her visa application.

 5. In the last refusal, the subject of the appeal, the Secretary of  State
    had found she was an overstayer, her previous application  having  been
    invalid and bringing to an end her s.3C leave. Therefore, she  did  not
    meet the eligibility requirements. She had not produced  the  requisite
    financial documents and did not satisfy the  language  requirement.  So
    far as Ex.1 is concerned the Secretary of State  found  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and  her  husband  continuing
    their family life outside the UK.

 6. The judge dealt with the validity issue at paragraph 12 of the Decision
    and Reasons. He noted, and it is clear from the  email,  that  although
    the IHS was paid on 9 May 2016 it was in fact paid after the  appellant
    had lodged her visa application. This, the appellant said, was  because
    there were problems in submitting the payment. It  is  clear  from  the
    receipt that she needed to include the reference number of the  receipt
    on her visa application. This of course she could  not  do  as  it  had
    already been submitted. The judge therefore found that he could not  go
    behind the Secretary of State's validity decision, which in  any  event
    the appellant had not challenged by way of Judicial Review.  The  judge
    therefore concluded that the Secretary of State was correct in  finding
    that the appellant was an overstayer at the date of application.

 7. Legally that is correct. However, it is also clear that  the  appellant
    had in fact paid the IHS  and  at  the  time  she  had  submitted  that
    application she did comply  with  all  of  the  other  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  Had it not been for  the  fact  she  submitted  her  visa
    application prior to making the payment, she would have succeeded under
    Appendix FM.

 8. The judge having found the Secretary of State's decision about validity
    to be correct went on to consider whether Ex.1 applied.

 9. The appellant's argument in relation  to  that  was  that  her  husband
    suffered from an eye condition for which  he  was  receiving  treatment
    from an optometry department. Evidence from that  department  indicated
    that he was required to wear  rigid  contact  lenses  on  top  of  soft
    piggyback lenses and that he was seen six monthly by specialists.  When
    he had to wear his glasses, as  opposed  to  the  contact  lenses,  his
    vision was very poor.

10. The appellant also relied upon the  fact  that  her  husband  had  been
    diagnosed with  paranoid  schizophrenia  and  was  being  treated  with
    risperidone and group therapy sessions. He was under the care of his GP
    for his  mental  health  condition  having  been  discharged  from  the
    psychiatry department in July 2017.

11. The appellant also relied on the fact that the couple  were  undergoing
    fertility treatment for which they were privately paying.

12.  In  relation  to  those  health  matters  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's husband was unable to wear his contact lenses in the UK  in
    the summer and therefore any argument that  the  impact  of  living  in
    Pakistan would have a detrimental effect was insufficient to render  it
    an insurmountable obstacle.

13. So far as the self-funded fertility  treatment  was  concerned,  whilst
    acknowledging it to be stressful and an emotional time, the  judge  did
    not find the desire to have  a  child  amounted  to  an  insurmountable
    obstacle. The judge found that they could access similar  treatment  in
    Pakistan if they chose.

14. So far as the husband's psychiatric conditions was concerned the  judge
    noted that he was maintained on medication which could be  obtained  in
    Pakistan.

15. The appellant also relied upon the fact that her husband provided  care
    for his mother in the UK with whom they  lived  and  who  suffers  from
    arthritis and received both physical and emotional care from  her  son.
    In that regard the judge noted that the husband had an elder brother in
    the UK who  could  be  responsible  for  his  mother's  care  and  that
    additionally there were local services which could provide such care as
    was necessary.

16. For those reasons  the  judge  found  there  to  be  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple enjoying family life together in  Pakistan  and
    that therefore the decision  to  refuse  the  human  rights  claim  was
    proportionate.

17. With the consent of Miss Everett on behalf of the Secretary of State, I
    found that while the judge was legally correct in his treatment of  the
    validity issue, it was an important factor to taken into  consideration
    with regard to the question of proportionality and the  judge  did  not
    take that into account at all.  That I find to be a material  error  of
    law as it goes to the proportionality decision such that  the  decision
    must be set aside.

18. The judge had found that had  the  2016  application  been  valid,  the
    appellant would have met the requirements of the rules  both  financial
    and on the basis of the English language certificate. The  only  reason
    she did not satisfy those by the time of the  more  recent  application
    was because the documents were by then out of date and as an overstayer
    the English language certificate was no longer valid.

19. In substance therefore, the May 2016 application would  have  succeeded
    had she submitted the payment for the IHS  immediately  before,  rather
    than a few hours after she submitted the visa application. Mr Woodhouse
    provided a copy of the Immigration (Health Charge) Order 2015 which  at
    paragraph 5 (1) provides that a person required to pay a  charge  "must
    pay the amount required when the person applies for entry clearance  or
    leave to remain, as applicable". That  Statutory  Instrument  does  not
    state in terms that it must be paid prior to  the  application  and  in
    this case the appellant in fact made the payment on the same day as she
    made the application. It would have been a matter that  may  have  been
    resolved by Judicial Review at the time. Unfortunately,  the  appellant
    was at all times making her applications without the benefit  of  legal
    advice.

20. Factoring that into the assessment of proportionality  and  adding  the
    inherent unfairness  in  this  appellant's  application  being  refused
    (albeit strictly legally correctly)  and  adding  that  to  the  health
    issues relating to her husband, the fact that they are undergoing self-
    funded fertility treatment and the husband's relationship with and care
    of his mother, the appellant is clearly entitled to succeed on  Article
    8 grounds. The refusal is a disproportionate breach  of  the  appellant
    and her husband's right to family life. Miss Everett conceded  that  to
    be correct.

Decision

21. The Decision and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  containing  a
    material error of law it is set aside.  In redeciding the appeal, it is
    allowed on Human Rights grounds.

22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and  I  see
    no justification for one.

Signed [pic]                            Date 3rd April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

