
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24070/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 14 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                              samjhana sunuwar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Brown, Solicitor, Drummond Miller (Edinburgh)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Nepal, has been granted  permission
    to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle.  For reasons
    given in his decision dated 16 January 2019  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 12 November 2018 refusing her further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant had arrived on a Tier 4 visa in the United Kingdom  on  4
    April 2010 with leave until 29 May 2012.  That leave was  curtailed  on
    21 October 2011.  Between 2012 and 2017 the appellant made a number  of
    applications for leave to remain.  None gave rise to a right of  appeal
    until the most recent dated 22 February  2017.   This  application  was
    based on her relationship with Andrew Chalk, a British citizen.  It was
    rejected by the respondent under the Immigration Rules  as  the  couple
    had not been living together in a  relationship  akin  to  marriage  or
    civil partnership  for  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
    application and, in respect of the appellant's private life, it was not
    accepted there would be very significant obstacles to  her  integration
    into  Nepal.   It  was  considered  that  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances.  In particular the appellant had failed to  provide  any
    evidence to show that she was "very close" to her  partner's  children.
    In the context of their best interests,  the  appellant  did  not  have
    parental responsibility for them as they resided in the United  Kingdom
    with their biological parents.  Judge Doyle made findings of fact  that
    led him to conclude that the appellant could not meet the definition of
    a 'partner' contained in paragraph GEN 1.2 although she met  the  other
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In respect of EX.1, the judge observed at paragraph 11(d) to (j):

         "(d) The appellant meets the other requirements of the  immigration
             rules.  It is an eligibility requirement  that  the  appellant
             cannot meet so I move on  to  consider  paragraph  EX.1.   Are
             there  are  (sic)  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
             continuing outside the UK.

         (e)  It is argued that the insurmountable  obstacles  are  that  Mr
             Chalk cannot turn his back on his eight-year  old  child  (nor
             his 20-year old).  He has well-paid employment in the  UK  and
             has financial commitments to support both of his children.  He
             enjoys contact with his children.  It is argued that he  would
             be faced with the choice of turning his back on  his  children
             are moving to Nepal (sic), or ending his relationship with the
             appellant.  It  is  also  argued  that  the  appellant  has  a
             familial relationship with Mr Chalk's 8-year old child because
             she provides childcare during contact periods.

         (f)  Those argument is wholly undermined by the  oral  evidence  of
             the appellant and Mr Chalk.  Mr Chalk candidly  admitted  that
             if the appellant returns to Nepal she will immediately  submit
             an application for entry  clearance  which  he  will  sponsor.
             Because of the passage of time, the appellant & Mr Chalk  have
             now  lived  together  for  more   than   three   years.    The
             respondent's decision is  that  the  remaining  parts  of  the
             immigration rules  are  met.   The  appellant  can  submit  an
             application which has a realistic chance of success.

         (g)  The appellant has not had the right to  be  in  the  UK  since
             2011.  The  current  application  was  submitted  as  an  over
             stayer.  Put simply,  the  application  fails  because  it  is
             premature.  The passage of time has cured that.  The weight of
             reliable evidence indicates that  the  financial  requirements
             are still met and that the relationship requirements  can  now
             be met.  The appellant can once again submit  an  application,
             even though she is an over stayer.  This time the  application
             has a realistic prospect of success.

         (h)  The fact that the appellant has two options which  could  lead
             to a grant of limited leave to remain in the UK indicates that
             family  life   can   continue.    There   are   therefore   no
             insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing.

         (i)   Applying  exactly  the  same  reasoning,  I  find  that   the
             respondent's decision does not have unduly harsh  consequences
             because it does not  lead  to  final  separation  between  the
             appellant and Mr Chalk, and does  not  bring  the  contact  Mr
             Chalk has to his child to an end.  Today, the appellant cannot
             meet the immigration rules because I have to look at the  date
             cohabitation  commenced  and  the  date  the  application  was
             submitted and measure the time that passes between  those  two
             dates.

         (j)  The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who lived there until  she
             was 20 years of age.  She spent the majority of  her  life  in
             Nepal.  She is familiar with the  customs  and  traditions  of
             Nepal and the language of Nepal.  Because of her age  and  the
             length of time the appellant has been in the UK the  appellant
             cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE(1)  (i)  to
             (v) of the immigration rules.  There is no  reliable  evidence
             before me of very significant obstacles to  integration.   The
             appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
             rules."

 4. Outside the rules, the judge found that family life within the  meaning
    of Article 8 did not exist between  the  appellant  and  her  partner's
    young child due to limited contact and that the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not a disproportionate breach of respect for  family  life
    as it would not bring that to an end.  The public  interest  outweighed
    the appellant's desire to have the Immigration  Rules  "waived  to  one
    side so that she can pursue her relationship with Mr Chalk".

 5. As to the delay of 21 months between the date of  application  and  the
    date of decision, the judge concluded at paragraph 14(j):

         "(j) In this case there has not been any unreasonable  delay.   The
             appellant applied prematurely after living illegally in the UK
             for years.  Her relationship with  Mr  Chalk  was  established
             before she told him that she had no right to remain in the UK.
              No reliable evidence of  the  impact  of  any  delay  on  the
             appellant  is  placed  before   me.    In   submissions,   the
             appellant's solicitor said little more than  21  months  is  a
             long time."

    before concluding at paragraph 14(K):

         "(k) After considering all of the evidence  I  still  do  not  know
             enough about the appellant's home, her habits  and  activities
             of daily living, her significant friendships, any  integration
             into UK society, or any contribution to her  local  community.
             There is no  reliable  evidence  of  the  component  parts  of
             private life within the meaning  of  article  8  of  the  1950
             convention before me.  The appellant fails to  establish  that
             she had created article 8 private life within the UK."

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rai  on
    the basis that it was arguable that "...the  judge  had  erred  in  the
    overall proportionality assessment having found the  Immigration  Rules
    were met at the date of hearing" ... with reference to the decision  of
    the Supreme Court  in  Agyarko  v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11.   The  judge
    considered the point made in that case was that it was clear  there  is
    no public interest if it is certain that an application  is  likely  to
    succeed if made from abroad.

 7. The hearing began with a discussion of the relevant  Immigration  Rules
    with reference  to  a  partner  application  and  an  analysis  of  the
    suitability and eligibility requirements with a  view  to  establishing
    why it was the judge had considered the case under  Appendix  FM  EX.1.
    and to establishing the factors which  were  inhibiting  the  grant  of
    leave.

 8. A partner is defined in GEN.1.2. of Appendix FM, and  relevant  to  the
    issue in this appeal (as the couple are neither married nor in a  civil
    partnership):

         "GEN.1.2. For the purposes of this Appendix "partner" means -


   i) ...


  ii) ...


 iii) ...


  iv) a person who  has  been  living  together  with  the  applicant  in  a
      relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership for at least  two
      years prior to the date of application, unless a different meaning  of
      partner applies elsewhere in this Appendix."


 9. In relation to an application for entry  clearance  as  a  partner  the
    relevant provisions of Section EC-P are as follows:


         "EC-P.1.1. The requirements to be met  for  entry  clearance  as  a
         partner are that -


         (a)  the applicant must be outside the UK;


         (b)  the applicant must have made a  valid  application  for  entry
             clearance as a partner;


         (c)  the applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
             grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability -entry clearance; and


         (d)  the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section  E-
             ECP: Eligibility for entry clearance as a partner."


10. As to in-country applications, the requirements for limited  leave  are
    at Section R-LTRP: Requirements  for  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner, as follows:

         "R-LTRP.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain
         as a partner are-


         (a)  the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;


         (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application  for  limited
             or indefinite leave to remain as a partner; and either


         (c)


             (i)  the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section  S-
                  LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and


             (ii) the applicant  must  meet  all  of  the  requirements  of
                  Section E-LTRP: Eligibility  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
                  partner; or


         (d)


             (i)  the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section  S-
                  LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and


             (ii) the applicant meets the  requirements  of  paragraphs  E-
                  LTRP.1.2-1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1-2.2.; and


             (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies."


11. It is unnecessary to  consider  the  suitability  requirements  as  the
    respondent made clear in the refusal letter that  the  application  did
    not fall for refusal on any of the grounds  under  paragraph  S-LTR  of
    Appendix FM.  For the purposes of this appeal, and the issues that  are
    engaged, there  is  no  material  difference  between  the  suitability
    requirements for an  entry  clearance  application  and  an  in-country
    application.

12. Relevant to the issues in this appeal, the material differences between
    the eligibility requirements for an in-country application  as  opposed
    to an  entry  clearance  application  are  as  follows.  For  in-county
    applications the 'Immigration Status Requirements' are:

         "E-LTRP.2.1. The applicant must not be in the UK -


         (a)  as a visitor; or


         (b)  with valid leave granted for a period of  6  months  or  less,
             unless that leave is as a fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner,
             or was granted pending the outcome of family court or  divorce
             proceedings.


         E-LTRP.2.2. The applicant must not be in the UK -


         (a)  ...


         (b)  in breach of immigration laws (except  that,  where  paragraph
             39E of these Rules applies, any current period of  overstaying
             will be disregarded), unless paragraph EX.1. applies."


13.  Paragraph  EX  provides  exceptions  to  certain  of  the  eligibility
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner or parent  and,  relevant
    to the issue in this appeal:

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if


   a) ...


         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK."


14. In entry clearance applications, the rules provide in paragraph 320(7B)
    for circumstances where entry clearance or leave  to  enter  is  to  be
    refused based on inter alia  overstaying.  Paragraph  A320  dis-applies
    this provision for applications to enter or remain as a Family Member.

15. Paragraph 320(11) under the heading 'Grounds on which  entry  clearance
    or leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  should  normally  be  refused'
    provides:

         (11) Where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
             way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:


             (i)  overstaying; or


             ...


             and  there  are  other  aggravating  circumstances,  such   as
             absconding,   not   meeting   temporary    admission/reporting
             restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity  or
             multiple identities, switching nationality,  making  frivolous
             applications  or  not  complying  with  the   re-documentation
             process."


16. Mr Brown and Mr Govan accepted that  as  the  appellant  did  not  come
    within the definition of a "partner" she was unable to avail herself of
    the  provisions  in  EX.   Judge  Doyle   considered   this   provision
    nevertheless and found that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing based on a new in-country application being made
    or, in the alternative, from abroad.

17. It will be seen from  the  extracts  cited  above  that  a  history  of
    overstaying for an in-country partner application  is  captured  by  E-
    LTRP.  It follows that even if  the  appellant  had,  at  the  time  of
    application, been able to demonstrate the necessary period of  time  to
    come within  the  definition  of  a  partner,  she  did  not  meet  the
    eligibility immigration status requirements set out above.

18. Pausing there for the moment, even if the applicant were to now reapply
    in-country as contemplated by Judge Doyle, it is difficult to  see  why
    he considered that, apart from the two year requirement, the rules were
    met due to the difficulties caused by the appellant's overstaying.  She
    would need to rely on paragraph EX and  persuade  the  respondent  that
    there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  relationship  continuing
    abroad (being the actual test rather than  basis  considered  by  Judge
    Doyle).  Mr Govan observed at the outset of the hearing that there  was
    uncertainty  for  any  in-country  application  in  the  light  of  the
    appellant's immigration history.

19. Were the appellant to apply from abroad, she would need  to  show  that
    her overstaying did not fall within 320(11).  Mr Brown argued with some
    force that with the appellant having met by the hearing time period for
    a  partner  application,  absent  any  deficit   in   the   suitability
    requirements, the judge was tasked with making the decision whether the
    decision was compatible with the Human Rights Act in the absence of  an
    application to the Secretary of State.  Were the appellant to  have  to
    apply from abroad, he contended the only issue  she  had  to  meet  was
    under paragraph 320(11).  Mr Govan accepted that there  is  a  need  to
    show more than overstaying in relation to  this  provision.   Mr  Brown
    referred to Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 in support of his  argument
    that the public interest would not require a party to apply  for  entry
    clearance in a case such as this.  As to whether this was a very  clear
    case, Mr Brown responded that despite the unlawful presence, there were
    no aggravating factors.  By way of response Mr Govan maintained that an
    assessment would need to be made  nevertheless  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's position was that this was not a totally clear case.  Mr  Brown
    maintained that the judge had erred by failing to apply  Chikwamba  and
    had he done so it would have affected  his  assessment  of  the  public
    interest.

20. I drew the parties' attention to the recent consideration by the  Court
    of Appeal of the Chikwamba principle in SSHD v R (on the application of
    Kaur) [2018] EWCA Civ 1423, in particular the observations of  Holroyde
    LJ at [41] to [45] as the basis for my enquiry whether this was a  very
    clear case.  The final paragraph of that passage explains:


         "41. In Chikwamba, the SSHD's policy, as  recorded  in  her  Asylum
             Policy Instruction, Consideration of  Article  8  Family  Life
             Claims, was  that  in  cases  where  there  was  a  procedural
             requirement under the Rules requiring a person to leave the UK
             and make an application for entry clearance from  outside  the
             UK, such a person should return home and make  an  application
             for entry clearance from there:

                  "In such a case, any interference would only be considered
                  temporary (and therefore more likely to be proportionate).
                   A person who claims that he will not  qualify  for  entry
                  clearance under the rules is not in  any  better  position
                  than a person who does qualify under the  rules  -  he  is
                  still expected to apply for entry clearance in  the  usual
                  way, as the entry clearance officer will consider  article
                  8 claims in addition to applications under the rules."

   1. Lord Brown, with whom the other Law Lords  agreed,  accepted  that  it
      would in some cases be reasonable and  proportionate  to  follow  that
      policy.  He went on, however, to say at paragraph 44:

                  "I am far from suggesting  that  the  Secretary  of  State
                  should routinely apply this policy in all but  exceptional
                  cases.  Rather it seems  to  me  that  only  comparatively
                  rarely, certainly  in  family  cases  involving  children,
                  should an article 8 appeal be dismissed on the basis  that
                  it would be proportionate and  more  appropriate  for  the
                  appellant to apply for leave from abroad."

             Mrs Kaur understandably relies on that statement.

   1. It must however be noted that the facts in  Chikwamba  were  striking.
      The claimant was a Zimbabwean national.  In June 2002 her asylum claim
      and leave to enter were refused.  Her removal  was  however  suspended
      because of deteriorating conditions in Zimbabwe.  She then  married  a
      Zimbabwean man who had earlier been granted asylum  in  this  country,
      and in April 2004 a daughter was born to them.  In November  2004  the
      bar on forced removals to Zimbabwe was lifted.  The claimant  appealed
      against the Secretary of State's refusal of her claim that removal  to
      Zimbabwe would breach her Article 8 right to respect  for  her  family
      life.  The issue was whether she  should  be  required  to  return  to
      Zimbabwe in order to apply from there for  permission  to  rejoin  her
      husband. It was accepted that he could not return to Zimbabwe.  It was
      found by the adjudicator that conditions in Zimbabwe would  be  "harsh
      and unpalatable".  The facts were such that the  claimant  would  have
      "every prospect  of  succeeding"  if  she  made  an  application  from
      Zimbabwe for permission  to  re-enter  and  remain  in  this  country.
      However, if the claimant had to return to  Zimbabwe  her  child  would
      either have to face those unpalatable conditions for  a  time,  or  be
      separated from her mother. In those circumstances, Lord Brown said  at
      paragraph 46:

                  "is it  really  to  be  said  that  effective  immigration
                  control requires that the  claimant  and  her  child  must
                  first travel back (perhaps at the taxpayers'  expense)  to
                  Zimbabwe, a country to which the enforced return of failed
                  asylum seekers remained suspended for more than two  years
                  after the claimant's marriage  and  where  conditions  are
                  'harsh and unpalatable', and remain there for some  months
                  obtaining entry clearance, before finally she  can  return
                  (at her own expense) to the United Kingdom to  resume  her
                  family  life  which  meantime  will  have   been   gravely
                  disrupted? Surely one has only  to  ask  the  question  to
                  recognise the right answer."

   2. I note that in Hayat v SSHD [2011]  UKUT  444  (IAC),  Upper  Tribunal
      (Lord Menzies and UT Judge PR Lane, as he then was) said:

                  "23  The significance of Chikwamba, however,  is  to  make
                  plain  that,  where  the  only  matter  weighing  on   the
                  respondent's side of the balance is the public  policy  of
                  requiring a person to apply under the rules  from  abroad,
                  that legitimate objective will usually  be  outweighed  by
                  factors resting on the appellant's side of the balance.

                  24   Viewed correctly, the Chikwamba principle  does  not,
                  accordingly, automatically trump anything on  the  State's
                  side, such as a poor immigration history. Conversely,  the
                  principle cannot be simply "switched off"  on  mechanistic
                  grounds, such as because children  are  not  involved,  or
                  that (as here) the appellant is not seeking to remain with
                  a spouse who is settled in the United Kingdom."

             With every respect to the Upper Tribunal, I do not think  that
             Lord Brown's words in Chikwamba justify the inclusion  of  the
             word "usually" in paragraph 23 of their decision.

   3. I have quoted in paragraph 26 above the passage in which Lord Reed (at
      paragraph 51 of his judgment in Agyarko) referred to Chikwamba. It  is
      relevant to note that he there spoke of an applicant who was  "certain
      to be granted leave to enter" if an application were made from outside
      the UK, and said that in such a case there might be no public interest
      in removing the applicant. That, in my view,  is  a  clear  indication
      that the Chikwamba principle will require a  fact-specific  assessment
      in each case, will only apply in a very clear case, and even then will
      not necessarily result in a grant of leave to remain."

21. The grounds of challenge by the appellant  are  threefold  although  Mr
    Brown indicated he did not  pursue  the  third  which  related  to  the
    appellant's private life.  They are in summary:


   1) The judge had erred by dismissing the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
      relationship in terms of cohabitation at the date of  application  and
      failed therefore to consider the case with reference to Section  85(4)
      of the 2002 Act.  Proper consideration would have dealt with the  only
      reason for dismissing an appeal which was  that  the  application  was
      premature.


   2) Had the judge properly considered Article 8,  with  reference  to  the
      decision of the Supreme Court  in  Agyarko  v  SSHD  [2107]  UKSC  11,
      although having referred to the principle established, the  judge  had
      failed to weigh Chikwamba as a relevant factor in the  proportionality
      assessment.


   3) The appellant's history constituted a very  significant  private  life
      and the conclusion that there was  no  private  life  in  the  UK  was
      erroneous.


22. It seems to me that grounds 1 and 2 may be taken  together  since  they
    both challenge the judge's approach to Article 8.  The  judge  referred
    to R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
    temporary separation - proportionality IJR) [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) and
    Chikwamba itself.  He cited the headnote from Chen.  He also  correctly
    referred to Section 117B of the 2002 Act and explained that immigration
    control was in the public interest so that he must attach little weight
    to the appellant's  family  life.   It  is  correct  that  he  did  not
    specifically ask the question whether, having directed  himself  as  to
    the principle in  Chikwamba,  the  public  interest  in  requiring  the
    appellant to apply for entry clearance from abroad  was  diminished  by
    virtue of any ability of the appellant to meet the requirements of  the
    rules.


23. In my judgment, had the judge applied the principles in  Chikwamba,  he
    could not, on the facts, have come to a conclusion that it was  a  very
    clear case in the light of the overstaying by the appellant since  2011
    by reference to the impact of E-LTRP.2.2. or paragraph 320(11).  Whilst
    neither represented an insuperable hurdle, despite the suitability  and
    the eligibility (as to finance and  the  length  of  the  relationship)
    requirements being met, the outcome was not a  certainty.   The  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control remains a  factor  of  some
    force in the Article 8 assessment.  Although  Mr  Govan  accepted  that
    more than overstaying was required for paragraph 320(11) to  bite,  his
    position was that an assessment would need to be made and  he  was  not
    willing to concede the matter.  It is for the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    to decide  whether  the  appellant's  immigration  history  which  will
    include the nature of the applications that she made after  curtailment
    of her leave (and the reasons for that curtailment) triggered  320(11).
    It may be an aspect that the appellant will be able  to  satisfactorily
    address but the result cannot be considered clear cut.


24. Drawing these matters together, although Mr Brown eloquently argued the
    appellant's case,  on  careful  examination,  her  immigration  history
    remains a significant factor.   He  acknowledged  that  the  ground  of
    challenge  was  essentially  a  failure  to  apply  the  principles  in
    Chikwamba.  In my judgment, had the judge done  so,  the  result  would
    have been the same.  Accordingly, I conclude that  although  the  judge
    erred in  not  applying  the  Chikwamba  principle  to  his  Article  8
    proportionality assessment, such an error,  if  corrected,  could  have
    only resulted in  the  appeal  being  dismissed  on  the  evidence  and
    findings reached.


NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date  11 June 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

