
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24110/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Parliament House, Edinburgh |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 March 2020                      |On 16 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                                LORD MATTHEWS


                                   Between

                                 Yamida [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ballantyne, instructed by Jain Neil Ruddy
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


PROCEDURAL HISTORY


 1. The appellant is a national of Sierra Leone.  She came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in December 2007, with leave expiring on 10 June 2008.  She has
    had no leave since that.  In December 2012 she was discovered in London
    and detained; she thereupon claimed to be a refugee on the  basis  that
    she had in 2007 been raped by police in Sierra Leone.  She was  refused
    and appealed. In his decision dismissing her appeal (which was affirmed
    on appeal to the Upper Tribunal) Judge Scobbie concluded that  she  had
    not been honest, and had claimed asylum only as a last resort when  she
    was about to be returned to Sierra Leone.  He also  concluded  that  it
    appeared that she had been working  illegally,  because  she  had  sent
    significant sums of money to Sierra Leone  for  her  children's  school
    fees.


 2. The appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 23  October  2013,  but
    she was not removed.  In December 2013 she  made  further  submissions,
    which were rejected on 7  August  2015  with  no  right  of  appeal,  a
    decision that was not challenged.  She made further submissions  on  16
    October 2015, which were rejected on 10 November 2015: again, there was
    no challenge to that decision.  She was detained with a view to removal
    on 21 June 2016, and within the next few days made further submissions,
    now based on her marriage on 14 January 2016.  On 2 July she  submitted
    a claim of having been subject to torture, which was rejected on 5 July
    and her detention was maintained. Her submissions were rejected  on  14
    July 2016 for lack of evidence of the relationship.  She  made  further
    submissions on 25 July 2016, which were rejected in a decision dated 24
    September 2016 (served on 1 October) that she did not qualify for leave
    to remain on human rights grounds, and that there were  no  exceptional
    reasons why she should nevertheless be granted  leave.   That  decision
    carried a right of appeal, which she exercised.


 3. It is convenient to continue a summary of the procedural history before
    turning to the merits.  The hearing of the appeal was on 16 March  2018
    before Judge Ross, who dismissed it in a decision sent out on 26  March
    2018.  There was an application for permission  to  appeal,  which  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 6 July and,  on  renewal  out  of
    time, by  this  Tribunal  on  17  October  2018.   The  appellant  then
    petitioned the Court of Session for reduction  of  the  last  decision.
    The matter was  settled  by  consent,  the  Interlocutor  of  the  Lord
    Ordinary based on the Joint  Minute  being  dated  26  September  2019.
    Permission was then granted by this Tribunal on 13 November 2019.


THE APPEAL BEFORE JUDGE ROSS


 4. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal against Judge Ross' decision thus  now
    falls for  decision.   We  observe  at  this  point  that,  despite  Mr
    Ballantyne's numerous attempts to lead us onto other  paths,  the  only
    grounds of appeal are those submitted to the Upper Tribunal on 20  July
    2018, which have not been amended and which were  the  subject  of  the
    grant of permission: the reduction of the previous refusal meant simply
    that the application based on those grounds now again awaited a  lawful
    decision.  We are not concerned with grounds that were not submitted to
    the Tribunal; in particular we  are  not  concerned  with  the  grounds
    supporting the Petition for Judicial review, which were not grounds  of
    appeal and in any event, were directed (and could only be directed)  to
    the Upper Tribunal's view on  arguability.    Further,  in  making  our
    decision, we are not concerned with any view expressed by the Court  or
    in the Joint Minute, those again being concerned only with whether  the
    Upper  Tribunal  could  be  shown  (or  agreed)  to  have  been  acting
    unlawfully in deciding that the grounds disclosed no arguable challenge
    to Judge Ross' decision.


 5. We turn therefore first to that decision.  The grounds of appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal are signed by Mr Terence Ruddy, of Jain,  Neil  and
    Ruddy, the solicitors who  have  represented  the  appellant  for  many
    years: Mr Ruddy appeared for her before Judge Scobbie  in  2013.   Five
    grounds are raised in challenge to  the  decision  which,  as  we  have
    observed, was the response to further submissions on the basis  of  the
    appellant's marriage.  Ground 1 is that the  appellant  is  a  refugee.
    Ground 2 is that she is entitled to  humanitarian  protection  'because
    she has a well-founded fear of persecution as a member of a  particular
    social group'.  Grounds 3 and 4 argue that the appellant is at risk  of
    persecution including extra-judicial killing and torture, and that  her
    return to Sierra Leone is therefore unlawful.  Ground 5, in full, is as
    follows:

         "Article 8 of the ECHR - the appellant is in a genuine and
         subsisting relationship with a British Citizen and is married to
         said individual.  Removal of the appellant to Sierra Leone would
         breach her Article 8 rights under the ECHR."

 6. It does not appear that any  reference  was  made  at  the  hearing  to
    grounds 1-4.  Mr Ruddy obviously knew both that those grounds had  been
    rejected previously, and that the present decision had  nothing  to  do
    with them.  They are wholly unspecific and as pleaded simply could  not
    succeed.  It is very  difficult  to  know  how  a  solicitor  could  be
    justified in wasting time and resources in this way by  asserting  that
    protection grounds were to be argued when they were not and in  reality
    could not be.  We also note that ground 2 appears to show a  remarkable
    ignorance of the scope of humanitarian protection, which would  not  be
    available to a person who has a well-founded fear of persecution for  a
    Convention reason.


 7. So far as concerns ground 5, it is also wholly unspecific.  Further, it
    fails to  engage  either  with  the  extensive  reasons  given  by  the
    Secretary of State for rejecting  the  submissions,  or  with  the  law
    relating to the application of article 8 to a person who marries  after
    being in the United Kingdom unlawfully for  a  very  long  period.   In
    short, the grounds show none of the attention to  either  law  or  fact
    which everybody, including the appellant and the Tribunal, is  entitled
    to expect from a solicitor.


 8. The appellant's husband died on 14 February 2017 of mesothelioma,  aged
    74.  That fact clearly made a considerable difference to the impact  of
    ground 5.  Mr Ruddy appears to  have  made  no  attempt  to  amend  the
    grounds or even to draw the attention of the First-tier Tribunal to the
    important change in the factual  basis  upon  which  his  grounds  were
    based.  That was  despite  the  fact  that  Directions  issued  by  the
    Tribunal required the appellant to submit all relevant documentation to
    the Tribunal no later than 13 September 2017.


 9. In breach of those directions the inventory of productions was produced
    only at the hearing on 16 March 2018 or  very  shortly  before  it  (it
    includes statements dated 14 March): item 7 of  the  inventory  is  the
    death certificate.  Only at the hearing itself did  Mr  Ruddy  disclose
    the appellant's husband's death more than a year  previously  and  that
    "she no longer relied on the fact of her marriage as founding a  family
    life claim".  Instead, Mr Ruddy argued that "the  appeal  ought  to  be
    considered in relation to the appellant's private  life  including  the
    effect that her husband's death has had upon her".  The  judge  appears
    to have allowed amendment of the grounds to that extent, so  that  this
    was now the only effective ground of appeal.


10. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and from a  friend  of
    hers.  There were witness statements, which stood as evidence-in-chief.
     The appellant's statement was chiefly about  the  genuineness  of  her
    relationship with her husband.  She said that she  was  still  grieving
    for him, often visited places in Glasgow she associated with  him,  and
    did "not wish" to be away from such places.  She also said that she did
    "not wish to return to Sierra Leone where I was raped before by  police
    officers" because she would be fearful  of  the  same  thing  happening
    again.  She said she was receiving medical treatment, which  she  would
    have to pay for in Sierra Leone and did not know whether she could  get
    it.  In an earlier statement, dated in September 2015, she said she had
    low moods as a result of her memories of ill-treatment in Sierra  Leone
    and at that time "still" required counselling and medication.  She said
    she had friends in the United Kingdom but did not in  the  most  recent
    statement mention any relatives. Cross-examination was directed  almost
    entirely  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  her  husband.   The
    appellant gave evidence that she is in touch with her husband's brother
    but not any of his children; she was vague about her contacts with  her
    family in Sierra Leone and said that she had not spoken to them  for  a
    long time.   The  appellant's  friend  said  that  she  had  known  the
    appellant and her husband as a couple and, as she put it,  "was  aware"
    that the appellant  visited  places  in  Glasgow  associated  with  her
    husband, and suffered from depression. There was documentary  evidence,
    and there is now on file a medical report  faxed  to  the  Tribunal  at
    10.20 am on the day when the hearing was listed to begin at 10am.


11. In submissions (according to the judge's note and the  decision:  there
    is no evidence countering either) the presenting officer accepted  that
    the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for ten years, but pointed
    out that she had lived most of her life in Sierra Leone, and  that  she
    had now been widowed for over a year. The public interest  factors  set
    out in s 117B of the 2002 Act had to be taken into account.  There were
    no exceptional circumstances meriting a grant of leave to  remain,  and
    any  friendships  could  be  continued  by  other  means.   Mr  Ruddy's
    submissions were that the marriage had been a  genuine  one:  the  Home
    Office had interviewed both parties and not too  much  should  be  read
    into any  differences  with  the  children.   The  appellant  had  been
    complying with the conditions of her temporary release, and  was  still
    engaging with her GP and  her  clinical  psychologist.   She  had  been
    deeply affected by her husband's death and regularly visits places with
    which she associates him.


12. In his  decision  Judge  Ross  began  by  considering  the  appellant's
    immigration history.  He noted the findings of Judge Scobbie  in  2013,
    that she had done nothing to claim asylum until apprehended, giving  an
    excuse he did not accept, and that she appeared not to be  being  frank
    about her activities in the United Kingdom.  Judge Ross' own conclusion
    was that the relationship with her husband was a genuine marriage,  but
    that the appellant was still not being truthful about the circumstances
    of her own family: he specifically did  not  accept  that  she  had  no
    contact with her two adult daughters in  Sierra  Leone  or  that  their
    father prevented any contact.


13. Judge Ross briefly considered the Immigration Rules and noted that  the
    appellant could not have met the financial requirements for  a  foreign
    partner even while her husband was alive: an appeal against the refusal
    of a  spouse  visa  would  not  have  succeeded.   He  found  that  the
    appellant's private life, even including her grieving for her  husband,
    was not sufficient to outweigh the public interest in her removal:  she
    had  no  strong  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom,  was  not  financially
    independent, and had formed all known relationships while in the United
    Kingdom unlawfully.  Judge Ross did not mention the medical report.  He
    concluded that the appeal on human rights grounds was without merit and
    that there was no need to conduct a separate proportionality assessment
    directly under article 8 of the ECHR as the result would be  the  same.
    He dismissed the appeal.


THE APPEAL AGAINST JUDGE ROSS' DECISION


14. Three grounds of appeal supported the  application  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  (1) The judge had no sufficient basis to make  the  findings
    he did in relation to the appellant's not having  been  truthful  about
    her family.  He had not given reasons for his disbelief; it appeared to
    be based on Judge Scobbie's findings, which were five years old and not
    specifically concerned with her family; and he was factually  in  error
    because the appellant has a son and a daughter, not two adult daughters
    in Sierra Leone. (2)  The judge had given insufficient attention to the
    article 8 claim, and had not considered the medical report or what were
    described as the "detailed submissions made at  the  hearing  regarding
    the appellant's grief and the ongoing difficulties she was having  with
    her health".  (3)  The judge had erred in failing to conduct a separate
    assessment under article 8.  Submissions had been made that the  appeal
    should be allowed under article 8 "on account of the factual issues and
    the medical evidence referred to previously" (i.e. the report  sent  on
    16 March).  A proportionality assessment "could have led to a different
    conclusion".  We have set out these grounds in detail because they  are
    by implication included in the grounds  of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal,
    which add nothing of substance but lay emphasis on  slightly  different
    aspects of the grounds in explaining why the author  (Mr  Ruddy  again)
    considers that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to refuse  permission.
    As we have said, those are the grounds that concern us now.


15. In the Court of Session the respondent is on record as agreeing, for no
    specified reason, that the Upper Tribunal decision erred in law:

         "...by failing to apply anxious scrutiny in its consideration of
         the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom.  As a
         consequence there was a failure of due process, contrary to natural
         justice, in the Upper Tribunal's decision."





16. We should say that this conclusion, apparently endorsed specifically by
    the Lord Ordinary, Lord Pentland, causes  us  some  mystification.   Of
    course the Upper Tribunal's decision might be in error for  failing  to
    take account of some relevant material  or  for  irrationality  in  the
    light of the material  available,  or  possibly  for  lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny, but we are wholly unable to understand what is said to be the
    failure of due process or the breach of natural justice  of  which  the
    Tribunal  stands  convicted  without  having  been  heard.   The   only
    procedural issue of which we are aware is that  the  Tribunal  extended
    time for the appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal,  not
    something  of  which  either  party  has  complained.   Mr   Ballantyne
    submitted to us that the Joint Minute casts light on the reasons why an
    appeal should now succeed.  It does not.


17. On the grounds, Mr Ballantyne submitted that Judge Ross ought  to  have
    considered whether (in view of the fact that the  appellant  could  not
    have succeeded under the Immigration Rules even when  her  husband  was
    alive) EX.1 would have  applied.   That  would  have  required  him  to
    consider whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the United Kingdom: he evidently had  not  done  so,
    and that was an error.  Secondly,  Mr  Ballantyne  submitted  that  the
    judge had not considered  the  medical  report,  which  said  that  the
    appellant was suffering from PTSD and required treatment for it.   Even
    if Mr Ruddy had made no specific reference to relying on it, the  judge
    should have appreciated that it was an important element in an  article
    8 decision.   Thirdly, there had been a breach of natural  justice,  or
    in any even an injustice, caused by  the  delays  in  this  case.   The
    appellant's relationship with her husband had begun in  2013.   If  the
    Secretary of State had not delayed in responding to her submissions and
    perhaps if the Tribunal had heard her appeal earlier,  she  would  have
    been able to rely on a current relationship with a partner.


18. We did not need to hear submissions from Mr Clark in response.


DISCUSSION AND DECISION


19. This appeal is in our view simply  hopeless.   Taking  the  grounds  in
    turn, the first written ground appears to criticise the judge for using
    the previous determination as a starting point and  going  no  further,
    but there was little further to go.  This was  a  human  rights  appeal
    based on article 8, in which the appellant  needed  to  show  that  her
    family and private life was such that despite not merely  being  unable
    to meet the rules but having ignored their provisions for many years it
    would now be unlawful to require her to leave the United Kingdom.   Any
    such appeal has to  be  based  on  clear,  credible  and  comprehensive
    evidence of the appellant's family  and  personal  circumstances.   The
    appellant and her solicitor were fully aware  of  the  observations  of
    Judge Scobbie in 2013, and Mr Ruddy must have been aware of the  effect
    of the decision in Devaseelan.  Despite this, no evidence  was  adduced
    to counter Judge Scobbie's findings and observations, except for  vague
    assertions that, as Judge  Ross  observed,  did  not  accord  with  the
    evidence taken as a whole (including that supporting the 2013  appeal).
    Judge Ross was clearly and unarguably entitled to reach the view he did
    about the evidence of the appellant's family, and, what  is  more,  was
    entitled to conclude that the evidence as a whole did not displace  the
    general position that a person who does not meet  the  requirements  of
    the rules will not obtain leave.  Further, even if the  evidence  about
    the appellant's family in Sierra Leone had been comprehensive and true,
    it provided no reason for her being  allowed  to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom, where she has no relatives at all except by affinity.


20. The asserted mistake about whether one of the appellant's  children  is
    male or female is wholly immaterial: nothing could possibly turn on  it
    in the context of this appeal.  But the position is that we  have  been
    unable to trace any evidence on the issue, and neither the grounds  not
    Mr Ballantyne's submissions referred to any.  What is clear is that  in
    those submissions to the Secretary of State that  ought  to  have  been
    demonstrating the appellant's  lack  of  continuing  ties  with  Sierra
    Leone, Mr Ruddy on her behalf did not mention her family at  all:  that
    is clear from, for example  paragraph  46  of  the  current  letter  of
    refusal.


21. As argued by Mr Ballantyne  this  ground  took  an  entirely  different
    character, which was that despite the total lack of evidence,  lack  of
    argument and lack of relevance of the question, the judge erred in  law
    by failing to consider, of his own motion,  the  application  of  EX.1.
    But there simply was  no  evidence  that  could  have  shown  that  the
    appellant and her husband could not live together in Sierra Leone,  and
    there was no evidence that the marriage was in any way conditional upon
    their being able to do so: one would, in the absence of evidence,  have
    supposed that a couple who were so  devoted  to  each  other  but  were
    living in a country where one of them was not entitled to be, would  be
    anxious to take the steps necessary to be somewhere  where  they  could
    properly  be  together.   There  was  evidence  about  the  appellant's
    husband's health for part of  the  time  of  their  marriage,  but  the
    evidence (which appears to have been the subject of no reference at all
    at the hearing, and which is therefore more than a little difficult  to
    analyse for the purposes of an appeal based on an error of law  by  the
    judge before whom the hearing took place) appears to have been  largely
    of control by  readily-available  drugs.   His  mesothelioma  was  not,
    apparently, diagnosed within the period covered by the medical evidence
    and so far as the evidence is concerned appears for the first  time  on
    his death certificate.  There was no evidence of his inability to  live
    with his wife in Sierra Leone  save  for  his  own  assertion  to  that
    effect: his statement dated 23 June 2016, in particular  the  reference
    to having "strict orders to keep out of the sun" is  not  supported  by
    the doctor's letter of 29 June 2016, which says "I am  unable  to  tell
    you whether it would be advisable for [him] to live in  Sierra  Leone".
    But, crucially, even if the  matter  had  been  properly  prepared  and
    argued before Judge Ross, an investigation into  the  applicability  of
    EX.1 would  have  been  completely  pointless,  because  the  appellant
    appeared before Judge Ross as a widow, not a person with a  spouse  who
    could not be expected to live with her in her own country.


22. The second ground relates to  the  medical  evidence.   There  must  be
    considerable doubt whether the report dated 15 March 2018 was  seen  by
    the judge, because it was tendered so late, but  we  must  for  present
    purposes assume that it was amongst the material  before  him  when  he
    made his decision (it was delivered to the Tribunal at a time when  the
    judge certainly had the file, and we do not know when it made  its  way
    onto the file).  As we have said, the decision does not  refer  to  it.
    It is, however, clear that despite what is asserted in the grounds,  Mr
    Ruddy did not refer to it either.  We do not know whether he  had  seen
    and read it, but the submission he made on  the  medical  evidence  was
    directly contrary  to  what  it  says.    He  did  not  make  "detailed
    submissions ... regarding ... the ongoing difficulties she  was  having
    with her health": he said she was engaging with her GP and her clinical
    psychologist.  But the report is from the  clinical  psychologist.   It
    says, among other things, that the appellant has been  discharged  from
    Glasgow Psychological Trauma Service, and that the psychologist herself
    has had no recent  contact  with  the  appellant  because  of  her  own
    "extended unplanned sick leave".  We do not know how it came about that
    in his submissions to the judge Mr  Ruddy  was  able  to  misstate  the
    effect of a document that in his grounds he regards as important.


23. The report does not  in  reality  assist  the  appellant  at  all.   In
    summary, it indicated that the appellant has received some  counselling
    for her PTSD and low mood.  Further  counselling  may  or  may  not  be
    helpful.  She needs to spend some time coming to terms with  the  death
    of her husband.  There is nothing indicating that she needs  to  be  in
    the United Kingdom, or that any treatment from the author of the report
    is current.


24. In these circumstances the omission of  the  report  from  Judge  Ross'
    decision is, even if erroneous, entirely  immaterial.   He  would  have
    made a material error if he had based anything on what  Mr  Ruddy  said
    about the report.  The only  other  factor  is  the  appellant's  grief
    itself, which the judge did take into account.   The  combined  factors
    simply did not have, and could not have had, the effect  attributed  to
    them by the grounds; and it is  clear  that  what  was  argued  at  the
    hearing was, so far as accurate at all, not what is  presented  in  the
    grounds.


25. Ground 3 is a general ground asserting that there  was  something  that
    might have assisted the appellant, without any real  identification  of
    what it was or how it was presented at the hearing.  We  are  confident
    that it is without merit.  The  judge  needed  to  decide  whether  the
    appellant met the requirements of the rules, because if she  did,  that
    would have an impact on whether the refusal of her  claim  was  lawful.
    He made that assessment.  She did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    rules at the date of the hearing.  She did not meet the requirements of
    the rules during her marriage.  The judge went on to  consider  factors
    outside the rules in order to see whether the circumstances  were  such
    that she should nevertheless  have  not  been  refused  the  leave  she
    sought, and concluded that they were  not.   That  was  the  assessment
    under and outside the rules that was  required.   Whatever  Judge  Ross
    meant  by  saying  that  no  separate  proportionality  assessment  was
    required, there was nothing more to be done.  For the reasons  we  have
    given, what was done was done lawfully and gives no reason to  set  the
    decision aside.


26. As we have indicated above, Mr Ballantyne sought to argue before  us  a
    ground based on delay by public authorities.  The evidence of  that  is
    very sparse, not  surprisingly  because  it  has  not  previously  been
    argued.  The only relevant factor clearly emerging from the evidence is
    that as late as July 2016 the appellant, assisted  as  she  was  by  Mr
    Ruddy, had failed to provide evidence establishing the  genuineness  of
    her relationship with her husband.  The legal position is that a  point
    based on delay simply was not taken below and the judge made  no  error
    by not constructing for himself an argument unsupported by evidence and
    not advanced by the appellant's professional representatives.


27. The conduct of these proceedings raises concerns at a number of levels.
     For the reasons we  have  given,  however,  there  is  no  ground  for
    intervention in  the  decision.  Our  conclusion  is  that  Judge  Ross
    completed his task without error of law; and that any  or  all  of  the
    errors asserted in the grounds would even if established not have  been
    material. We therefore dismiss this appeal.





                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 8 June 2020
