
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal numbers: HU/24118/2018
                                                             & HU/24121/2018
                                                             & HU/24124/2018
                                                             & HU/24129/2018



                            the immigration Acts



|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reason promulgated        |
|On: 27 November 2019                 |10 December 2019                     |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                   Mrs J K
                                  Mr S S B
                                Master M S B
                                Master N S B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to  identify  the  appellants.  No  report  of
these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.    This
direction applies to both the appellants  and  to  the  respondent  and  all
other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt
of court proceedings.
I make this order because two of the appellants are  children.  The  parties
at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr D Bazini, of Counsel, instructed by E2W (UK)  Ltd.

For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer.







                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellants are  nationals  of  India,  born  (respectively)  on  22
    October 1974, 7 October 1968, 31 January 2007 and  21  July  2010.  The
    first appellant is the wife of the second  appellant.  The  thirds  and
    fourth appellants are their minor sons. The appellants  appeal  against
    the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S J Clarke who  (in  a
    determination promulgated on 9 July 2019 following a hearing on 25 June
    2019) dismissed their appeals against the decision of the respondent of
    14 November 2018 to refuse the private and family  life  claims  of  29
    September 2017.

 2. As the judge said at  para  2  of  her  decision,  the  thrust  of  the
    appellants' Article 8 claims was that they are Christian converts, they
    have settled in the United Kingdom and the children would be  adversely
    affected if required to leave the United Kingdom. As at the date of the
    judge's decision, the children had not  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for a period of at least 7 years.

 3. The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  4  November  2011
    with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student. The  second,  third
    and fourth appellants arrived on 18 December 2012 with entry  clearance
    as the first appellant's dependants. On arrival,  the  appellants  were
    aged (respectively) 36 years, 44 years, 5 (nearly 6) years  and  2  1/2
    years old.

 4. All the appellants had their leave extended on the same basis until  28
    July 2019.  However,  the  first  applicant's  leave  was  subsequently
    curtailed to  expire  on  2  October  2017  because  her  employer  had
    terminated her employment on account of the fact  that  she  could  not
    meet the standard required of her in the IELTS examination. She had not
    scored level 7 as was required by the  General  Nursing  and  Midwifery
    Council. The other appellants had their leave as  dependants  curtailed
    in line.

The grounds

 5. The grounds advanced on the appellants' behalf, set out  at  length  in
    the written grounds dated 22 July 2019 and reformulated by Mr Bazini in
    his hand-written note prepared at  my  request  and  submitted  at  the
    commencement of the hearing, were essentially as follows:

         i)   (Ground 1) (para 5 of the reformulated  grounds)  The  judge's
         consideration (at paras 8-13 of her  decision)  of  the  background
         material before her relating to  the  difficulties  experienced  by
         Christians in  India  failed  to  take  into  account  more  recent
         evidence which showed an escalation of  incidents  and  which  also
         showed that the situation was worse for Christian converts.

         ii)  (Ground 2) (para 2 of  the  reformulated  grounds)  The  judge
         misapprehended the evidence when  she  said,  at  para  15  of  her
         decision, that, upon return to India, the appellants could live  at
         first with the first appellant's mother who was also  a  practising
         Christian, albeit in  cramped  conditions.  To  the  contrary,  the
         evidence before the judge was that that they could  not  live  with
         the first appellant's mother.

         iii) (Ground 3) (para 4 of  the  reformulated  grounds)  The  judge
         misapprehended the evidence when  she  said,  at  para  15  of  her
         decision, that she found that, if the  appellants  preferred,  they
         could find alternative accommodation to reside in when  they  first
         arrive in the India because there was no evidence to  suggest  that
         they are completely without funds.  To  the  contrary,  the  second
         appellant  had  said  in  his  witness  statement  (at  K2  of  the
         appellants' bundles) that "we cannot afford English school in India
         without any job and saving".

         iv)  (Ground 4) (para 3 of the reformulated grounds) The judge  had
         erred in her consideration of  the  expert  report  from  Mr  Peter
         Horrocks, an independent social worker (hereafter the "expert"). At
         para 16, the judge had said that the expert had "failed to consider
         the impact upon [the minor appellants] of  re-uniting  with  family
         members such as grandparents and cousins  in  their  own  country."
         However, given that the judge had misapprehended the evidence  when
         she said that the appellants could at first  live  with  the  first
         appellant's mother and (in Mr Bazini's submission) that  the  judge
         had not otherwise assessed  the  expert's  report,  the  judge  had
         effectively failed to consider the expert's report  concerning  the
         best interests of the children and the impact upon them of  leaving
         the United Kingdom and going to India.

         v)   (Ground 5) (para 6 of the reformulated grounds) The judge  had
         failed to consider the wishes of the minor  appellants  which  they
         had expressed  in  their  letters  at  A7-A13  of  the  appellant's
         bundles, contrary to the approach required pursuant to the judgment
         of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

 6. In the event that I decided that the judge had materially erred in law,
    Mr Bazini informed me that, on 18 December 2019, the  minor  appellants
    will have lived in the United Kingdom continuously for a period  of  at
    least 7 years. He submitted that  this  would  not  constitute  a  "new
    matter" requiring the respondent's consent pursuant to section 85(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002  Act")  and
    that, in any event, the Upper Tribunal would be bound to apply  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 7. Although I have  concluded,  having  considered  the  grounds  and  the
    submissions, that the judge did not materially err  in  law,  I  should
    record that Mr Tarlow informed me that, in the event that I decided  to
    set aside the judge's decision, he  consented  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    considering whether the minor appellants satisfy s.117B(6) even if this
    did constitute "new matter".

The judge's decision

 8. The judge found that the appellants had not shown that there were  very
    significant obstacles to their reintegration in India. At paras 8-13 of
    her decision,  she  summarised  background  material  relating  to  the
    situation of Christians in India and concluded, at para 13, that "I  do
    not find that there are very significant difficulties per se for  being
    converted Christians". Paras 8-13 read:

         "8.  The Appellants have not shown that there are very  significant
             obstacles to their integration to India. I was referred to the
             Home Office Country Guidance; India: Religious Minorities  May
             2018 which reads at paragraph 2.3.3  there  is  discrimination
             against Muslims and Christians  for  the  officially  reserved
             jobs or school placements. It reads at 2.3.4  how  there  have
             been  incidents  of  public  officials  including  politicians
             instigating communal violence against religious minorities and
             isolated  reports  of  Christians   facing   arrests,   fines,
             beatings, extortion, imprisonment and restrictions  on  public
             expressions of their faith.

         9.   It goes on to read at 2.3.8  how  Christians  enjoy  religious
             freedom in much of India, and are able to express their  faith
             freely and openly. However, they face  some  abuses  by  Hindu
             nationalists, including the interruption of church services or
             worship;  vandalism;  physical  violence;  and   threats   and
             harassment, most typically  accusing  Christians  of  forcibly
             converting Hindus.

         10.  The report refers to the USCIRF Annual Reports 2016  and  2017
             which read that  the  groups  most  frequently  targeted  were
             Muslims and  Christians  and  Muslims  are  14  per  cent  and
             Christians 2 per cent of the population and India in 2017  was
             ranked 11 worldwide and now 10 worldwide on  the  World  Watch
             rankings.

         11.  At 6.1.1. it refers to the report prepared by  the  Church  in
             Chains, and [sic] independent  charity  supporting  Christians
             worldwide, which noted in India, Christians  face  persecution
             from state authorities in the form of arrests, fines, beatings
             and imprisonment as  well  as  prohibitions  on  meetings  and
             public  expressions  of  faith.  The  police  rarely  arrested
             perpetrators of attacks against Christians but it  also  cited
             examples of the police providing state protection. It goes  on
             to note that Christians enjoy freedom in much of India, but in
             some areas they face persecution. In  recent  years  with  the
             rise of Hindu nationalism  religious  intolerance  has  grown,
             with attacks on people and  property,  and  false  charges  of
             forcible conversion.

         12.  There is also reference  to  the  USCIRF  Annual  Report  2017
             repeating the above and  including  anecdotal  evidence.  When
             looking at the figures provided by The Church  in  Chains  and
             the Evangelical Fellowship of India, even if they consider the
             number of incidents to be far greater, the figures  given  are
             low, with 410 reported for the first half of 2017 and 351.

         13.  Given  India  has  a  population  of  some  1.3  billion,  and
             Christians account for 1  per  cent,  it  is  clear  that  the
             numbers cited are small. I do not find  that  there  are  very
             significant  difficulties   per   se   for   being   converted
             Christians."

 9. Having noted, at para 14, that the first  appellant  was  a  practising
    Christian in India "albeit she said somewhat clandestinely" and that it
    appeared that the Christian  college  and  hospital  where  she  worked
    employed all denominations, the judge said, at para 15:

         "15. The first Appellant's mother  is  Christian  by  convert,  and
             lives in the same building as the brother, but is described as
             self-sufficient, although the  brother's  children  have  been
             told to distance themselves from her. I find  there  has  been
             some embellishment here, but in any event, the  Appellant  and
             family can at first live with her mother  albeit  in  somewhat
             cramped surroundings before they find their own home, and this
             would benefit the children and the grandmother to resume their
             relationship  again,  and  being  practising  Christians   the
             grandmother can assist in continuing the  integration  of  the
             children. If they prefer, I find  they  can  find  alternative
             accommodation to reside in when they  first  arrive  in  their
             country because there is  no  evidence  to  suggest  they  are
             completely without funds."

10. The judge referred specifically to the expert's report at paras 16,  17
    and 20. At para 18, she said, inter alia, that "I have  read  carefully
    the description of the full and active lives both boys have in the  UK,
    ...", a phrase which Mr Tarlow relied upon in his submission that  this
    phrase showed that the judge had considered the expert's  report  as  a
    whole as well as the supporting letters.

11. Paras 16 - 24 of the judge's decision read:

         "16. The expert  evidence  in  the  report  by  the  social  worker
             instructed by the Appellants called  Mr  Horrocks  is  lacking
             because this area was never explored at all. He focused on the
             lives of the children in the UK, and failed  to  consider  the
             impact upon them of re-uniting with  family  members  such  as
             grandparents and cousins in their own country.

         17.  The report focussed [sic] upon the impact of the  children  by
             being separated from the first Appellant when she moved to the
             UK, and how they should not have another disruption  in  their
             lives. But the whole family unit would  be  relocating  rather
             than separation from a parent.

         18.  I have read carefully the description of the full  and  active
             lives both boys have in the UK, and it is clear that they have
             formed relationships outside the family,  but  also  in  their
             Church, and also their activities  which  are  many  including
             scouts/cubs, sports, and hobbies, and friends. However, should
             the boys return to India with their parents, they have similar
             opportunities to continue their sports  and  hobbies,  and  to
             become part of a new Church  and  its  family  in  India,  and
             whilst there would be some disruption to them, they  would  be
             doing fully with the support of both  parents,  and  with  the
             additional support of a grandmother  as  well.  Based  on  the
             evidence of how well the boys are faring in the UK, I find the
             Appellant parents are particularly diligent in  providing  for
             the welfare of the children at all levels and  would  continue
             so to do in India.

         19.  I was told that they would not  enjoy  the  same  standard  of
             education, but I find that the boys can attend school, and  if
             the first Appellant was paying for private  nursery  in  India
             where he was taught in English, there remains a possibility of
             a similar private education  continuing.  However,  these  are
             young children who spoke Punjabi, and  have  some  familiarity
             with the language, and their  father  occasionally  speaks  to
             them in it, and I find that they can learn again the  language
             and how to read and write as well. Whilst there may well be  a
             setback in their education, this is not  permanent,  and  with
             proper support and encouragement they can learn at  school  in
             India.

         20.  The expert himself noted how the parents are very  capable  of
             meeting all aspects of the boys' needs and the  practical  and
             emotional care  provided  is  of  a  very  high  quality,  and
             considered it a very close and living [sic] family  unit  with
             the priorities of the  parents  being  focussed  on  the  best
             interests of their sons. He emphasised how a notable aspect of
             this assessment was the extent of the support for  the  family
             in the local community, but as  I  mentioned  earlier,  having
             failed to consider the  family  and  potential  new  community
             through Church in India, the expert has not fully assessed the
             impact and ability on the children by closing his mind to what
             opportunities lie ahead for them in India.

         21.  The best interests of the children are to  remain  with  their
             parents in a family unit and whilst remaining in the UK  where
             they have the school, Church and  friends  would  provide  the
             least disruption, they would be returning to India with  their
             parents who have their best interests at heart.

         22.  The parents have shown resilience and fortitude relocating  to
             the UK, and I find that they will find equal strength  finding
             a new Church to practise in, and form a  new  community  with,
             and this will assist greatly to the integration of the  family
             into India. I find the parents will ensure their children  are
             properly looked after upon return to their  country,  in  much
             the same way they have done to date.

         23.  The parents have  both  worked  in  the  UK,  and  the  second
             Appellant was once a professional singer in India,  but  I  do
             not accept his estimate of requiring �50,000 to start up again
             in his country. In any event,  he  is  working  as  a  kitchen
             assistant and I find that there are employment options for him
             in this field. The first Appellant has made no attempt to find
             out what her employment options are, and given she  bears  the
             burden of proof I find she has not discharged the burden  that
             she has not [sic] employment options in her  chosen  field  or
             nursing, or caring, and in any event, she  can  work  in  less
             skilful work if she so chooses.

         24.  The Appellants have been in the UK since 2011  and  2012,  and
             the children are not qualifying children, having  not  resided
             in the UK for over 7 years. The first Appellant speaks English
             well, the second Appellant has limited ability to  talk  basis
             [sic] sentences about food and what the children can do, but I
             do not find he would be able  to  have  any  more  significant
             conversation with them in English, and a mix  of  Punjabi  and
             English is  most  likely  spoken  at  home  when  needed.  The
             Appellants have worked, and paid taxes,  and  the  application
             was made before  the  curtailment  of  the  leave  to  remain.
             However, having only had Tier  4  or  Tier  2  leave  is  only
             precarious, and there can be [sic] expectation  of  long  term
             settlement. Drawing the strands together, and noting both  the
             positive and negative features of the case, I  find  that  the
             public interest lies in the removal of the family, who have no
             particular features requiring them to remain in the UK. Whilst
             there will  be  some  setbacks  to  the  boys,  these  can  be
             overcome, given the supporting parents they have,  and  noting
             neither is a qualifying child, but also how they have  resided
             in the UK for 6 years, I conclude that it is proportionate for
             them to be removed as a family unit and I dismiss the appeal."

Assessment

12. In relation to ground 1, Mr  Bazini  took  me  through  the  background
    material that was before the judge. The thrust of his  submissions  was
    that the background material at Annex C of the appellants'  bundle  was
    more recent than the evidence mentioned by the judge at paras  8-13  of
    her decision; that the more recent evidence showed that there has  been
    an escalation of attacks against Christians, in that,  it  referred  to
    attacks in the "thousands" whereas the judge relied upon older material
    stating that there had been 410 attacks reported in the first  half  of
    2017 and therefore, Mr Bazini submitted, the  situation  was  far  more
    serious than the judge had considered;  and,  further,  that  Christian
    converts are at greater risk.

13. I have carefully considered all of  the  material  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Bazini and paras 8-13 of the judge's decision.

14. It is correct to say that the document at page  C  of  the  appellants'
    bundle refers to there having been "thousands of attacks  taking  place
    every year", whereas the judge referred  to  410  attacks  having  been
    reported in the first half of 2017.

15. However, there was no evidence before the judge about  the  reliability
    of the sources of the documents at Annex C  and,  importantly,  of  the
    data mentioned in the documents.  The  data  was  not  consistent.  For
    example, in relation to the size of the Christian population in India:

         i)   the document at page C, the date of posting of  which  is  not
         clear and which is from "Open Doors",  states  that  there  are  64
         million Christians living in India out of a total population of 1.3
         billion;

    whereas

         ii)  the document at C15, the date of which is  (again)  not  clear
         and which is from "The Voice of the Martyrs", states that there are
         an estimated 27 million Christians who live in India and that  this
         represents only 2.1 per cent of the population.

16. If the figure of 27 million Christians equates to 2.1 per cent  of  the
    total population  of  India,  it  follows  that  the  total  population
    according to "The Voice of the Martyrs" at  the  time  the  article  in
    question was posted was 1.28 billion, which is similar to the  estimate
    of 1.3 billion for the total population according to the  "Open  Doors"
    article at page C. It is therefore surprising  that  the  two  articles
    give vastly different estimates of the number of Christians  living  in
    India, with one stating that there are 64 million  Christians  and  the
    other stating that there are 27 million Christians. In addition to this
    apparent inconsistency rendering it difficult to place reliance on  the
    content of the articles, any proper evaluation of the two  articles  on
    this particular point is rendered more difficult by reason of the  fact
    that it is not possible to say when these two documents were posted  on
    the internet

17. More importantly, in relation to the number  of  attacks,  the  undated
    "Open Doors" article at page C refers to there having  been  "thousands
    of attacks taking place every year". However:

         i)   the article at page C4, which is dated 3 August  2019  and  is
         entitled "Pastors knocked out,  Christians  killed  as  persecution
         spikes dramatically in India" states, referring to attacks in 2019,
         that, according to the Evangelical Fellowship of India, a total  of
         77 incidents were documented against Christians between January and
         February; and

         ii)  the document at page C28, which is from "Open  Doors"  and  is
         dated 23  May  2019,  states  that  "Open  Doors'  local  partners"
         recorded 216 violent incidents in India in  the  first  quarter  of
         2019.

18. In view of these difficulties, it would not be surprising if the  judge
    made a conscious decision to summarise the situation for Christians  in
    India in broad terms but quote specifically from the material that  she
    mentioned at paras 8-12 of her decision. I do not accept that the  mere
    fact that she did not refer in terms to the material in Annex C of  the
    appellants' bundles  means  that  she  did  not  take  account  of  the
    evidence, given that it is clear that the judge recognised and took  on
    board the fact that religious intolerance  and  Hindu  nationalism  had
    grown  and  that  the  problems  that  Christians  in  India  face  had
    increased. That was the picture that one obtains from the  material  at
    Annex C of the appellants' bundle on the  question  of  the  number  of
    incidents against  Christians,  it  not  being  possible  to  be  place
    reliance upon the actual numbers of incidents mentioned in the  various
    documents at Annex C, for the reasons I have given above. It  is  plain
    that the judge recognised this and took it on board.

19. Accordingly, I do not accept that the judge failed to take into account
    the material at Annex C of the appellants' bundle, for  the  reasons  I
    have given.  In  my  judgment,  her  summary  at  paras  80-12  of  the
    background material before her was an adequate summary of  all  of  the
    documents she had.  However,  even  if  I  am  wrong  about  this,  the
    documents at Annex C could not have made a material difference, in view
    of the difficulties with the documents in Annex C as I  have  explained
    and the fact that the judge was aware of and took into account the fact
    that religious intolerance and Hindu nationalism  had  grown  and  that
    Christians in India faced increased problems.

20. Mr Bazini also submitted that the judge had not taken into account  the
    fact that the more recent material to which he referred me  shows  that
    Christian converts face  increased  problems.  I  do  not  accept  this
    submission, for the following reasons:

         i)   The article at page C9 dated 26 April 2018 from  "AsiaNews.it"
         entitled "Persecution against Christian schools in India continues"
         refers to teachers being accused of forced conversions and that the
         anger of attackers was triggered by false  accusations  against  14
         teachers of trying to convert pupils to Christianity.

    However, in the final sentence of para 9 of  her  decision,  the  judge
    referred to "threats and harassment, most typically accusing Christians
    of forcibly converting Hindus" and, in the final sentence of  para  11,
    the  judge  specifically  referred  to  "false  charges   of   forcible
    conversions" in the sentence that reads: "In recent years with the rise
    of Hindu nationalism religious intolerance has grown, with  attacks  on
    people  and  property,  and  false  charges  of  forcible  conversion."
    Accordingly, her summary of the background material  from  Home  Office
    Country Guidance, at para 9 of her  decision,  and  the  USCIRF  Annual
    Reports 2016 and 2017 at para 11 of her decision adequately encompassed
    the material Mr Bazini said she had overlooked.

         ii)  The article at page C23, which is from "Open Doors" (the  date
         of which is unclear albeit that it appears to be dated some time in
         2019 because it refers to the "2019 World Watch List"  in  the  top
         line), states  "Additionally,  in  some  regions  of  the  country,
         converts  to  Christianity   from   Hinduism   experience   extreme
         persecution, discrimination and violence".

    However, this evidence was irrelevant, because the appellants  are  not
    converts from Hinduism and there was no evidence before the judge  that
    they are engaged in trying to convert  people  to  Christianity  and/or
    will do so on return to India. In any  event,  the  judge  specifically
    referred to the problems  faced  by  Christians  of  being  accused  of
    forcibly converting Hindus, as I have already stated.

21. For all of the reasons given above, I  am  satisfied  that,  given  the
    difficulties with the documents at Annex C, the judge's summary of  the
    background material at paras 8-13  of  her  decision  was  an  adequate
    summary of all of the background material  before  her.  I  am  further
    satisfied that, even if the judge had overlooked the documents in Annex
    C (which I do  not  accept),  they  could  not  have  made  a  material
    difference given the difficulties as I have  explained  above  and  the
    fact that the judge was aware of and took into account  the  fact  that
    religious  intolerance  and  Hindu  nationalism  had  grown  and   that
    Christians in India faced increased problems.

22. I therefore reject ground 1.

23. In relation to ground  2,  Mr  Bazini  referred  me  to  the  following
    evidence:

         i)   the first appellant had said in her witness statement dated 21
         June 2019 (at A3 of the appellants' bundles)  that  the  appellants
         could not live with her mother because her mother  lived  with  the
         first appellant's brother who did not accept  their  conversion  to
         Christianity and who would not allow them to live there; and

         ii)  the expert had said at para  3.11  of  his  report  that  "the
         [first appellant's] mother doesn't have space for them.  She  lives
         with her brother and his wife and two  children  in  a  two  roomed
         house".

24. The judge did not say that she rejected  this  evidence,  nor  did  she
    assess this evidence. I therefore accept that the judge  misapprehended
    the evidence because it is clear that  she  said  that  the  appellants
    could return to India to live,  at  least  initially,  with  the  first
    appellant's mother whereas the first appellant's evidence was that that
    was not an option.

25. I will consider the materiality of the judge's misapprehension of  this
    aspect of the evidence when I have considered the remaining grounds.

26. Turning to ground 3, Mr Bazini referred me to  the  second  appellant's
    witness statement dated 24 June 2019 at  page  K2  of  the  appellants'
    bundles where  he  said:  "There  are  English  school  in  India,  but
    education is totally different than England, moreover we cannot  afford
    English school in India without any job and saving".

27. Mr Bazini submitted that the evidence before the  judge  was  therefore
    the opposite of the judge's finding at para 16 that "If they prefer,  I
    find they can find alternative accommodation to  reside  in  when  they
    first arrive in their country because there is no evidence  to  suggest
    they are completely without funds."

28. Whilst it  is  true  that  the  second  appellant  had  said  that  the
    appellants could not afford to send the  minor  appellants  to  English
    schools in India without a job and savings, it is clear from para 23 of
    her decision that the judge  did  not  accept  that  his  evidence  was
    sufficient to show that he would not have employment  opportunities  in
    India. Likewise, the mere fact that the second appellant had said  that
    the appellants  have  no  savings  was  not  sufficient  in  itself  to
    discharge the burden of  proof  on  the  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

29. In order to decide whether the judge did in fact err in  law  when  she
    said that she found that it would be open to  the  appellants  to  find
    alternative accommodation because "there was  no  evidence  to  suggest
    that they are completely without funds", it is  necessary  to  consider
    the evidence that was before her and what was missing from the evidence
    before her.

30. The first appellant  had  submitted  her  wage  slips,  P45,  P60,  her
    employment contract and  bank  statements.  The  banks  statements  she
    submitted were for the periods from 13 February 2017 (page 174  of  the
    appellants' bundle 1) to 12 September 2017 (page 159 of the appellant's
    bundle 1).

31. There was evidence of employment for the second appellant up  to  2017.
    The bank statements he submitted were for the periods from  3  February
    2017 (page 232 of the appellants' bundle 1) to 2 September  2017  (page
    208 of the appellants' bundle 1).

32. Accordingly, the bank statements that were submitted to  the  judge  by
    the first and second appellants  ended  1  year  9  months  before  the
    hearing before the judge on 25 June 2019. I appreciate that  the  first
    and second appellants had their leave curtailed  so  that  their  leave
    ended on 2 October 2017. However, that does not explain the  lacuna  in
    the evidence they submitted to the judge. It is simply  not  enough  to
    leave the judge to infer, from the  fact  that  their  leave  had  been
    curtailed, that it must follow that they have not been  working  and/or
    that it must follow that their  financial  circumstances  remained  the
    same as may have been indicated  by  their  banks  statements  for  the
    period from 3 February 2017 to 12 September 2017.

33. Given that the bank statements before the judge ended 1 year  9  months
    before the hearing date and bearing in mind the burden and standard  of
    proof, the judge was fully entitled to find that "there was no evidence
    to suggest that they are completely without funds".

34. I therefore reject ground 3 and turn to ground 4.

35. Ground 4 is that the judge erred in her  consideration  of  the  expert
    report of Mr Horrocks. In view of my conclusion on ground 2,  I  accept
    Mr Bazini's submission that, in assessing the expert report, the  judge
    had erred when she said at para 16  that  the  expert  had  "failed  to
    consider the impact upon [the  minor  appellants]  of  re-uniting  with
    family members such as grandparents and cousins in their own country."

36. However, I do not accept Mr Bazini's submission that the judge had  not
    otherwise assessed the expert's report, for the following reasons:

         i)   At para 16, the judge said that the expert had focused on  the
         lives of the children in the United Kingdom, and, at para 17,  that
         he had focused on the impact of the  children  of  being  separated
         from the first appellant when she moved to the United  Kingdom  and
         how the children should not have another disruption in their lives.



    I have carefully read the expert's report. I entirely  agree  with  the
    judge's observation. The expert had emphasised very strongly, as it was
    a recurrent  theme  of  his  report,  that  the  minor  appellants,  in
    particular the older child, had been much affected by their  separation
    from their mother when she travelled to the United Kingdom in  November
    2011 ahead of them and that they should  not  have  to  endure  another
    disruption in their lives.

         ii)  At para 18,  the  judge  said:  "I  have  read  carefully  the
         description of the full and active lives  both  boys  have  in  the
         UK...".  Mr Tarlow sought to suggest that this shows that the judge
         had considered the remainder of the expert's report. On  the  other
         hand, Mr Bazini sought to suggest that this was consistent with the
         judge's assessment of the letters of support, of  which  they  were
         several, in the appellants' bundle.

    I have read the letters of support and, as I have said already, I  have
    read the expert's report very carefully. The phrase I have just  quoted
    from para 18 of the judge's  decision  is  consistent  with  the  judge
    having considered  not  only  the  letters  of  support  but  also  the
    remainder of the expert's report.

         iii) Likewise, the content of the remainder of para 18 as  well  as
         the whole of para 19 of the judge's decision.

         iv)  At para 20, the judge again mentioned the expert's  report  in
         terms, stating that the expert had noted how the parents are  every
         capable of meeting all aspects of  the  boys'  needs.  Indeed,  the
         whole of para 20 of her decision plainly relates  to  the  expert's
         report.

         v)   Likewise, the first part of para 21, where the judge said that
         "[t]he best interests of the children  are  to  remain  with  their
         parents in a family unit and whilst remaining in the UK where  they
         have the  school,  Church  and  friends  would  provide  the  least
         disruption..." is plainly based upon the  expert's  report.  As  Mr
         Bazini  submitted,  the  expert's  report  was  "highly   material"
         evidence relating to the best interests of the children and  it  is
         difficult to see what else the judge could have based her  view  of
         the best interests of the children upon if not the expert's report.



37. There is therefore simply no basis for saying that the judge failed  to
    consider the remainder of the expert's report. In my  judgment,  it  is
    clear that the judge had considered the expert's report  and  that  she
    did so adequately.

38. I therefore reject ground 4 and turn to ground 5.

39. I accept that the judge did not mention, in terms, the letters from the
    minor appellants wherein they expressed their feelings and  their  wish
    to remain in the  United  Kingdom.  However,  their  wishes  were  also
    relayed by the expert in his report, at paras 4.2 and 4.3 (page  56  of
    the appellants' bundle 1). As I have said above in relation  to  ground
    4, it is not the case that the judge had effectively failed to consider
    the expert's report. She referred to the expert's report, in terms,  at
    paras 16, 17 and 20 and,  in  addition,  the  content  of  para  18  is
    consistent with the evidence in the expert's  report  as  well  as  the
    supporting letters from friends and other individuals.

40. I have concluded that ground 3 is not established and  that  the  judge
    had considered the expert's report adequately. Since the expert relayed
    the wishes and feelings of the minor appellants, there is no basis  for
    concluding that the judge had erred by failing to take into account the
    wishes and feelings of the minor appellants simply because she did  not
    mention their wishes and feelings in terms. It  is  not  necessary,  as
    judges have been repeatedly  reminded  by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  for
    judges' decisions to deal with all aspects of the evidence before them.



41. I turn now to consider whether or not the error I  have  identified  in
    relation to ground 2 is material. As I said, I accept  that  the  judge
    had misapprehended the evidence  when  she  said  at  para  15  of  her
    decision that the  appellants  could  live  initially  with  the  first
    appellant's mother on return to India, given that  she  failed  to  say
    that she rejected the evidence of the first  appellant  and  given  the
    evidence at para 3.11 of the expert's report  to  the  effect  that  it
    would not be open to the appellants to live with the first  appellant's
    mother.

42. Insofar as this was  an  error  in  relation  to  the  judge's  finding
    concerning the accommodation for the appellants in India,  the  judge's
    misapprehension of the  evidence  is  plainly  not  material.  This  is
    because she made the  alternative  finding,  that,  if  the  appellants
    preferred, they could obtain alternative accommodation because they had
    not established that they  were  entirely  without  funds.  As  I  have
    rejected ground 3, it follows that the appellants have  not  discharged
    the burden of proof upon them to show, on the balance of probabilities,
    that they would not be able to obtain alternative accommodation.

43. However, in addition, the  judge  relied  upon  her  finding  that  the
    appellants could return to live with the first  appellant's  mother  in
    order to find, in essence, that, by living with their grandmother,  the
    minor appellants would be able to resume their  relationship  with  her
    and they would also have her support in  reintegrating  in  India  (for
    example, at paras 15, 16 and 18 of her decision) and, at para 16,  that
    the expert had failed to take into account the possibility of the minor
    appellants  being  able  to  resume  their  relationship   with   their
    grandmother.

44. I have concluded that the judge's reliance upon  the  minor  appellants
    being able to resume their relationship with their maternal grandmother
    and the possibility that she could assist in their reintegration is not
    material to her decision, given that she placed reliance upon the  fact
    that the minor appellants would have the support of their parents, that
    the parents were very capable of meeting all aspects of  the  needs  of
    the minor appellants as the expert had noted, and that this was a  very
    close and loving family unit.  In these circumstances,  the  fact  that
    the minor appellants will  not  have  the  support  of  their  maternal
    grandmother is immaterial, in my view, to the judge's  conclusion  that
    the respondent's decision is proportionate. In addition, I am satisfied
    that it does not materially undermine her assessment  of  the  expert's
    report.

45. Mr Bazini submitted that there was no  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    support her view that the appellants have the potential to become  part
    of a new community through the church in India. The judge said, at para
    20 of her decision,  that  the  expert  had  failed  to  consider  this
    possibility and, at para 22, that the parents will be able  to  find  a
    new church and form a new community.

46. This aspect of the judge's reasoning  was  not  part  of  the  grounds,
    although I accept that it falls for consideration by me as part  of  my
    duty to assess whether the judge's misapprehension of the evidence  (as
    established by ground 2) is material.

47. However, I do not accept that the judge erred in this respect. What the
    judge was saying  at  para  22  was  that  the  parents,  having  shown
    resilience and fortitude in relocating to  the  United  Kingdom,  "will
    find equal strength finding a new Church to practise in, and form a new
    community with...". In reaching this finding, the judge was  making  an
    assessment of the qualities of the parents and their  ability  to  form
    new links with a new church in India. The background material that  was
    before her plainly showed that there were Christian churches in  India.
    Furthermore, the evidence was that the first appellant was a practising
    Christian in India "albeit she said somewhat clandestinely" (para 14 of
    the judge's decision).  In all of these circumstances, it  is  nonsense
    to suggest that, in the absence of evidence  that  specifically  showed
    that these appellants could form new links with church  communities  in
    India  or  a  specific  church  community  in  India,  the  judge   was
    speculating. I am satisfied that the judge was fully entitled  to  draw
    her finding from all of the evidence that  was  before  her,  that  the
    appellants have the opportunity to find a new church and become part of
    the community of another church in India.

48. In the typed grounds as lodged with the application of  permission,  it
    is said that the judge had failed to assess the fact  that  the  second
    appellant had suffered serious injury at the hands of  his  family.  Mr
    Bazini  submitted  that  it  would  therefore  be  dangerous  for   the
    appellants to return  to  live  with  the  second  appellant's  family.
    However, the fact is that the judge did not rely  upon  the  appellants
    being able to live with the second appellant's family or having contact
    with them.

49. The remainder of the typed grounds, in  the  main,  do  not  amount  to
    anything  more  than  a  disagreement  about  the  weight  attached  to
    particular aspects of the evidence or with the judge's reasoning.

50. For all of the reasons given above, the appellants have failed to  show
    that the judge materially erred in law  in  reaching  her  decision  to
    dismiss their appeals.




    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside. Accordingly,
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals stands.

    The appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.


[pic]
Signed   Date: 7 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
