
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24139/2018
     HU/24144/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th August 2019                   |On 12th September 2019               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                 (1)  m S M
                                 (2)  m N M
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Mohzam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    J L Bristow, promulgated on 12th February 2019, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 4th February  2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the   Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Mauritius.   They  are  siblings.   The
    eldest, was born on 27th May 2000, and is the  sibling  sister  of  the
    second Appellant.  She is 18 years of age.  The youngest, born on  13th
    May 2003, is the sibling younger brother of the first Appellant, and is
    15 years of age.  Both applied for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of their family and private life, in an application made on  26th
    May 2018.  They do so on the basis of  their  family  life  with  their
    mother and siblings.

The Judge's Decision

 3. The judge observed how the Appellants' mother came to the UK in  August
    2015, and acquired residence under the EEA Regulations, from June 2018.
     The eldest child of the mother was born on 13th February 1985 and  she
    arrived in the UK on 9th December 2004, and has subsequently married in
    the following year, and acquired indefinite leave to remain in the  UK.
    The next child, was born thereafter, and left for the  UK  in  December
    2012, and the following year married in the UK in 2013, and is now  the
    family member of an EEA national.  The two  Appellants  in  this  case,
    however, remained in Mauritius with their father.

 4. The judge observed that the essence of the claim was  that  the  father
    would disappear for several nights and then when  he  would  return  he
    would be physically and  mentally  abusive  to  the  first  and  second
    Appellants because he would be intoxicated.  The Appellants were  often
    without food or money.   They  would  eat  cereal  or  rely  upon  food
    provided by friends.

 5. The judge went on to say that the relationship of  the  two  Appellants
    with their father "has deteriorated to such an extent  that  he  is  no
    longer interested in them.  In the second Appellant's case, his  father
    is no longer willing to care for him" (paragraph  26).   This  evidence
    was disputed by the Respondent, and the judge  took  that  factor  into
    account fully (at paragraph 27), before going on to conclude  that  the
    best interests of the children lay in being in the  UK  (paragraph  31)
    and that the account he had heard was truthful  and  reliable.   If  so
    concluding, the judge adopted a "balance sheet approach"  weighing  the
    public interest into the balance before a  finding  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant's human rights to remain in the UK (paragraph 39 onwards).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal state that the judge has  wrongly  accepted  some
    elements of the account provided by the Appellants because there was no
    corroborating evidence of what was being asserted in terms of the abuse
    and the neglect that the Appellant suffered.

 8. On 3rd May 2019, permission to appeal was granted by  the  Tribunal  on
    the basis that the judge had arguably failed to look for  corroborating
    evidence which might recently have been expected  in  a  case  such  as
    this.  Moreover, it may also be unclear as to how the  judge  concluded
    that any test for success outside the Rules would be  met,  given  that
    the Appellants could not succeed within the Rules.

 9. A Rule 24 response was thereafter entered by the Appellant.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 7th August 2019, Ms H Aboni,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer for the Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, submitted that the judge had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons
    when there had been no corroboration of the oral evidence given by  the
    Appellants.  This  was  important  because  the  Appellants  could  not
    satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Moreover, the judge failed to  consider
    the  public  interest.   He  did  not  identify  what  the   compelling
    circumstances were in a case  such  as  this.   Therefore,  the  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. For his part, Mr Mohzam submitted that he would rely upon the  Rule  24
    response and upon his skeleton argument.  He submitted  that  this  was
    nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's finding below.   This
    was the case for the following reasons.  First,  the  judge  considered
    the best interests of the youngest child to be to  remain  in  the  UK.
    This was a case where the mother had leave  to  remain  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The youngest Appellant was 15.  The judge concluded that,
    "I find that he cannot  live  with  his  father.   His  father  has  no
    interest in caring for him.  His father was abusive to him.  His mother
    and sisters are in the UK and are willing  to  provide  care  for  him"
    (paragraph 31).  That was reason enough, submitted Mr Mohzam,  and  the
    decision could not be challenged other than as a disagreement with what
    the judge had concluded.

12. Second, he submitted that  the  judge  had  applied  the  law  properly
    referring to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 (from paragraph 32 onwards).  He had
    gone on to consider the issues of proportionality by reference  to  the
    leading authorities such as Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, and the case  of
    MM [2018] EWCA Civ 28.  Indeed, the judge had then also considered  the
    public interest in immigration control (at paragraph 40).  Having  done
    all of this,  the  judge  then  considered  the  position  of  the  two
    Appellants towards the end of the  determination  before  allowing  the
    appeal.  The conclusions the judge reached were open to  him.   Insofar
    as it has been said that there ought to have been corroboration of  the
    father's  abusive  treatment  of  the  Appellant  children,  this   was
    difficult to comprehend, because the father was in  Mauritius,  and  it
    was not readily apparent as to what kind  of  corroboration  was  being
    required, other than a police report, which assumed that the matter had
    gone to the police, which was not case put forward by the Appellants.

13. In a reply, Ms Aboni submitted that the judge had  failed  to  show  on
    what basis the children were neglected or abused by the father.



No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I should set aside  the  decision.   I  come  to  this
    conclusion bearing in mind  the  well-established  legal  threshold  in
    cases of irrationality as set out by Lord Justice Brooke, in  R  (Iraq)
    [1985],  where  His  Lordship  stated  that  rationality  was  a  "high
    threshold" and that too often perversity was used by  practitioners  in
    an easy manner which was not justified (see paragraphs 11 to 12 of  the
    judgment).  This is a case where the judge has taken  full  account  of
    the facts before him and concluded in a manner that was open to him. It
    was open to the judge to begin from  the  premise  that,  "I  find  the
    Appellants and the  witnesses  to  be  truthful  and  reliable.   There
    evidence was consistent" (paragraph 18).  Unless a proper challenge can
    be made to this finding, it is difficult to see why the evidence of the
    witnesses would then not be held to be credible.

15. Second, the evidence  was  that  the  father  neglected  the  Appellant
    children, disappearing for several  nights,  and  then,  "he  would  be
    physically and mentally abusive to the first  and  second  Appellants",
    after arriving back home "intoxicated" (paragraph 23).

16. Third, the judge is perfectly alive to the fact that  the  evidence  of
    the Appellants is not accepted.  Indeed, the judge sets out  the  three
    reasons that the Respondent gives for not believing the account of  the
    Appellants (at paragraph 27).  However, the judge then goes on  to  say
    that,

         "I am satisfied that the Appellants have now provided  evidence  to
         substantiate their claims.  This is their oral testimony  and  that
         of their witnesses.  This has been tested, with  exception  of  the
         second  Appellant's  evidence,   by   way   of   cross-examination"
         (paragraph 28).

17. Fourth, the judge does consider why it is  that  the  first  Appellant,
    having come to the UK and then returned back to Mauritius, because  she
    did so, "because the second Appellant was alone and  she  was  awaiting
    her GCSE results, I find this an adequate explanation" (paragraph  28).



18. Fifth, the judge adopts  a  "balance  sheet  approach"  (paragraph  39)
    weighing the public  interest  as  against  the  human  rights  of  the
    Appellants.

19. Finally, the judge then concludes that there were a number  of  factors
    that add weight to the first Appellant's claim, namely, that

         "She was 17 when she made the application for leave to remain.  She
         is only 18 now.  She has only been an adult for eight months.   She
         experienced abuse from her father.  Her father did not care for her
         and she  was  required  to  look  after  the  second  Appellant  in
         Mauritius".

20. As a result her health was affected and it  would  now  be  "unfair  to
    separate her from the second Appellant" because "she has been more than
    a sister to him" (paragraph 45).  The judge also considered that  there
    were a number of factors that were in  the  second  Appellant's  favour
    (see paragraphs 46 to 47) who was a minor at the time of the  decision,
    and with respect to whom the judge concluded that his "best  interests"
    lay in remaining with his family in the UK.  Insofar as  any  issue  of
    corroboration is raised, I refer to the Rule 24 response, and  conclude
    that this was not necessary in circumstances where the judge had  found
    the witnesses to be credible and reliable.  There is no requirement per
    se of corroboration in judicial proceedings of this kind.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

An anonymity order is made.

The appeals of the Secretary of State are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019




