
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24867/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th May 2019                              |On 15th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     KK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Ward of Counsel, instructed by James & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor promulgated on  9  October  2018,  in
    which the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  human
    rights claim (in the context of deportation) dated 19 October 2016  was
    dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Sierra Leone, who arrived in the  United
    Kingdom on 29 July 2001.  His asylum claim was refused and  his  appeal
    against refusal dismissed in October 2001.  The Appellant  remained  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully and obtained a  false  British  passport,
    with which he obtained work  and  a  false  British  passport  for  his
    younger child.

 3. On 24  June  2016,  the  Appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  four  offences
    involving the possession and use of the false passport for which he was
    sentenced to a total  of  16  months'  imprisonment.   Further  to  his
    criminal convictions, the Respondent made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    Appellant on 9 July 2016 on the basis that his presence in  the  United
    Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.  The Appellant then  made
    a human right claim, the refusal  of  which  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.

 4. The Respondent refused the application the basis that although  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with his two  children  in  the  United  Kingdom  (one  of  whom  is  a
    Qualifying  Child  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  399(a)   of   the
    Immigration Rules and section 117C(5) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002) for whom it would be unduly harsh to  relocate  to
    Sierra Leone with the Appellant; it was not  considered  to  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their
    mother following the Appellant's  deportation.   There  were  no  other
    applicable exceptions to deportation on private or family life grounds.

 5. Judge Norton-Taylor dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 9
    October 2018 on the basis that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's children to remain in the United Kingdom  without  him  and
    there were no exceptions to deportation under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The "unduly harsh" test applied was that as set out  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 617, with reference not only  to  the  children's  best
    interests but also to the overall circumstances,  including  the  wider
    public interest considerations for the deportation of foreign  national
    offenders.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on the sole ground that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in applying the wrong test of  "unduly  harsh",
    that set out in MM (Uganda) having been  expressly  overturned  by  the
    Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53 after promulgation of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 7. At the oral hearing, Mr Kotas accepted on behalf of the Respondent that
    there was an error of law in  the  decision  following  the  subsequent
    decision of the Supreme Court in KO.  However, it  was  submitted  that
    the error was not material on the basis that the  unchallenged  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal could not meet the  high  threshold
    of "unduly harsh" as set out by the Supreme Court.  In  any  event,  if
    the error of law was material, the same submissions would be made as to
    how the appeal should be remade.

 8. I indicated to the parties at the hearing that I found a material error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (for the reasons  set
    out more fully below).  No further evidence was to be  relied  upon  by
    either party and therefore submissions were made as to the re-making of
    the appeal as follows.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Kotas submitted that on  the  basis  of
    the findings of fact in the First-tier Tribunal, it was  accepted  that
    there would be an adverse impact on the Appellant's children  remaining
    in the United Kingdom without him, but that  it  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh.  The Appellant's claim was premised on his ex-partner's  medical
    conditions and needs, with the impact of these on the children  without
    the Appellant to provide assistance and support.  It was submitted that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  medical
    evidence and rejected a large part of it; albeit it was  accepted  that
    the Appellant's ex-partner was HIV positive and suffered  from  anxiety
    and depression.  There was an almost complete lack of evidence from the
    Appellant's ex-partner herself and nothing  to  suggest  that  she  was
    unfit or lacked capacity to give evidence in these proceedings.   There
    was no alternative explanation for her lack of  evidence.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the Appellant's ex-partner was  able  to  care
    for the children, albeit that at times,  her  health  impacted  on  her
    ability to carry out her parental duties.

10. In accordance with the Supreme Court's decision in  KO,  the  threshold
    for showing that deportation would be unduly harsh on the children is a
    high one.  In light of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, it  was
    submitted that although  there  would  be  an  adverse  impact  on  the
    children, it would not be sufficiently high to meet  the  threshold  as
    unduly harsh.

11. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that on the facts  of  the
    present case, there was a stronger than usual family life  between  the
    Appellant and his children, with whom he had been living from birth  up
    to 2018.  The  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  that  the
    Appellant had a significant involvement in  his  children's  lives  and
    played an active parental role.  If the Appellant were to be  deported,
    the  adverse  impact  on  the  children  would  be  unduly  harsh.   In
    particular, it was accepted that the children's mother had a low  level
    of literacy and therefore the children would lose the help  with  their
    schoolwork that the Appellant  has  provided  to  date.   Further,  the
    Appellant's elder child was acknowledged by the First-tier Tribunal  as
    at times being a young carer for her mother, when she has suffered from
    anxiety and depression (albeit this happened on a less  frequent  basis
    than the Appellant claimed).  Overall, it was submitted that beyond the
    normal adverse impact on  children  when  a  parent  is  deported,  the
    additional factors in this case which make deportation unduly harsh are
    the health and literacy problems of the mother in the  United  Kingdom,
    meaning that the children are more reliant on the Appellant for support
    than would normally be the case.

Findings and reasons

 1. In this appeal, the First-tier Tribunal applied the meaning of  "unduly
    harsh" as it was set out in authority at the time  of  promulgation  of
    the decision, namely the Court of Appeal's decision in MM (Uganda), but
    through no fault of its own has been shown to have erred in law in that
    regard, for the reasons set out by the Supreme Court in KO,  which  was
    handed down after the decision under challenge.  The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal set this out expressly from paragraph 66 to  80  of
    the decision, first considering the best interests of the children  and
    secondly the competing public interest considerations (now shown not to
    be a relevant factor  when  assessing  whether  deportation  is  unduly
    harsh), concluding as follows:

          "79.    Weighing up the matters I have set out above,  and  taking
         my findings of fact into account, I  have  ultimately  reached  the
         conclusion that  whilst  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  have
         "harsh" consequences for X  and  Y,  these  would  not  be  "unduly
         harsh".

         80.  This has been a difficult case to decide, and rightly so given
         the nature of the issues involved.  If the test was centred on  the
         children alone my conclusion would probably  have  been  different.
         However,  the  current  legal  landscape  presents   a   formidable
         challenge to all those facing deportation.  Here the best interests
         of two children, while significant, are, on the facts of this case,
         outweighed by the public interest matters on the Respondent's  side
         of the balance  sheet.   The  combination  of  the  general  public
         interest, the particulars of the  Appellant's  offending,  and  his
         immigration history, represents simply too much."

 2. The Respondent accepts, in light of the decision in KO, that the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision  involved  an  error  of  law  and  given  the
    indication in paragraph 80 that this was a  difficult  case  which  the
    Judge would probably have decided the other way if the test of  "unduly
    harsh" was focused on the position of the children alone  (as  has  now
    been confirmed is the  correct  approach),  I  find  that  this  was  a
    material error.  It is therefore necessary to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the decision must be remade on the  correct
    legal test.

 3. There was no challenge by either party to any the factual findings made
    by the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal, none of which in relation to
    the family circumstances or best interests of the children are infected
    by the error of law  and  therefore  in  remaking  the  decision  under
    appeal, the relevant findings as to the Appellant's  relationship  with
    his ex-partner and two children, the  Appellant's  ex-partner's  health
    and circumstances and the best interests of the children are  preserved
    and are set out in full below.

         "The Appellant's relationship with MB, X, and Y

         ...

         42.  I find that the Appellant has had very significant involvement
         in the lives of his children from their respective  births  to  the
         present day.  Despite my adverse findings on certain other  aspects
         of the Appellant's evidence, there has  been  a  consistent  thread
         from him as to his devotion to  his  children,  together  with  his
         impact with their lives.  What he said corresponds in  broad  terms
         with what is said both of the social worker reports, the Tribunal's
         decision in the appeals of MB and the children (at  paragraph  28),
         what the Appellant has told his probation officer (31), and what  X
         has written (29-30).  Mr Armstrong noted the absence of  supportive
         letters from the children's schools.  I take account of  that,  but
         it does not, of itself, fatally undermine the overall weight of the
         evidence before me on this particular issue.

         43.  In light of the foregoing I find that the Appellant has  taken
         an active parental role in helping his  children,  particularly  X,
         with homework and engages with them and helps them  to  participate
         in social activities such as attending  church,  birthday  parties,
         and other matters.  I accept that  the  Appellant  has  shown  this
         involvement both in the past (except for the  period  when  he  was
         imprisoned) and since he stopped living with the children  in  June
         of this year.

         MB's health and other consequential circumstances

         44.  The evidence before me shows that MB is HIV positive.   Having
         said that, the evidence also indicates that  she  is  asymptomatic,
         and has been doing very well  in  respect  of  her  viral  load  in
         compliance  with  relevant  medication  (26-28).   Nothing  in  the
         medical evidence suggests that there has been any  adverse  changes
         in her circumstances insofar as the HIV is concerned.  I appreciate
         that the author of the latest social services  report  states  that
         MB's CD count has been "very high", but with all due respect, there
         is no medical evidence  to  support  this,  and,  nothing  from  MB
         herself to give context of the assertion.  Overall, I find that the
         HIV is well-managed does not represent a significant barrier to MBs
         functionality or ability to care for X and Y.

         45.  There had been a suggestion that she might  suffer  from  some
         form of epilepsy.  Upon examination in January of this year it  was
         said that nothing remarkable was detected.  It  appears  as  though
         further investigation is still ongoing.  A  consultant  neurologist
         has  confirmed  that  she  does  not  require  any   anti-epileptic
         treatment at the present time (23-24).  I do not accept that MB  in
         fact suffers from epilepsy.

         46.  The GP letter dated 28 February 2018 states  that  MB  suffers
         from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma as a result of her  HIV.   There  is  a
         difficulty with this statement, it seems to me.  In a letter from a
         consultant physician, who clearly had charge of MBs  HIV  treatment
         at the relevant time, it clearly states  that  tests  for  lymphoma
         were  "inconclusive"  and  that  symptoms  were   "resolved"   with
         antiretroviral therapy (26).  That letter is dated  November  2014.
         Aside from the February 2018 GP letter, I cannot  see  any  letters
         from the specialist treating MBs HIV or  any  other  specialist  to
         indicate  that  non-Hodgkin's  lymphoma  had  in  fact  ever   been
         diagnosed and/or had returned.  The medical position  is  decidedly
         unclear.  On balance, I would not accept that MB  in  fact  suffers
         from this condition, as I would expect to see clear  evidence  from
         the relevant specialist if this was in  fact  the  case.   However,
         even if the condition is present now,  there  is  no  specific  and
         reliable evidence before me to indicate that this  has  a  material
         impact on MBs ability to function on a day-to-day  basis.   I  find
         that there is no significant impact as a result of this  particular
         condition, if it is indeed present.

         47.  The February 2018 GP letter also says that  MP  is  "suffering
         quite badly" from anxiety and depression, and that this makes  work
         very difficult for her.  Unfortunately, the letter  does  not  give
         any particulars, such as the existence or extent of any  treatment,
         whether she has been seen by specialist, or suchlike.  In his  oral
         evidence, the Appellant was oddly unsure about  any  of  this.   He
         told me that MB did not discuss the matter with him, and he clearly
         had no real information about what one might  think  was  an  issue
         that he would have sought further details on.   Combined  with  the
         absence of any evidence from MB herself, the Appellant's  ignorance
         is rather telling, and did not assist his claim.

         48.  On balance, I am willing to accept that MB  does  suffer  from
         anxiety and depression, but on the evidence before me, and  without
         wishing to diminish the potential impact of these conditions on  an
         individual,  I  do  not  accept  that  these  are,  by  themselves,
         significantly debilitating.  I say this with the following reasons.
          First, I find that although MB resigned from her  job  as  a  care
         worker earlier this year, she has been able to continue to work  on
         a part-time basis as a cleaner: her conditions have  not  prevented
         her from working at all.  Second, I do not have evidence from,  for
         example, a psychologist or psychiatrist, to  indicate  that  MB  is
         unable to cope with day-to-day activities, including,  for  example
         childcare and general self-care.  Third, as mentioned above,  I  do
         not have any direct evidence from  MB  herself  about  any  of  her
         circumstances, including the impact of  health  conditions  on  her
         life.  Fourth, the Appellant has been unable to provide evidence of
         the mental health issues and their particular impact on MB.  Fifth,
         without wishing to criticise the GP, the letter is  somewhat  vague
         and does not even describe particular problems reported by MB.

         49.  There is reference in the two social  workers  reports  of  MB
         suffering from kidney disease.  I have found it difficult to locate
         the precise basis for this assertion.  The latest  GP  letter  does
         not mention this, nor can I see  any  specific  diagnosis  and  the
         other medical evidence.  As  with  the  non-Hodgkin's  lymphoma,  I
         would expect  to  see  clear  evidence  if  a  significant  medical
         condition had been diagnosed and was being treated.  In the absence
         of such evidence, and on the balance of  probabilities,  I  do  not
         accept that there is a significant kidney disease.  If there  is  a
         kidney condition, I find that it is not of a serious nature, or  at
         least  does  not  represent  a  cause  of  significant   functional
         impairment.

         50.  Whilst I  have  expressed  some  concerns  about  the  medical
         situation and made findings of fact which are not supportive of the
         Appellant's claim that MB is so seriously unwell  that  she  cannot
         adequately care for the children a consistent basis,  that  is  not
         say that she is free of medical difficulties.  She does suffer from
         certain conditions, and it is more likely than not that these  will
         have an impact upon her.  It is likely that she  will  suffer  from
         fatigue, pain, and symptoms from anxiety and depression.   However,
         my  particular  findings  on  the  medical  evidence  are   clearly
         important when I come to assess the current and future (at least in
         the short to medium-term) ability of MB to appropriately  care  for
         her children.

         51.  I now turn to this issue.  I find that it is more likely  than
         not that MB is, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future,
         able to  appropriately  care  for  X  and  Y,  notwithstanding  the
         Appellant is absent from the United Kingdom should he be  deported.
         This finding is based upon the following matters.

         52.  First, I would refer  back  to  my  findings  on  the  medical
         evidence, above.

         53.  Second, the Appellant has asserted in oral evidence that he is
         the "main carer" of the  children.   That  is,  to  an  extent,  an
         exaggeration.  He has not been living  with  MB  and  the  children
         since June of this year.  It is indeed not the  case  that  MB  has
         provided little or no  care  to  her  children  during  the  period
         between June and the date of hearing.  Even  though  the  Appellant
         has clearly been paying a significant role in his children's lives,
         the evidence is not showing that he has been the "main carer".  The
         same applies to the situation when he was living together  with  MB
         and the children.

         54.  Third, MB cared for the children  was  the  Appellant  was  in
         prison.  There is no evidence to indicate that  the  children  were
         neglected to  the  extent  the  social  services  intervention  was
         required.

         55.  Fourth, whilst MB had no recourse to public funds in the past,
         the respondent  has  changed  his  position  and  now  varied  this
         restriction.  MB does now have  a  course  to  benefits,  and  this
         represents a material safety net in respect of her position, and in
         turn that of the children.  This is  been  a  material  change  the
         situation  since  2017  report  and  the  correspondence  from  the
         Distance Advice Bureau  prior  to  the  family  eviction  from  the
         previous property.

         56.  Fifth, the social workers report from  2017  describes  MB  as
         being "very unwell and unable to meet the children's  needs  in  an
         appropriate manner" (15).  That is a serious statement to make  and
         I give it very careful consideration.  Although I  appreciate  that
         this was written a year before the hearing, the evidence as a whole
         does not support such an assertion, at least  as  things  currently
         stand.  It is noteworthy that the latest report  does  not  make  a
         similar assertion.

         57.  Sixth, the 2017 social workers report does not state that  the
         Appellant's absence from the children's lives  would  lead  to  the
         real possibility of them being taken into local authority care.   I
         do not read the last bullet point on 15  as  an  assertion  to  the
         contrary.  There was, as far as I can see, no suggestion  that  the
         children should actually be removed from MB's care.   There  is  no
         reference in the most recent report to X and Y  being  at  risk  of
         going into local authority care.

         58.   Seventh,  the  most  recent  social  workers  report,   while
         supportive of the Appellant's claim in certain respects,  indicates
         that MB's health issues do not appear to arise on a frequent  basis
         insofar as having an adverse impact on her  parental  duties.   For
         example, it says at page 6 that, "[MB's] health problems... can  at
         times impact on her parental duties...".  At  pages  3-4  there  is
         reference to X having been identified as a young carer because  she
         "sometimes" takes on a caring role when MB is unwell.  Finally,  at
         page 7, it is said that the Appellant  "is  the  main  support  and
         protective and safety factor for the children, should [MB's] health
         deteriorate".  These last two references are  certainly  important,
         and I take full account of  the  contents.   They  do  however  run
         consistently with what I  find  to  be  the  relatively  infrequent
         nature of episodes of significant ill-health on MB's part.   Whilst
         there was some discussion at the hearing about the meaning  of  the
         words "is" and "should" in the last sentence  on  page  7,  I  have
         concluded that these do not refer to current  fluctuations  in  MBs
         conditions, but to a speculative view as to what  might  happen  in
         the future: in other words, the Appellant would take on  a  greater
         role is/should MBs health deteriorate at some future point.  On the
         evidence before me  (the  point  I  wish  to  emphasise),  such  an
         eventuality is speculative and, I find, unlikely.  This reading  of
         that final sentence is more consistent with other  aspects  of  the
         report, refer to earlier  in  this  paragraph.   Ultimately,  fact-
         finding is not an exact science, on my assessment of the  frequency
         of these episodes must be seen in the context of the evidence as  a
         whole.

         59.  Eighth, I have taken particular account of  the  reference  in
         the latest report to X being identified as a "young carer" and that
         she sometimes assist with laundry, preparing small meals, and doing
         some shopping errands when MB is unwell (page 4).  It is also  said
         that X can call on the Appellant for help.  I accept that this  has
         been the case and it certainly counts in favour of the  Appellant's
         case as regards X's best interests.  In terms of my  assessment  of
         MBs overall ability to properly care for the children, when  taking
         the evidence as a whole and especially my view on the frequency  of
         MB  being  so  unwell  that  her  parental  responsibility  is  are
         adversely affected, it does not alter my core finding, as expressed
         in  paragraph  51,  above.   In  light  of  my  assessment  of  the
         infrequency of MBs episodes of particular ill-health, I  find  that
         X's role as a young carer (as  described  in  the  report)  is  not
         performed on a regular basis, nor is it a level that is  likely  to
         represent a substantially detrimental impact on her  overall  well-
         being.

         60.  Ninth, social  services  are  involved  as  a  result  of  the
         eviction issue back in June 2018.  The social services report shows
         that there is a Children in  Need  plan,  and  it  is  likely  that
         additional support is, or would be, available from social  services
         if necessary.  There has been no suggestion that the plan  was  put
         in place as a result of concerns over MBs ability to care  for  the
         children: as I understand it, this occurred because of the eviction
         and consequent precarious housing situation.

         61.  Tenth, I do accept that the Appellant has  been  contacted  by
         either MB or X to lend additional  assistance  after  he  left  the
         family home in June 2018.  This  is  consistent  with  his  general
         involvement with his children, but, taking the evidence as a whole,
         I find that this has not occurred on a frequent basis.

         62.  Eleventh, it is said by the Appellant that  MB  has  very  low
         literacy skills.  There is no evidence from MB herself on this, and
         it is only mentioned briefly in the 2017 social workers  report  as
         being an issue reported by MB.  It is the case of MB was previously
         working as a carer, a job that I would find would require at  least
         a degree of basic literacy ability (no  evidence  the  country  has
         been put before me).  Taking the evidence as  a  whole,  I  do  not
         accept that MB has little or no literacy skills.   I'm  willing  to
         accept that they may be on the low side, I find that she is able to
         conduct her first a reasonable standard.  In any event, it would be
         the case that if she did require assistance, social services  would
         be in a position to provide this, particularly that there is a plan
         in place for the family unit.

         63.  Twelfth, I do accept that there are no other family members or
         close friends who have been willing or able to provide  alternative
         support.  This is relevant, but it does not detract from my overall
         view of MBs own caring abilities.

         64.  Thirteenth, in respect of all the findings set  out  above,  I
         have endeavoured to evaluate various sources of evidence and  weigh
         them up in the around.  It is not case where I am simply  rejecting
         any particular item  as  being  entirely  incredible.   It  is  the
         overall picture, assessed on the balance of probabilities, which is
         all-important.

         ...

         67.  I start by assessing the  children's  best  interests  and  my
         obligation under section 55 of the 2009 Act,  and  in  so  doing  I
         leave  out  of  account  any  adverse  matters  relating   to   the
         Appellant's conduct.  It is very clear  that  the  children's  best
         interests lie in having the Appellant as part  of  their  lives  in
         United Kingdom.  They have a strong bond with their father  and  he
         has always played as an active role in their lives.  I fully accept
         that the children would be very, very upset  by  the  departure  of
         their father.  It  is  likely  that  this  would  have  an  adverse
         emotional impact on their lives.  In addition, his departure  would
         put a strain on MB, and this would be upsetting for the children as
         well.  I have of course factored in MBs health problems (as I  have
         found them to be), the impact of these on her caring abilities  (as
         I found these to be), and the consequences of  this  on  X  and  Y.
         There is no doubt that their lives would be adversely  affected  on
         emotional and practical level.

         68.  In turn, difficulties in home life can of course have a knock-
         on effect to schooling.  I take this into account as well.  In this
         regard, I do however note that the  latest  social  workers  report
         indicates that  the  respective  schools  are  well  aware  of  the
         familial situation and put in place  to  deal  with  any  emotional
         difficulties (page 4).

         69.  The Appellant's practical involvement in their lives  is  also
         important, and a facet of the best interests assessment.

         70.  I wish to make it clear that my factual findings show that the
         children will be adequately  cared  for  by  their  mother  if  the
         Appellant is deported, and that there is no realistic prospect care
         proceedings being instigated were this eventuality to arise."

 4. As above, no further evidence was  relied  upon  by  either  party  and
    submissions were made as to the outcome of the appeal on the  basis  of
    these findings of fact, which are comprehensive and to which no further
    findings needs to be added.

 5. The issue in this appeal is whether in the circumstances set out above,
    the Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on his two  children,
    remaining in the United Kingdom without him, it being accepted  by  the
    Respondent that their removal to Sierra Leone with him would be  unduly
    harsh.  If so, the Appellant would meet the  exception  to  deportation
    set out in paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules, as replicated  in
    section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. The meaning of unduly harsh is now  set  out  in  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision in KO.  In paragraph 23, Lord Carnworth held as follows:

          "On the other hand the expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of the relative levels  of  severity  of  the  parent's
         offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the
         section itself by reference to length of sentence.   Nor  (contrary
         to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR
         240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with the requirement  to  show
         "very compelling reasons".  That would be in  effect  to  replicate
         the additional test applied by  section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
         sentences of four years or more."

 7. Within the Supreme Court's consideration of the specific appeal in  KO,
    further reference is made to the authoritative guidance on the  meaning
    of unduly harsh given in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), which held in paragraph 46:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something more severe,
         or bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  and  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

 8. In the  present  appeal,  aside  from  the  strength  of  the  parental
    relationship between the Appellant  and  his  children,  the  two  main
    factors relied upon to take the circumstances  over  the  threshold  of
    unduly harsh, to go beyond the likely consequences on any  child  faced
    with the deportation of a parent, are primarily the mental and physical
    state of  their  mother  and  her  low  literacy  skills.   The  former
    requiring the elder child to be a young carer, albeit infrequently  and
    albeit without a substantial detrimental impact on  her  overall  well-
    being.  The latter, it is said, to  have  an  impact  on  the  mother's
    ability to assist children in, for example, the school work.

 9. As found by the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal, this is  a  difficult
    case on the facts, even applying  the  test  and  set  out  in  KO  and
    focusing solely on the situation of the children, due to  the  findings
    that the  Appellant's  mother  is  able  to  adequately  care  for  the
    children, with no realistic prospect care proceedings being  instigated
    if the Appellant were deported.  However, I find that  considering  all
    of the circumstances as a whole, that on balance  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children, particularly the elder child, to remain in  the
    United Kingdom without the Appellant.  This is primarily because of the
    additional support and help he gives the children (and  potentially  by
    extension his ex-partner) in the, albeit infrequent, periods where  her
    parental responsibilities are adversely  affected  by  her  ill-health.
    The Appellant's ex-partner's ill-health,  at  such  times  and  in  the
    absence of the Appellant, would have  additional  adverse  consequences
    for the children which go beyond being merely  harsh  or  part  of  the
    usual consequences of deportation, but taken together with all  of  the
    other factors, make deportation unduly harsh on  the  children  on  the
    facts of this particular case.  For these  reasons,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant meets the exception  to  deportation  set  out  in  paragraph
    399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and/or  section  117C(5)  of   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his  appeal  is
    therefore allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision is remade as follows:
The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]             Date 13th May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

