
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24725/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th February 2020                |On 24th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                zohra ghafary
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal of Counsel, instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 4 September 2019, in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a spouse dated 15 November
    2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a US citizen, who applied for entry clearance to  join
    her husband (the "Sponsor"), a British Citizen in the  United  Kingdom.
    She is currently resident with family in the United States of America.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that  although  the
    relationship and language requirements for entry clearance set  out  in
    Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  were  met,   the   financial
    requirements were not.  Specifically, specified  evidence  required  to
    meet E-ECP.3.1 to 3.4  of  Appendix  FM  was  not  submitted  with  the
    application for entry clearance.   The  Sponsor  was  employed  in  his
    father's company such that paragraph 9(a) of  Appendix  FM-SE  required
    that further documents be submitted in addition to wage slips and  bank
    statements.   In  the  absence  of  meeting  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Respondent considered  whether  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of  entry  clearance,  but
    found that there were none.  An Entry Clearance  Manager  reviewed  and
    maintained the decision on 15 February 2019, noting that the  specified
    evidence had still not been provided.

 4. Judge Khan  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  4
    September 2019 on human rights  grounds.   The  Judge  noted  that  the
    required specified evidence was still  not  available,  although  there
    were two reasons why unforeseen circumstances had meant that it was not
    possible for either the Appellant or Sponsor to obtain these documents,
    first, that the Sponsor's father had died suddenly; and secondly,  that
    the company accountant had been remanded in custody on assault charges.
     In any event, there was no dispute that the Immigration Rules were not
    met.  In terms of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,
    it was found that there were not any unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    on either of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor,  whose  relationship  could
    continue as it had done to date  through  visits.   The  Appellant  had
    family in the United States of America, was only at that  time  in  the
    early stages of pregnancy and could make a fresh application for  entry
    clearance almost immediately.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on four grounds, all linked to an overall claimed
    error in the First-tier Tribunal's approach  to  the  assessment  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   First,  that
    there was a failure to take into account the lengthy separation between
    the Appellant and the Sponsor and the adverse impact of that  on  them.
    Secondly, that there was no challenge  to  the  Sponsor's  earnings  as
    evidenced by his payslips  and  corresponding  bank  statements,  which
    shows that  the  minimum  financial  requirements  were  in  fact  met.
    Thirdly, the Judge found that the Appellant had immediate family in the
    United States of America, however this was only  extended  family,  her
    immediate family is the Sponsor in the United Kingdom.   Finally,  that
    the period of  continued  separation  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor was unknown as there was no evidence as  to  waiting  times  on
    current  entry  clearance  applications  and   there   were   difficult
    circumstances meaning that the specified evidence could not necessarily
    be obtained immediately.

 6. At the oral hearing, Ms Vidal confirmed that there was no dispute  that
    the required specified evidence was not available due to  circumstances
    beyond the Appellant's control,  however,  on  the  evidence  that  was
    available, the substantive requirements of the Immigration  Rules  were
    met (given that the Sponsor's payslips, P60 and  bank  statements  were
    not challenged by the Respondent) and in  all  the  circumstances,  the
    appeal should have been allowed on human rights grounds.

 7. In relation to the specified documents and the difficulty in  obtaining
    them, I noted that there was a significant period between  the  refusal
    of entry clearance in November 2018  and  the  appeal  being  heard  in
    August 2019 but an apparent  lack  of  detail  as  to  difficulties  in
    obtaining the required specified evidence  for  the  duration  of  this
    period.  Ms Vidal confirmed that the Sponsor's father died in May  2018
    in Afghanistan, which led to practical difficulties  dealing  with  the
    death.  It was also submitted that prior to his  death,  the  Sponsor's
    father had in fact resigned from the  company.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that any of this evidence was before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    nor was there any evidence about the accountant, such as whether he was
    a sole practitioner or the dates between which he had been remanded  in
    custody.

 8. Finally, it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to
    take into account the evidence from the Appellant and  Sponsor  of  the
    impact of separation and difficulties in continuing their  relationship
    in the absence of entry clearance.   This  included  reference  to  the
    Appellant's  pregnancy,  the  cost  and  difficulty  in  maintaining  a
    relationship through visits only and cultural problems  caused  by  the
    lengthy separation including with wider family.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms  Bassi  emphasised  that  it  had  been
    accepted at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for
    a grant of entry clearance and there had been a significant  period  of
    time within which the  required  specified  evidence  could  have  been
    provided, or a change of circumstances,  namely  the  Sponsor's  death,
    could have been relied upon.

10. In  relation  to  the  assessment  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, Ms Bassi submitted that  the  reasoning  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was  sufficient  and  in  accordance  with  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Agyarko v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  It was further submitted that is not a
    case in which entry clearance was certain to  be  granted,  given  that
    required specified evidence had still not, to date, been  submitted  by
    the  Appellant.   The  focus   had  to  be  on   whether   there   were
    unjustifiably harsh consequences resulting from the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance and all relevant matters were considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the conclusion open to it on the evidence, that there were
    none and that there would be no breach of Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  This is a case in which it  was  submitted
    to be clearly open to the Appellant to make  a  fresh  application  for
    entry clearance with the required documents.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    take into account the lengthy separation between the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor  and  the  adverse  impact  on  them   of   this   within   the
    proportionality  exercise  for  Article  8.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision refers to the Judge having  taken  into  account  all  of  the
    written and oral evidence and he summarises the five key points  relied
    upon by the Appellant for the purposes of the  balancing  exercise  for
    Article 8.  These include the disruption to  family  life  and  ongoing
    cost and time consumption for the Appellant  and  Sponsor  to  continue
    their relationship through visits.  The evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to the impact on the Appellant and Sponsor  for  a  further
    period of separation was relatively thin, but included  evidence  of  a
    number of visits  to  each  other  to  maintain  the  relationship  and
    anticipation that further separation would not  be  lengthy  as  a  new
    application for entry clearance could be made immediately.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal has taken into account the impact of  continued
    separation on the Appellant and Sponsor and the level of detail in  the
    decision is commensurate with the lack of  detailed  evidence  on  this
    point before the First-tier Tribunal.  This links to the  final  ground
    of appeal that there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  as
    to  waiting  times  on  current  entry   clearance   applications   nor
    consideration that specified evidence could not necessarily be obtained
    immediately.  As to waiting times, this is  a  matter  upon  which  the
    Appellant could have given evidence and  in  any  event,  there  is  no
    reason to suggest that these would be significantly different  to  when
    the application was made previously on 15 August 2018 which resulted in
    a decision on 15 November 2018, some three months.  As above, there was
    a lack of any detailed evidence about the specified  documents  or  why
    they were still not available over a year after the initial application
    was made and over 9 months since the refusal of entry clearance.  There
    was no evidence at all that the required documents  could  not  now  be
    obtained, nor was there any consideration  of  the  self-evident  point
    that paragraph 9 of Appendix FM-SE may no longer be applicable  in  any
    event because of the Sponsor's father's death (although  it  may  apply
    for a different reason), it would no longer apply for the  same  reason
    as when the application was  made  as  the  Sponsor  is  no  longer  an
    employee of his father's business.

 3. For these reasons I find no error of law on the first or  last  grounds
    of appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal properly  considered  and  attached
    appropriate weight to the evidence before it on the duration and impact
    of separation and the likely availability of a further application  for
    entry clearance.  The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    arguably demonstrate that there were unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    of a continued and likely short continuing separation.

 4.  I  return  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal.   In  the  Appellant's
    application for entry clearance, she relied on the  Sponsor's  earnings
    in the United Kingdom to meet the financial requirement in E-ECP.3.1 to
    3.4 of Appendix  FM,  evidenced  by  payslips  and  corresponding  bank
    statements, and P60.  However, because the Sponsor was, at the time  of
    the application, employed by his father, paragraph 9 of Appendix  FM-SE
    applied to the application such that additional specified evidence  was
    required.  Paragraph 9 provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

         '9.  In respect of  income  from  employment  and/or  shares  in  a
         limited company based in the UK of a type  specified  in  paragraph
         9(a), the requirements of paragraph 9(b)-(e) shall apply  in  place
         of the requirements of paragraphs 2 and 10(b).

         (a)  The specified type of limited company is one in which:

             (i)      the person is either a director or  employee  of  the
                  company, or both, or of another company  within  the  same
                  group; and

             (ii)     shares are  held  (directly  or  indirectly)  by  the
                  person, their partner or the following family  members  of
                  the person or their partner: parent ...; and

             (iii)     any  remaining  shares   are   held   (directly   or
                  indirectly) by fewer than five other persons.

         (b)  All of the following must be provided:

             (i)  Company Tax Return CT600 (a copy or  print-out)  for  the
                  last full financial year and evidence this has been  filed
                  with HMRC, such as electronic  or  written  acknowledgment
                  from HMRC.

             (ii)      Evidence  of  registration  with  the  Registrar  of
                  Companies at Companies House.

             (iii)    If the company is required to produce annual  audited
                  accounts, such accounts for the last full financial year.

             (iv)     If the company is  not  required  to  produce  annual
                  audited accounts, unaudited accounts  for  the  last  full
                  financial  year  and  an   accountant's   certificate   of
                  confirmation, from an accountant who is a member of  a  UK
                  Recognized Supervisory Body (as defined in  the  Companies
                  Act 2006) or who is a member of the Institute of Financial
                  Accountants.

             (v)  Corporate/business bank statements covering the same  12-
                  month period as the Company Tax Return CT600.

             (vi)     A current Appointment Report from Companies House.

             (vii)    One of the following documents must also be provided:

                   1) A certificate of VAT registration and the VAT  return
                      for the last full financial year (a  copy  or  print-
                      out)  confirming  the  VAT  registration  number,  if
                      turnover is in excess of �79,000 or was in excess  of
                      the threshold which  applied  during  the  last  full
                      financial year.

                   2) Proof of ownership or lease of business premises.

                   3) Proof of registration with HMRC as  an  employer  for
                      the purposes of PAYE and National Insurance, proof of
                      PAYE reference number and Accounts  Office  reference
                      number.  This evidence  may  be  in  the  form  of  a
                      certified copy of the documentation issued by HMRC.'

 5. As can readily be seen from the above, there is a fairly  lengthy  list
    of additional specified evidence required for an application for  entry
    clearance in the Appellant's circumstances.  This was  not  a  case  in
    which a single document or piece of information  was  missing  and  for
    that reason alone, the rules on evidential flexibility could  not  have
    applied to assist the Appellant.

 6. The submissions on behalf of the Appellant at the First-tier  Tribunal,
    as recorded  in  paragraph  20  of  the  decision,  included  that  the
    specified evidence was not provided for reasons beyond the Appellant or
    Sponsor's control and that this was in essence a near miss case because
    if the Sponsor had been employed other than in  his  father's  company,
    the documents that had been submitted would  have  been  sufficient  to
    show that the income requirement was met.  There is nothing to  suggest
    that any  more  detailed  argument  was  made  as  to  the  importance,
    relatively or otherwise of specified evidence and no reliance placed on
    the Supreme Court's decision in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] UKSC  10  at  paragraph  76  in  particular.
    Similarly, despite this  being  expressly  referred  to  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Povey in  the  grant  of  permission,  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant made no specific submissions on this point before me  either,
    again only broadly submitting that the financial requirements for entry
    clearance  had  been  met,  despite  conceding  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the requirements of the Immigration Rules  had  not  been
    met.

 7. Paragraph 76 of MM (Lebanon) held as follows:

         "76. As Lord Reed explains (Agyarko, para  47),  this  approach  is
         consistent  with  the  margin  of  appreciation  permitted  by  the
         Strasbourg  court  on  an  "intensely  political"  issue,  such  as
         immigration control. However, this important principle  should  not
         be taken too far. Not everything in the rules need  be  treated  as
         high policy or peculiarly within the province of the  Secretary  of
         State, nor as necessarily entitled to the same weight. The tribunal
         is entitled to see a difference in principle between the underlying
         public interest considerations, as set by the  Secretary  of  State
         with the approval of Parliament, and the working out of that policy
         through the detailed machinery of the rules and its application  to
         individual cases. The former naturally include issues such  as  the
         seriousness  of  levels  of   offending   sufficient   to   require
         deportation in the public interest (Hesham Ali, para  46).  Similar
         considerations would apply to rules  reflecting  the  Secretary  of
         State's assessment of levels of income required to avoid  a  burden
         on public resources, informed as it is by the specialist  expertise
         of the Migration Advisory Committee. By contrast rules  as  to  the
         quality of evidence necessary to satisfy that test in a  particular
         case are, as the committee acknowledged,  matters  of  practicality
         rather than principle; and as such matters on  which  the  tribunal
         may more readily draw on its own experience and expertise."

 8. Although in an appeal such  as  the  present  one,  the  last  part  of
    paragraph 76 could arguably have  some  potential  application,  as  to
    whether  the  requirement  for  specified  evidence  beyond   payslips,
    corresponding bank statements and a P60, is a  matter  of  practicality
    rather than principle such that a Tribunal may more readily draw on its
    own experience and expertise, it is not a point that  was  relied  upon
    before either the First-tier Tribunal, nor in the grounds of appeal  or
    oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal.  I  do  not  consider  that
    this is a Robinson obvious point that the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
    have considered of its own motion, nor that it was an error of law  not
    to do so.

 9.  This  is  particularly  so  in  the  circumstances  where  there  were
    significant gaps in the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  to
    explain why, even despite the two unforeseen circumstances relied  upon
    (about which there was little detail at all as to  relevant  dates  and
    relevance to the unavailability of any of the specified documents), the
    specified  documents  in  paragraph  9  of  Appendix  FM-SE  were   not
    originally submitted with the application, nor  in  the  intervening  9
    months between the date of refusal and the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In these circumstances, even if the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge had considered the issue in paragraph 76 of MM  (Lebanon),  there
    were still a number of points adverse to the Appellant,  including  the
    volume of missing documentation and lack of evidence about it  and  the
    reasons why none was available.

10. For these reasons, there is no error of law on  the  second  ground  of
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal were entitled to attach weight to  the
    accepted position that the Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules for a grant of  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. Finally, the third ground of appeal is a minor point which  could  have
    no material bearing on the outcome of the appeal and in  any  event  is
    not  an  error  of  law.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  referred  to  the
    Appellant's immediate family being in the United States as  opposed  to
    recognising that her immediate family was the  Sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Of course both may be true, immediate family is  not  limited
    to one person or just a person's spouse and the evidence was  that  the
    Appellant lived with her parents in the  United  States  who  in  those
    circumstances could be fairly described as immediate family even though
    she is a married adult.

12. Overall,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly  considered  all  of  the
    evidence before it and came to a conclusion that was open to it on that
    evidence and which was in accordance with the Supreme Court's  decision
    in Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.





Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     23rd March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

