
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24316/2018
     HU/24319/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th May 2019                        |On 20th May 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MRS PARAMDEEP [K]
                               MR GURPREET [V]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby (instructed by Harrow Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  appellant,  permission
    having been granted by Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on  29  March  2019.
    The appellants are husband and wife who had sought leave to  remain  on
    the basis of their family and private life in the United Kingdom.  They
    are citizens of India. The couple had made application on the 23  March
    2016 for leave to remain on compassionate grounds. That application was
    refused as were subsequent applications made in  August  2016  February
    2017 and October 2017. The decision appealed against  was  made  on  16
    November 2018.

 2. The first appellant, the wife, came to the UK with the second appellant
    as her dependant in September 2012 with a Tier  4  student  visa  valid
    until February 2014. Since that date, due to unsuccessful  applications
    they have had no leave.

 3. The couple have a daughter born in the UK in 2014.  Before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal the respondent's case was that the appellants had been in
    the UK for only five years and had lived in India the vast majority  of
    their lives. They had retained cultural and social ties  to  India  and
    had family there. Their friends in the UK speak Punjabi and their roots
    and cultural ties remain  within  India.  The  first  appellant  has  a
    Diploma in Tourism and Hospitality from the University of Sunderland in
    October 2014.

 4. The Secretary of State's case was that the child was spoken to  by  her
    parents in Punjabi as a baby and could pick up Punjabi again.

 5. The appellants' case was that it was not in the best interests  of  the
    child to return to India as she does not speak or  understand  Punjabi.
    It was also argued that she is  stateless  because  she  has  not  been
    registered as an Indian citizen. She should remain with her parents and
    the only country where she can maintain family life with her parents is
    in the UK. Although the family has family members in India, they are of
    limited means. It would be unsettling for the child to return to India.

 6. The judge made brief findings. He noted that both the  appellants  have
    family in India where they had spent the majority of their lives  prior
    to coming to the UK in September 2012.

 7. The judge noted that there was a letter in the  bundle  from  the  High
    Commission of India dated 16 April 2018 stating that the child had  not
    been registered as  a  citizen  of  India.  It  was  explained  by  the
    appellants that this was due to their failure to provide ID  documents.
    He noted that no explanation was  provided  as  to  why  they  had  not
    provided the necessary ID documents. The judge then went on to say that
    in any event, for a person to be accepted as stateless, an  application
    needs to be made under paragraph 403 of the Immigration  Rules  and  no
    such application has been made.

 8. The judge went on to say there were no very  significant  obstacles  to
    the family returning to India as a family  unit.  Both  the  appellants
    have family in that country where they had lived the majority of  their
    lives. The child concerned is aged four and would  have  no  difficulty
    integrating in India. She already understands some of the  language  of
    Punjabi and in any event, is fluent in English. The judge found it  was
    obviously in the interests of the child to return as part of the family
    unit and he was not satisfied that sufficient efforts had been made  to
    ensure that she  is  registered  as  an  Indian  citizen  at  the  High
    Commission of India in the UK so they could return as a family unit.

 9. The judge noted that the appellants could not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules under paragraph 276 ADE and that  the  child  had
    not been accepted as a stateless person  under  paragraph  403  of  the
    rules. He found it was not disproportionate or a breach of their  human
    rights as protected by article 8 for them  to  return  to  India  as  a
    family unit and be required to leave the UK.

10. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 6th February 2019 he dismissed
    the appeal.

11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that arguably  the  judge
    had  not  set  out  a  sufficient   analysis   in   relation   to   the
    proportionality exercise under article 8.

12. Before me Mr  Sowerby  referred  to  paragraph  16  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision which is where the judge referred to the fact  that
    in order for a person to be accepted as stateless they need to make  an
    application under paragraph 403  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  that
    regard he referred me to the case of MK  (a  child  by  her  litigation
    friend CAE), R (on the application of) the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWHC 1365 (Admin). That is  a  decision  of  the
    Vice-President of the Upper Tribunal, Mr Ockelton, sitting  as  a  High
    Court Judge. In that judgment Mr Ockelton cites paragraph 3 of Schedule
    2 to the British Nationality Act 1981 which provides: -

         '3.  (1) a person born in the United Kingdom or a British  overseas
                  territory after commencement  shall  be  entitled,  on  an
                  application for his registration under this paragraph,  to
                  be registered if the following requirements are  satisfied
                  in his case, namely    `

                   a) that he is and always has been stateless; and

                   b) that on the date of the application he was under  the
                      age of 21; and

                   c) that he was  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  a  British
                      overseas territory (no matter which) at the beginning
                      of the period of five years ending with that date and
                      that (subject to paragraph 6) the number of  days  on
                      which he was absent from both the United Kingdom  and
                      the British overseas territories in that period  does
                      not exceed 450.

             (2)  a person entitled to registration under this paragraph-

                  (a)  shall be registered under it as a British citizen if,
                      in the period of five years mentioned in subparagraph
                      (1), the number of days wholly or partly spent by him
                      in the United Kingdom  exceeds  the  number  of  days
                      wholly or partly spent by him in the British Overseas
                      Territories;

                  (b)  in any other case, shall be registered under it is  a
                      British overseas territory citizen.'

13. At paragraph 4 of the judgement Mr Ockelton states: -

         "The issue, in short, is whether C, for the purposes of paragraph 3
         of Schedule 2 to the 1981 Act, "is and always has been  stateless".
         That will (or may) depend on the meaning of (stateless) in the Act,
         which is a matter of law. It will in addition almost certainly turn
         on the question whether C is (or  ever  has  been)  a  national  of
         India. That will depend wholly or largely on Indian law,  which  in
         this court is a matter of fact and needs to be proved by evidence.

14. At paragraph 36 of the same judgement Mr Ockelton states: -

         "For the purposes of the statutory provisions in issue, a person is
         stateless  if  he  has  no  nationality.  Ability  to   acquire   a
         nationality is irrelevant for these purposes. A child  born  on  or
         after 3 December 2004, outside India, of parents at  least  one  of
         whom is an Indian national, and who has not been to India,  is  not
         an Indian national unless registration of the birth has taken place
         in accordance with the  provisions  of  the  Citizenship  Act  1955
         (India) as amended. If the child  has  no  other  nationality,  the
         child is stateless for the purpose of paragraph 3 of Schedule 2  to
         the British Nationality Act 1981 and, if the other requirements  of
         that paragraph are met, is entitled to be registered as  a  British
         citizen. If, therefore, C's birth had on the date of  the  decision
         under challenge not been registered, she  is  entitled  to  British
         citizenship.

15. Mr Ockelton goes on in the following paragraph to recognise  that  that
    conclusion opens an obvious route to abuse. The  case  before  him,  he
    said, might be an example of abuse as the parents were both overstayers
    and both had sought and been refused further leave. They  preferred  to
    allow their child to be stateless all her  life  to  date  rather  than
    register her birth and obtain Indian nationality for her. Yet her right
    to British nationality (and the consequence that she  will  not  be  or
    become a national of India) would  immeasurably  improve  the  parents'
    prospects of being allowed to stay in the United Kingdom.

16. It is quite clear from MK that the child in this case, who has not been
    registered by her parents as an Indian citizen, is in  fact  stateless.
    She is however not entitled to British citizenship as she has not  been
    here for the requisite period. In the final sentence of  paragraph  16,
    where the First-tier Tribunal judge referred to paragraph  403  of  the
    Immigration Rules he erred. However, I find that  error  is  immaterial
    because the fact remains that although currently stateless, that  is  a
    situation that can simply be remedied by the parents registering her as
    an Indian national, something they have thus far chosen not to do.  The
    fact that the situation can be so easily remedied is thus not a bar  to
    her returning to  India  with  her  parents  and  does  not  render  it
    unreasonable to expect her to return.

17. This case was always an extremely weak claim under article 8. The adult
    appellants have close family members in India and have not  lost  their
    ties to that country. There are no bars to their  integration  in  that
    country and it is not unreasonable to  expect  their  child  to  return
    there with them. Accordingly, any error of law  by  the  judge  in  his
    decision regarding the stateless status of the child is not a  material
    error of law and had he not made that mistake there is no prospect that
    the decision would have been different.

Decision

18. The Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a
    material error  of  law  and  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and  I  see
    no justification for one.


Signed [pic]                            Date 17th May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






















