
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24061/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2019                     |On 29 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 arber hoxha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nightingale ("the judge"),  promulgated  on  8  November
    2018, by  which  she  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 5 October  2016,  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim made on that same day.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Albania, born on 3 May 1991, came  to  the
    United Kingdom in March 2006  to  attend  a  privately-funded  boarding
    school in this country.  At all material times, his family remained  in
    Albania.  Having been granted a number of  extensions  to  his  initial
    Tier  4  leave,  the  Appellant  eventually  made  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain (this being the human rights  claim  leading
    to the decision which was appealed to the First-tier Tribunal).

 3. In refusing that claim the Respondent concluded that the Appellant  had
    spent a total of 898 days out of the United  Kingdom  during  what  was
    then the relevant  ten-year  period  of  lawful  residence.   This  was
    clearly substantially in excess of the 540-day  limit  imposed  by  the
    combination of paragraphs 276B and 276A of the Immigration Rules  ("the
    Rules"), and therefore it was said that the Appellant could not satisfy
    the ten years' continuous lawful residence provision.  In addition,  it
    had been concluded that  the  Appellant  was  not  assisted  by  either
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules or Article 8 in its wider context.






The judge's decision

 4. Having summarised the evidence before her and setting out a  number  of
    relevant  legal  provisions,  the  judge  states   her   findings   and
    conclusions at [31]-[35].  She notes that the  Appellant,  through  his
    representative at the hearing, had expressly accepted  that  the  total
    number of days absent from the  United  Kingdom  was  898.   The  judge
    observes the absence of any policy guidance  from  the  Respondent,  at
    least insofar as the Appellant's representative was able to direct her.
     She notes that the Appellant's brother  had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain but  concluded  that  this  had  no  relevance  to  the
    Appellant's case.  There  is  a  reference  to  the  Respondent  having
    disregarded a certain number of days of absence from the United Kingdom
    in respect of medical treatment received by  the  Appellant  whilst  in
    Albania.

 5. Ultimately, the judge  concludes  that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Rules.  Similarly, on
    the  facts,  the  Appellant   could   not   succeed   under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  In [34] and [35] the judge considers Article 8  in  its
    wider context, taking into account a number of factors relating to  his
    circumstances, both in this country and if returned to Albania.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6.  Having  been  refused  permission  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant renewed his application for permission to the Upper Tribunal.
     This was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 12 March 2019.  With
    reference to  the  reformulated  grounds  submitted  with  the  renewed
    application, he deemed it  to  be  arguable  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the  correct  ten-year  period  when  reaching  her  overall
    conclusions with the consequence that the number of absences  from  the
    United Kingdom was significantly fewer than the 898 relied  on.   Judge
    Grubb was of the view that this lower figure might  have  affected  the
    overall assessment of Article 8.  In addition, it was  deemed  arguable
    that a discretionary policy published by the Respondent and relating to
    long residence had not been drawn to the judge's attention.



The hearing before me

 7. Mr McGirr quite rightly accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  had  leave
    (including that extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act
    1971) at all material times.

 8. It was agreed by both representatives that that ten-year period  should
    have been viewed by the judge as running back from the date of  hearing
    (25 October 2018) and therefore beginning on 25 October 2008.

 9. There then followed a  discussion  and  recalculation  of  the  precise
    number of days of absence from  the  United  Kingdom  relating  to  the
    correct relevant ten-year period.  It was agreed that the figure of 898
    days  was  incorrect,  despite  the  acceptance  of   the   Appellant's
    representative before the judge.

10. Having regard to the clear dates and figures set out in the Appellant's
    unchallenged  witness  statement  (which  was  before  the  judge)  and
    disregarding the period of 115  days  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    medical  treatment  in  Albania  (as  the  Respondent  had  done   when
    considering the human rights claim in the first place - see page  3  of
    the reasons for refusal letter and [32] of the judge's  decision),  the
    final total figure was agreed as being 710 days of  absence  from  this
    country.

11. Having arrived at this  agreed  position,  Mr  Haywood  relied  on  the
    grounds and submitted that the significant reduction in the  number  of
    absent days from 898 to 710 was  of  itself  a  material  factor  which
    rendered the judge's Article 8 assessment  unsafe.  He  emphasised  the
    fact that the number of days spent outside the United Kingdom in excess
    of the 540-day limit had been 170 rather than the  300-plus  considered
    by the judge. He submitted that any Article 8 proportionality  exercise
    must be fact-specific and it was essential  that  the  correct  factual
    matrix be taken into account.

12. Mr Haywood then turned  to  the  issue  of  the  policy  guidance.   He
    submitted that whilst the Appellant's representative before  the  judge
    (not Mr Haywood) might have been at fault for not drawing her attention
    to any published policy, it was  also  the  case  that  the  Presenting
    Officer had not done so.  Mr Haywood confirmed that the relevant policy
    guidance entitled "Long residence Version  15.0"  and  published  on  3
    April 2017 had been in place at the time  of  the  hearing  before  the
    judge.  He referred me to pages 9-11 of the  guidance,  specifically  a
    passage which confirmed  that  there  was  a  discretion  to  disregard
    absences where "compelling or compassionate circumstances" existed.  An
    example of these are said to be a situation in which an individual  was
    prevented from returning to the United  Kingdom  through  "unavoidable"
    circumstances.

13. Mr Haywood submitted that in the Appellant's case there were  a  number
    of such compelling and/or compassionate circumstances:  the  fact  that
    during school holidays he had had to return to his family in Albania as
    he had nowhere to live in the United Kingdom; that his mother had  been
    ill in Albania and he had needed to be there with her for a  period  of
    time; that he had had to wait for a fairly substantial  period  on  two
    occasions for new entry clearance to be granted from Albania;  and  the
    Appellant's own medical treatment in  his  home  country.   Mr  Haywood
    accepted that the last factor had been accounted for by the  Respondent
    in the first  instance,  but  he  submitted  that  because  the  policy
    guidance had not been brought to the judge's  attention,  she  had  not
    taken any of the other factors into account.  He submitted  that  given
    the appeal was on Article 8 grounds only the judge was  bound  to  take
    all   relevant   considerations   into   account    when    considering
    proportionality and that she had not only factored in too many days  of
    absence, but had failed  to  consider  whether  any  other  factors  in
    relation to absent days were also relevant.

14. Finally, Mr Haywood relied on the Appellant's brother's  circumstances.
    Unchallenged evidence from the brother had been before the judge and he
    had set out details of his absent days from the United  Kingdom,  these
    being significantly  in  excess  of  540.   Notwithstanding  this,  the
    Respondent had granted him indefinite  leave  to  remain.   Mr  Haywood
    acknowledged that the brother's case was not in  any  way  decisive  in
    respect of the Appellant's,  but  submitted  that  it  was  nonetheless
    relevant and the judge had erred in rejecting it out of hand.

15. For his part, Mr McGirr submitted that any errors by the judge were not
    material.  In respect of the absent days relating to  school  holidays,
    it was a case of the Appellant simply complying with the conditions  of
    his Tier 4 leave and there was nothing compelling or  compassionate  in
    this.  The same applied to his mother's illness.  Mr  McGirr  submitted
    that issues such as family illness were part and parcel of the  540-day
    "allowance" which was already provided for in  paragraph  276A  of  the
    Rules.  In addition, the fact that the Appellant had had  to  wait  for
    the grant of entry clearance on two occasions  was  no  different  from
    anybody else applying to get back into the United Kingdom.

16.  Finally,  Mr  McGirr  submitted  that  the  brother's   evidence   was
    insufficient to have made this matter of any material relevant  to  the
    Appellant's case.

17. At the end of the hearing I reserved my error  of  law  decision.  Both
    representatives were agreed that if I set aside the judge's decision, I
    could and should remake the  decision  in  this  appeal  based  on  the
    evidence before me. In respect of further submissions on  the  remaking
    issue, Mr Haywood essentially relied on the points he made  in  support
    of the error of law argument. Mr McGirr did not seek to  challenge  any
    of the evidence  and  submitted  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate.




Decision on error of law

18. The first thing to say is that there are several unsatisfactory aspects
    of  this  case  which  have  their  genesis  in  the  approach  of  the
    representatives before the judge. I have a good deal  of  sympathy  for
    her and the conclusions I have reached, below, say a lot more about the
    way in which the appeal was presented to her  than  about  her  overall
    diligence.

19. With the above observations in mind, I nonetheless  conclude  that  the
    judge did err in proceeding on the  basis  that  the  total  number  of
    absent days was  898.   Although  the  Appellant's  representative  had
    expressly accepted that figure at the hearing, it was the case that the
    relevant ten-year period should  have  been  assessed  from  that  date
    backwards (in other words, from 25 October 2018 to  25  October  2008).
    If this had been done, and taking into account the unchallenged figures
    contained in the Appellant's detailed witness  statement  running  from
    December 2008 onwards, the total  figure  was  in  fact  710,  a  total
    significantly lower than 898.

20. However, the total clearly remained in excess of the 540 days permitted
    by paragraph 276A of the Rules.  I conclude that the error  in  respect
    of the total number of absent days is not, in and of  itself,  material
    to the outcome of the Appellant's appeal.  It  is,  however,  relevant,
    bearing in mind the Appellant's other arguments, to which I now turn.

21. I conclude that the judge inadvertently erred in failing to have regard
    to  the  Respondent's  published  policy  on  long   residence.    Both
    representatives before the judge  were  at  fault  for  this  omission.
    Although  the  judge  recalls  that  she  had  asked  the   Appellant's
    representative as to whether any such policy guidance  existed,  in  my
    view the onus was as much on the Respondent's representative (see,  for
    example, UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ  85,  at  [16]-[22]).   In  any
    event, one or other of them should have  been  able  to  reply  in  the
    affirmative when asked about the existence of a  policy  which  clearly
    had potential application to the instant case.

22. The question is then whether this error, alone or in  combination  with
    the first identified  above,  is  material.   Page  10  of  the  policy
    guidance does state a  broad  discretion  based  on  the  existence  of
    "compelling or compassionate circumstances":

         "If the applicant has been absent from  the  UK  for  more  than  6
         months in  one  period  or  more  than  18  months  in  total,  the
         application  should  normally  be  refused.  However,  it  may   be
         appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  over  excess   absences   in
         compelling or compassionate circumstances, for  example  where  the
         applicant  was  prevented  from  returning  to   the   UK   through
         unavoidable circumstances."

23. This stated discretion was relevant not because it could  have  allowed
    the judge  to  directly  substitute  her  own  view  for  that  of  the
    Respondent in respect of a discretion  outwith  the  Rules  (she  could
    not), but because it  raised  the  possibility  of  additional  factors
    relating to absent days which could have been  material  to  the  wider
    Article 8 balancing exercise.

24. It is right that the judge has recognised the Respondent's disregard of
    the 115 days spent  by  the  Appellant  receiving  treatment  for  back
    problems in Albania.  What she did not consider were the  circumstances
    behind  three  other  categories  of  absence,  all   of   which   were
    specifically highlighted by the Appellant himself in  his  unchallenged
    witness statement: the school holidays; the mother's illness;  and  the
    waiting for further entry clearance to be granted.   A  number  of  the
    school holiday absences were when the  Appellant  was  still  a  minor.
    Given the fact that he was a  boarder  and  that  his  family  live  in
    Albania, on the face of it, it would seem to be relevant  that  he  was
    having to leave the United Kingdom during school holidays and return to
    Albania, there being nowhere else for  him  to  stay  in  this  country
    during the breaks, even once he had reached his majority.  There is  no
    "bright line" upon reaching adulthood and the need to return to Albania
    during school holidays just after his eighteenth birthday could also be
    said to be relevant.

25. In respect of the Appellant's mother's  illness  in  2012,  this  would
    arguably appear to be circumstances deserving of compassion.

26. Finally, the periods during which the Appellant was  awaiting  decision
    on entry clearance applications in 2013 (64 days)  and  September  2015
    (51 days) were fairly significant in duration and would, on the face of
    it, arguably amount to circumstances  beyond  the  Appellant's  control
    which prevented him from re-entering this country.  This  is  a  factor
    alluded to in the policy guidance.

27. Whilst I acknowledge Mr McGirr's  argument  that  the  school  holidays
    would apply to any individual being educated at a boarding  school  and
    was simply a consequence of the Tier 4 conditions of  leave,  and  that
    everybody has to wait for entry clearance decisions, in my view all  of
    the factors put forward by Mr Haywood and arising  out  of  the  widely
    expressed discretion in the Respondent's policy guidance  were  capable
    of being material factors in the wider Article 8 balancing exercise.

28. When this point is combined with the error on the calculation of absent
    days, I conclude that the judge has materially erred in law.  The error
    could arguably be said to relate to whether or  not  the  Appellant  in
    fact satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the  Rules.  The
    better view, as I see it, is that the error goes to the approach to the
    wider Article 8 assessment.

29. If all relevant matters  had  been  taken  into  account  it  is  quite
    possible that the total number of relevant absent days would have  been
    found to fall below 540.  Even if that were not  the  case,  the  total
    number was substantially fewer than the  judge  believed  and  relevant
    considerations of a large number of those days might well have  counted
    in a manner favourable to the Appellant.

30. My conclusions on the two issues discussed above are sufficient for the
    judge's decision to be set aside.

31. For the  sake  of  completeness,  I  now  turn  to  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's brother. The judge did apply her mind to this.  It is clear
    that she did not have any  detailed  information  from  the  Respondent
    about the granting of his application, but that was unsurprising.   His
    application was granted and there would not have been any reasons given
    for the decision.  However, the brother had provided  a  very  detailed
    witness statement which was before the judge (88-92 of the  Appellant's
    bundle).  This sets out the number  of  days  absent  from  the  United
    Kingdom in his case.  It can be seen that this was well  in  excess  of
    the 540 days (797 to be precise).  Although in  no  way  decisive,  the
    Appellant's brother's situation did bear marked similarities to that of
    the  Appellant,  in  particular  the  absences  during  the   secondary
    schooling (they both attended the same institution)  and  his  evidence
    was, in my view, of relevance to the Appellant's case, at least insofar
    as proportionality was concerned.  In my view the judge  was  wrong  to
    have concluded that it bore no relevance whatsoever.

32. Overall, I regard this as a further material error.




Remaking the decision

33. In remaking the decision in this  appeal  I  have  had  regard  to  the
    evidence contained in the Respondent's original bundle, the Appellant's
    bundle (indexed  and  paginated  1-191,  and  the  submissions  of  the
    representatives.

34. There has been no challenge to the reliability of any of  the  evidence
    before me. I find it all to be entirely credible.



The essential facts

35. In light of the above, I make the following essential findings of fact.

36. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in March 2006 and has been  in
    this country lawfully ever since, albeit  on  a  precarious  basis.  He
    attended a boarding school between August 2006 and July  2010.  He  was
    wholly dependent on his family in Albania  during  this  time.  Between
    December  2008  and  the  end  of  the  summer  holiday  following  the
    completion of his secondary school studies, the Appellant was,  out  of
    necessity, staying with his parents in Albania during all holidays  for
    a total of 215 days (2 and 17 of the Appellant's bundle).

37. Between May and September 2011 the Appellant spent 115 days in  Albania
    receiving treatment for a spinal problem.  The evidence shows that  the
    Appellant's mother was ill in 2012 and, to a  lesser  extent,  2015.  I
    accept that the Appellant spent 73 days in Albania caring for her.

38. In July 2013 and August 2015  the  Appellant  returned  to  Albania  to
    obtain further entry clearance. I accept that he had to wait for 64 and
    51 days respectively before being granted the required visas.  Although
    there has been no conclusive evidence on why these delays occurred,  Mr
    McGirr indicated (I put it no higher  than  that)  that  administrative
    restructuring was taking place and certain visa posts  were  moved:  it
    was a possibility that the Tirana post was effected  by  this.  I  find
    that it is probable that there were  administrative  delays  caused  by
    restructuring. But whatever the precise reason, I find that it was  not
    down to the Appellant in any way and that the delays were  beyond  what
    might have been expected.

39. The Appellant continues to have statutorily extended leave  to  remain.
    Taking the date of the hearing before me as the end point, the relevant
    ten-year period is therefore 15 April 2009 to 15 April  2019.  Applying
    this timeframe and using the figures set out in the Appellant's witness
    statement at 2-4 of his bundle, I recalculate the number of days absent
    from the United Kingdom as being:

             175 (school holidays)

             14 (additional holidays whilst at school)

             9 (waiting for further entry clearance in October 2010)

             214 (holidays whilst at university)

             115 (spinal treatment in Albania)

             73 (caring for sick mother)

             115 (waiting for entry clearance in 2013 and 2015)

             53 (holidays with a former girlfriend between 2012 and 2014)

             14 (miscellaneous absences in 2016)

             Gross total: 782

40. I then disregard (as the Respondent did in his original  decision)  the
    115 days spent receiving medical treatment in Albania.  This  leaves  a
    total of 667 days.

41. I accept the Appellant's brother's evidence as to the circumstances  in
    which he came to be granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. His total absent days was 797 but it is more likely  than  not
    that the school holidays were disregarded, together  with  absences  on
    account of employment in later years.

42. It is clear that the Appellant has put down significant  roots  on  the
    United Kingdom. I find that he has a mortgage on  a  property  and  has
    studied and worked here for a substantial period of time.



Conclusions

43. It was  never  suggested  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  her
    consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Rules,  nor  has  any
    reliance been placed  upon  this  provision  in  terms  of  the  remake
    decision. It is clear that the Appellant cannot succeed by reference to
    that particular Rule.

44. I  turn  to  a  consideration  of  paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules,  in
    conjunction with paragraph 276A.

45. The 540-day limit in paragraph 276A(a)(v)  is  not  the  subject  of  a
    discretion within the Rule itself: continuous lawful residence  "shall"
    be considered to be broken if the limit  is  exceeded.  The  discretion
    stated in the policy guidance is, by definition, one  existing  outside
    of the Rules.

46. In the present case it is a fact that the Appellant has a total of  782
    days outside of the United Kingdom during the relevant ten-year period.
    Even accounting for the 115 days for medical treatment  disregarded  by
    the Respondent in the exercise of  his  discretion  when  deciding  the
    application, the total remains in excess of the 540-day limit.

47. In my view, given the wording of the Rule itself and  the  location  of
    the discretion, it would impermissible for  me  to  simply  purport  to
    exercise my own discretion and apply it directly to paragraphs 276A and
    276B.

48. Instead, I take all relevant circumstances (of which  the  absent  days
    are  certainly  one)  into  account  when   considering   whether   the
    Respondent's refusal of the Appellant's human rights  claim  strikes  a
    fair balance between his Article 8 rights on  the  one  hand,  and  the
    important public interest on the other.

49. There is no suggestion by the Respondent that the  Appellant  does  not
    enjoy protected Article 8 rights in the  United  Kingdom,  specifically
    the right to respect for his private life. It is  clear  that  he  has,
    over the course of time and in light of his  overall  circumstances  in
    this country, established such a life.

50. It is equally  clear  that  the  Respondent's  decision  constituted  a
    sufficiently serious interference  with  the  private  life,  that  the
    decision is in accordance with  the  law  (as  that  term  is  properly
    understood in the  context  of  Article  8),  and  that  it  pursues  a
    legitimate aim.

51. I turn to the question of proportionality,  having  regard  to  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.

52. The following factors weigh in  the  Respondent's  favour.  The  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control is, of itself,  a
    significant matter. The fact that the Appellant has not  been  able  to
    meet the specific requirements of the Rules is also a matter  deserving
    of considerable weight.

53. It is the case that the Appellant has always been in the United Kingdom
    on a precarious basis. I have regard to this  mandatory  consideration.
    Although the strength of the Appellant's private is reduced, there  are
    particular circumstances in this appeal which mitigate that  reduction.
    I will set these out, below.

54. The Appellant has never relied on public  funds  and  he  is  a  fluent
    English speaker. These are effectively neutral factors.

55. I now consider the Appellant's side of the balance  sheet.  He  has  an
    unblemished immigration history. He has studied and worked hard in this
    country and clearly regards the United Kingdom as his home now.

56. More importantly, the issue of the absences  from  the  United  Kingdom
    falls to be assessed more favourably to the Appellant than the position
    adopted by the Respondent.

57. It was  clearly  right  that  the  115  days  spent  receiving  medical
    treatment in 2011 was disregarded in the original refusal. In my  view,
    other absences also fall into the category of what  I  consider  to  be
    either compelling or compassionate circumstances.

58. First, there are the secondary school holidays. Although  the  relevant
    number of days away (175 or even just 90 if  one  excluded  the  summer
    holiday following the completion of  the  studies)  occurred  when  the
    Appellant had turned eighteen, he was nonetheless wholly  dependent  on
    his parents in Albania, had nowhere to live in this country, could  not
    remain in the school during the breaks,  and,  as  Mr  Haywood  rightly
    pointed out, there is no  "bright  line"  between  the  final  year  of
    minority and the first couple of a person's majority. I  conclude  that
    the conditions of the Appellant's Tier 4 leave related to  his  studies
    and did not, of themselves, require him to return to Albania. Thus,  in
    the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case,   the   Appellant   was
    effectively compelled to be absent from the United Kingdom for at least
    90 days during his schooling.

59. I bear in mind the fact that the Respondent disregarded school holidays
    in the bother's case but not  in  the  Appellant's.  That  is  odd  and
    displays a lack of consistency. I would emphasise that this  factor  is
    not of significant weight, although it is relevant.

60. I regard the mother's illness and need for care  by  the  Appellant  as
    constituting a compassionate circumstance. I disagree with Mr  McGirr's
    suggestion that this would simply fall within the  "allowance"  of  540
    days provided for by the Rules. If this argument were correct, the same
    could be said for any similar occurrence and the notion  of  compelling
    and/or compassionate circumstances would lose its utility.

61. In respect of the Appellant's lengthy wait for entry clearance in  2013
    and 2015, it is, as I have alluded to  previously,  difficult  to  know
    what caused the delay. It is of note that in 2010 he only had  to  wait
    for eight days before receiving the grant. I have found that there were
    delays caused by administrative restructuring by the  Respondent.  Even
    if that were not the case, the Appellant was, through no fault  of  his
    own, prevented from re-entering the United Kingdom for two  significant
    periods in 2013 and 2015. I conclude that these  absences,  or  at  the
    very least, a  substantial  portion  thereof,  are  to  be  seen  as  a
    compelling circumstance.

62. In light of the above, I would assess  the  absences  from  the  United
    Kingdom as follows:

             Gross total: 782 days

             Disregard 115 days for the Appellant's medical treatment

             Disregard 90 days for school holidays

             Disregard 73 days for caring for the mother

             Disregard at least 90 days for the entry clearance grants.

63. On  this  fairly  conservative  but  in  my  view  entirely  reasonable
    assessment, the total number of absent days is 414, significantly fewer
    than the 540 limit imposed by paragraph 276A of the Rules.

64. The effect of this is twofold. First, the assessment  discloses  strong
    factors which go to justify a mitigation of  the  reduction  in  weight
    attributable to the Appellant's private life, by reference  to  section
    117B(5) of the 2002 Act. Second, and  more  significantly,  whilst  not
    being able to satisfy paragraph 276B of the Rules, my conclusion on the
    absent days places the Appellant in the position of being able to  show
    that his time away from the United Kingdom not  covered  by  compelling
    and/or compassionate  circumstances  has  actually  been  significantly
    shorter than the limit imposed by the Rules. This in turn represents  a
    strong Article 8 claim.

65. Having weighed up all  relevant  factors  in  this  case,  my  ultimate
    conclusion is that the factors in  favour  of  the  Appellant  outweigh
    those on the Respondent's aide of the balance sheet. The refusal of the
    human rights claim does not strike a fair balance and  the  Appellant's
    appeal falls to be allowed.



Anonymity

66. No anonymity direction is made.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remake the decision and allow the Appellant's appeal.

The Respondent's refusal of the Appellant's human rights claim  is  unlawful
under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.



Signed        [pic]             Date: 24 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have remade the decision in  this  case  and  allowed  the  Appellant's
appeal, I make a full fee award of �140.00.



Signed        [pic]             Date: 24 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
