
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24309/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made on the papers          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|at Field House                       |                                     |
|On 11 July 2019                      |On 25 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                MS KA WAI MA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the reasons given below, it  is  not  necessary  to  have  an  oral
    hearing of this appeal.

 2. The Appellant has appealed, with permission, against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Brookfield, promulgated on 31  October  2018,
    in which the judge had dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision refusing to grant her indefinite leave to remain

 3. Following a hearing before UTJ Hanson sitting at Bradford  on  8  April
    2019, Judge Hanson found that there had been an error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and the appeal has  been  listed  for  a
    resumed hearing before him on 16 July 2019.

 4. On 9 July 2019, the respondent wrote to the Tribunal in  the  following
    terms:

         "Upper Tribunal hearing scheduled for  16  July  2019  at  Bradford
         Hearing Centre

         Following representations made by the  appellant's  representative,
         the respondent is writing to confirm that there is no objection  to
         the Upper Tribunal allowing the appellant's case  on  human  rights
         grounds on the basis that she has  now  accrued  the  necessary  10
         years' residence under the immigration rules, without the need  for
         a further hearing".

 5. In these circumstances, there is no need for a further hearing and  the
    tribunal now will make a decision allowing the appellant's appeal.



Decision

    The decision of the first tier tribunal is set aside  as  containing  a
    material error of law and the following decision is substituted:

    The appellant's appeal is allowed, on human rights grounds.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 11 July 2019
