







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/24054/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |            Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 21 February 2018                 |            On: 3 May 2018                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Mr Babar Shahzad
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, counsel (instructed by Pasha Law
Chambers)
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.

   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy who, in a decision promulgated on 13
      November 2017, allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision  of
      the respondent to refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain under
      the Immigration Rules on the basis of ten years' long residence.

   3. She found that the appellant satisfied the requirements of  the  rules
      and had established a strong family and private life in  the  UK.  She
      accordingly found  that  the  decision  was  not  proportionate  under
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention (6.14).

   4. On 5 December 2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  He
      referred to the grounds which argued  that  the  Judge  did  not  give
      adequate reasons for finding that  the  secretary  of  state  did  not
      discharge the legal burden in showing  that  the  appellant  had  used
      deception under ETF.

   5. It was arguable that the Judge failed in the approach to the evidence.
      The fact that the claimant had attended the test centre would  not  be
      evidence that he took the test as observed from the BBC documentary.

   6. On behalf of the secretary  of  state,  Mr  Jarvis  acknowledged  that
      paragraph 3 of the secretary of state's  grounds  of  appeal  was  not
      accurate. The assertion made was that there was no  finding  that  the
      claimant is able to recall details of the examination process such  as
      to demonstrate that he attended the examination in person. However, Mr
      Jarvis acknowledged that there was evidence at [5.3] of the decision.

   7. He submitted that the real point  is  that  the  overall  evidence  of
      Professor French supports the secretary of state. The  fact  that  the
      claimant had attended the test centre was not sufficient.

   8. He referred to the decision in MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450. There may
      well be a reason why a person who is able  to  speak  English  to  the
      required level would nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate  to
      undertake an ETS test on their behalf or otherwise to cheat. The Judge
      erred in failing to give proper reasons for holding that the  claimant
      who speaks English,  would  therefore  have  no  reason  to  secure  a
      certificate by deception.

   9. Nor did the Judge identify any  compelling  circumstances  to  justify
      consideration of whether there would be a breach under Article 8.  The
      proportionality assessment has been coloured by this error with regard
      to her findings relating to the claimant's use of deception.

  10. Mr Coleman, who had also  represented  the  claimant  at  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal,  noted  that  it  is  clear  from  the
      secretary of state's evidence that not everyone who took  the  English
      test cheated. It was thus not shown on the  balance  of  probabilities
      that everyone cheated.  The  allegation  of  cheating  required  'good
      evidence'.

  11. He submitted that the real difficulty is that the claimant attended  a
      Home Office interview on 10  July  2015.   He  had  been  particularly
      invited to attend to assess his English language and  to  see  whether
      his TOEIC was genuine. He did attend that interview  and  subsequently
      was informed by the interviewing officer that he was satisfied  as  to
      the appellant's proficiency in the English  language.  No  curtailment
      action was pursued against the claimant.  Further,  the  claimant  had
      travelled on several occasions after that and had never been stopped a
      border control on suspicion of deception concerning the TOEIC.

  12. He also referred to the claimant's witness statement at paragraph  17,
      page 14. He had obtained qualifications prior to  taking  the  English
      test. He had been a student for five years before this.

  13. The First-tier Judge had full regard to this at [6.9]. She referred to
      the fact that he gave his evidence in English noting that it  was  not
      possible to assess his level of English in  December  2011,  some  six
      years earlier. He would no doubt have improved significantly over that
      period. This showed a balanced approach to the evidence before her.

  14. Mr Coleman referred to the Upper Tribunal decision in SM and  Qadir  v
      SSHD (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 which had been
      identified by the Judge at [6.8] and [73]. She  adopted  the  approach
      set out by the President in that decision.

  15. She has made clear and appropriate  findings  based  on  the  evidence
      before her. The secretary of state's grounds amount to no more than  a
      disagreement with a sound and well-reasoned  decision.  This  includes
      the decision under Article 8 which gave effect to her finding that the
      claimant did not cheat, had not used deception and was  married  to  a
      British citizen.

  16. In reply Mr Jarvis submitted that the 2015 interview constitutes a red
      herring. That occurred at a time prior to the  evidence  presented  by
      Professor French. A very small proportion are thought to have produced
      a false positive.

      Assessment

  17. The Judge  has  properly  directed  herself  in  accordance  with  the
      applicable rules and the evidence. She has set out the evidence of the
      secretary of state in some detail in [6]. This included reliance  upon
      the expert report from Professor French dated 20 April  2016  relating
      to the likelihood of the ETS testing methodology as well as the report
      from DI Andrew Carter, investigating this college.

  18. She properly directed herself in accordance with SM and Qadir,  supra.
      She had regard to the claimant's evidence where  he  expressly  denied
      the charge of deception. She considered the submissions  that  he  had
      previously undertaken an IELTS test, that he had studied and  received
      an MBA degree in English.

  19. He gave evidence before her in English, although,  as  already  noted,
      that did not constitute evidence relating to his level of  English  in
      December 2011, some six years prior to the test under dispute [6.9].

  20. She found that the evidence before  her  was  that  the  claimant  was
      likely to have reached the required level of ability prior  to  taking
      the TOIEC test at Elizabeth College in December 2011.

  21. She had full regard to the claimant's oral evidence  relating  to  the
      taking of the test at Elizabeth College. He gave details  relating  to
      its location as well as the number of people in a large hall where the
      test was taken, and that it took place in the morning  and  afternoon.
      Everyone had a separate table with individual computers.  He  set  out
      the details concerning the listening and reading tests on the same day
      as  well  as  details  relating  to  the  writing  and  speaking  part
      undertaken the following day.

  22. She found that the claimant was  a  credible  witness  who  had  given
      credible explanations of the issues canvassed with him. That  included
      his oral descriptions of the test and his familiarity  with  the  area
      where the test centre is located [6.12].

  23. She accordingly found that there was no evidence to conclude that  the
      claimant had engaged in deception. Following that  she  was  satisfied
      that the requirements of the  rules  had  been  met.  He  had  clearly
      established strong family and private life in the UK and  was  married
      to a British citizen, had  completed  a  Masters  degree  and  had  no
      history of overstaying. In  the  circumstances,  she  found  that  the
      decision of the respondent was disproportionate [6.14].

  24. The assessment of credibility  was  central  to  the  outcome  of  the
      appeal. As noted by Mr Coleman, there has been no perversity challenge
      by the secretary of state.

  25. Having regard to  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  the  Judge  has  given
      satisfactory reasons substantiating her findings.




      Notice of decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. It shall stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed
      Dated: 9 March 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


