
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24186 /2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2017                           |On 24 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Ball, Counsel instructed by JCWI


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, any order restricting  publication
    of the details of this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  on  3
    October 2016 refusing him international protection and leave to  remain
    on human rights grounds and maintaining a decision to deport him.

 3. We begin by considering exactly what the First-tier Tribunal decided.

 4. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He was born in 1987 but  he  has
    lived in the United Kingdom since 1995 when the claimant  was  7  years
    old.  With his mother and four siblings he was given  indefinite  leave
    to remain on 11 February 2004.

 5. However the claimant is a criminal.  He has been  in  trouble  on  many
    occasions.  He has been warned on two occasions  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that the likely consequence of persistent bad behaviour would  be
    his deportation.  Letters were sent in October 2009 and February 2010.

 6. On 5 November 2010 he was sentenced to twelve months'  imprisonment  on
    an indictment containing six counts alleging that he took  property  by
    deception.  As a consequence of that decision he was made  the  subject
    of a deportation  order  but  he  appealed.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed his appeal and the Upper Tribunal found the decision  to  allow
    the appeal was wrong in law.   The  Upper  Tribunal  re-determined  the
    appeal but it too allowed the appeal.  The  appeal  was  allowed  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 7. At paragraph 5 of its decision in the  instant  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal said:

         "The  Upper  Tribunal  on  rehearing   the   appeal   allowed   the
         [claimant's] appeal against deportation  in  a  decision  that  was
         promulgated on 30 April 2012.  The appeal was allowed under Article
         8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  (ECHR).   The  Upper
         Tribunal made positive findings in favour  of  the  [claimant]  and
         they  found  that  he  had  been  assessed  as  a  medium  risk  of
         reoffending but considered himself to be a low risk; he  had  shown
         remorse for his offending behaviour which was genuine and  sincere;
         he had established a private life in this country in which  he  had
         lived since the age of 7 and was educated here and  has  friendship
         groups; deportation would interfere with his private life  and  the
         interference would lead to grave consequences and that it would  be
         disproportionate to deport him."

 8. It is a depressing indication of the claimant's sense of responsibility
    that having succeeded in that appeal against deportation  he  committed
    further offences.  On 29 January 2015 he was convicted of burglary  and
    two counts of dishonestly making false representations for gain and  in
    February 2015 he was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.

 9. He was served with a decision to deport letter and on 25 March 2015  he
    made representations contending that he should not be deported  because
    (essentially) of his strong links with the United Kingdom and  his  not
    having links with Nigeria. On 13 May 2015 a claim for leave  to  remain
    on human rights grounds was refused and a further deportation order was
    made.

10. The judge noted that the claimant was given indefinite leave to  remain
    in February 2004 but the application had been made in 1999 and  it  was
    not the claimant's fault that it had taken about five years to  process
    the application.

11. It was the Secretary of State's case that the claimant could "re-adapt"
    to life in Nigeria, that there would be no language barriers and  there
    would not be "very significant obstacles" to his integration back  into
    Nigerian culture in the event of his deportation.

12. The claimant applied to revoke that deportation order based on his long
    residence

13. The claimant was initially placed on  immigration  detention  but  then
    released on bail and was found on Tower Bridge apparently attempting to
    take his life.

14. The judge said at paragraph 10:

         "The  central   issues   therefore   concern   firstly   Devaseelan
         principles;  secondly,  application  of  paragraph  339A   of   the
         Immigration Rules  because  of  the  length  of  residence  of  the
         appellant in  this  country;  thirdly  whether  or  not  there  are
         significant obstacles to him being returned  to  Nigeria;  fourthly
         Article 8 principles and its applicability, and  lastly  Article  8
         medical circumstances such as depression, suicide and self harm."

15. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  set  out  his  findings  beginning  at
    paragraph 29. He accepted that the appellant is socially and culturally
    integrated into the culture of the United Kingdom.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion the judge reminded  himself  that  the  appellant  has  been
    convicted of numerous criminal offences but  noted  as  well  that  his
    accent suggests that he lives in London and he carries himself in a way
    that would identify himself as  a  Londoner  if  he  were  returned  to
    Nigeria.  The judge found that the  claimant  would  not  be  aware  of
    cultural and social norms in Nigeria.

16. The judge did  find  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration into society  in  Nigeria  in  the  event  of  deportation.
    Particularly, the judge  accepted  the  evidence  that  the  claimant's
    entire family lived in the United Kingdom and that he  knew  no-one  in
    Nigeria.  The judge found it significant that the claimant had lived in
    the United Kingdom for 22 years.  Some of that time was spent in prison
    but there was still a period  of  seventeen  years'  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom out of prison and the claimant had no knowledge  of  the
    culture in Nigeria or anyone to help him live there.

17. Paragraph 31 may be more troublesome because it might show weight being
    given to matters that are relevant but are not  particularly  important
    in an article 8 balancing exercise in  a  case  involving  deportation.
    There the judge said:

         "In  relation  to  whether  or  not  there  are   very   compelling
         circumstances such as not  to  deport  this  [claimant]  from  this
         country I am of the view  that  such  compelling  circumstances  do
         exist in that this [claimant] has for  the  majority  of  his  life
         committed crimes, he  has  started  to  change  his  behaviour  for
         example he has completed his probation and the course which he took
         in anger management has been of use to him.   I  find  that  having
         listened to him and having carefully considered his past that there
         is a strong possibility that what he says in his evidence  that  he
         has now turned over a new leaf and that he will  continue  to  move
         away from a life of crime is something that I found to be  credible
         and he has the support of his mother who has made it clear  to  him
         that she will not tolerate any more of his criminal  behaviour.   I
         am also persuaded by evidence that was given  in  relation  to  his
         other siblings and the fact that they are all law abiding that this
         has started to have a positive impact on the  behaviour.   I  noted
         that in the hearing in 2012 that positive  findings  were  made  in
         respect of the [claimant] but matters have moved on  greatly  since
         then and the [claimant] went on to commit further offences  and  he
         has gone through a difficult period  of  being  incarcerated  as  a
         result of his offences suffering from mental illness  and  suicidal
         thoughts and he is now feeling  positive  and  started  to  make  a
         positive contribution to activities concerning his reoffending."

18. The judge was also impressed with the medical evidence, particularly  a
    report from Dr Grant Peterkin.  The claimant  has  made  "a  number  of
    impulsive attempts at suicide and self harm and  his  profile  in  this
    respect has increased and it does place him at moderate  risk  of  self
    harm."

19. The judge was clearly impressed with the  evidence  of  the  claimant's
    mother that the claimant would  rather  kill  himself  than  return  to
    Nigeria, a country that he does not know.

20. The judge echoed this finding at paragraph 34  where  he  purported  to
    follow the cases of "J" and "Paposhvili".   It  was  the  judge's  view
    that, given  the  claimant's  "impulsive  nature  and  lack  of  coping
    mechanisms, it is likely that he will take his own life rather than  be
    returned to a country which he left at the age of 7 and to be separated
    from his family in this country."

21. The judge then found that removal  would  be  disproportionate  and  he
    confirmed that  he  had  considered  Sections  117B  and  117C  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

22. The Secretary of State was not given an unfettered  right  to  complain
    about the decision.  She was given permission to appeal on grounds that
    she had drawn.  We consider those grounds below.

23. The grounds note, correctly, that the First-tier Tribunal  allowed  the
    appeal "principally on the grounds that the  [claimant]  satisfied  all
    three limbs of  399A".   Given  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  a
    statutory obligation to consider the requirements of paragraph 117C  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  it  might  have  been
    more helpful all round if more thought had been given to  that  but  we
    are not aware of any material difference between  the  requirements  of
    the Section and the Rules identified by the respondent.

24. Notwithstanding the correct description for the reason for allowing the
    appeal, the first complaint in the grounds is that the judge  gave  too
    much weight to the issue of the risk of reoffending. It  is  said  that
    the judge had referred to the authority of Devaseelan and said that the
    earlier appeal had been allowed because there was a very  low  risk  of
    reoffending but the claimant had  reoffended  and  had  satisfied  this
    judge that he had again turned over a new leaf.

25. With respect to Mr Bramble, who had to argue  the  case  in  accordance
    with grounds drawn, we find this point hard  to  follow.   It  was  the
    finding of the Tribunal that the claimant had turned over a  new  leaf.
    Whether or not the leaf was turned over it did not stop him reoffending
    and if the judge had simply followed Devaseelan by finding that he  had
    in fact turned over a new leaf he would no doubt have  been  criticised
    for making a finding that was perverse or at least a finding  that  did
    not recognise the true position by the time the offence was  committed.
    The judge did  not  lightly  decide  that  the  claimant  had  in  fact
    reformed.  He recognised that the claimant had persuaded  the  Tribunal
    on a previous occasion that he had changed his ways and had  not  lived
    up to that new life.  The judge found further reasons to find that  the
    claimant had put his criminal behaviour behind him.

26. That said, we  do  not  see  that  this  is  a  particularly  pertinent
    criticism.  As the Secretary of State recognises and relies on later in
    her grounds, rehabilitation is a  peripheral  reason  for  allowing  an
    appeal.

27. The next complaint  relates  to  the  finding  that  the  claimant  was
    "culturally and socially integrated in the United Kingdom".

28. Much is made in the grounds about the claimant  having  spent  time  in
    prison but the judge's answer to that, namely that he  spent  seventeen
    years of his life not in prison is, we find, a  complete  answer.   The
    grounds, appropriately, refer to  the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in
    Bossade (ss.117A-D - inter-relationship with  Rules)  [2015]  UKUT  414
    (IAC).  We accept that the Tribunal has decided that  a  claimant  must
    show both social and cultural integration.  Integration is described as
    something qualitative and integration is not established  merely  by  a
    presence in the United  Kingdom.   It  was  the  Tribunal's  view  that
    further offending is clear evidence that a person  is  not  integrated.
    However, it must be a matter of weight and degree.  If the finding that
    a person was socially and culturally integrated could  be  defeated  by
    the fact that he had a criminal conviction, even a criminal  conviction
    that had resulted in his imprisonment for a period of up  to  but  less
    than four years then the section would be otiose.   The  judge  plainly
    had regard to a wide range of factors.   It  may  not  be  particularly
    astute to refer to the claimant having a "London accent" (whatever that
    might be) but the point the judge was  making  is  clear  enough.   The
    claimant would stick out in Nigeria because his demeanour is that of  a
    person who has grown up in London not  Nigeria.   However,  this  point
    probably goes to very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  and  we
    consider it below.  The social and cultural integration  was  based  on
    his long  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  new  sense  of
    responsibility in having taken advantage of the opportunities presented
    to  him  in  prison  and  the  growing  influence  of  his  respectable
    relatives.  We are far from saying that this was  the  only  conclusion
    open to the judge but there is nothing perverse in the conclusion  that
    the judge has reached.

29. Neither do we find anything erroneous in the  finding  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria.  The main reasons  for
    this finding are obvious.  The claimant has no experience  of  life  in
    Nigeria since he was a small boy and has no-one there to  support  him.
    Neither does he have the resources in terms of education or aptitude to
    establish himself easily in a country where  he  would  be  a  complete
    stranger.   Rather  he  would  run  into  all  sorts   of   undesirable
    temptations.  Again we are not saying that this was the only conclusion
    open to the judge.  However the judge heard the evidence  and  saw  the
    witness and heard what other people had  to  say  about  him.   He  was
    perfectly entitled to come to the conclusion  that  he  did  that  this
    claimant simply could not cope in Nigeria.  It is  not  a  perverse  or
    unlawful finding. That  being  so  the  findings  support  the  judge's
    conclusion  that  Exception  1  to  the  requirement  for  deportation,
    explained at section 117C(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002, applies.  The claimant has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for most of his life,  he  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom and there would be  vey  significant
    obstacles to his integration in society in  Nigeria.   If  Exception  1
    applies then the public interest does not require deportation.

30. Any  errors  in  following  the  cases  of  "J"  and  "Paposhvili"  are
    immaterial.

31. We are aware of authority binding  on  us  that  Paposhvili  is  not  a
    relevant  consideration  (EA  and  Ors  (Article  3  medical  cases   -
    Paposhvili  not  applicable)  [2017]  UKUT  445  (IAC)).   However  the
    decision in "J" is a reference to a decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 which clearly does bind us.

32. Further, although the explanation for the finding that  the  claimant's
    appeal should be allowed on human  rights  grounds  with  reference  to
    Article 3 might be somewhat telegraphic it is instructive  to  consider
    the finding in the light of the written  submissions  made  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This is a man who has made four suicide  attempts
    in the United Kingdom.  He has refused food, he has attempted  to  hang
    himself, he has attempted to swallow razor blades and he has  attempted
    to jump off Tower Bridge.  The judge clearly, in  accordance  with  the
    submissions, directed himself that he had to be  satisfied  that  there
    was a "real risk" that removal would cause the claimant to take his  or
    her life.  The decision was open to him on the medical evidence.

33. It follows therefore that notwithstanding Mr Bramble's best efforts  we
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

34. It may be that the decision is less than a model example and it may  be
    that the grounds supporting the application for permission  could  have
    been drawn more artfully.  The simple test is "Does  the  Secretary  of
    State know why she has lost  and  are  the  reasons  permissible?"  The
    Secretary of State lost because the judge found  that  this  claimant's
    circumstances came within the scope of Exception 1 to the  normal  Rule
    requiring deportation set out at paragraph  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   It  is  uncontroversial  that  the
    claimant had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
    his life.  The findings that he is socially and  culturally  integrated
    in the United  Kingdom  and  the  finding  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration  into  life  in  Nigeria  were
    clearly open to the judge when it is remembered that this claimant  has
    spent so many years of his life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  has  no
    contacts with Nigeria.  That is what this case is all  about  and  this
    was resolved in the claimant's favour.

35. It follows therefore that we dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal on
    all points.









|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 23 January 2018               |
|Judge                                |                                     |









