
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24552/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2019                   |On 24 October 2019                   |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                         FRANCK STEPHANE ROBERT OUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not legally represented, acting as a litigant in
person
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL


1.   The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Cameroon.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant, on 15 September  2009  and  was
    subsequently granted further leave in this capacity until  29  February
    2012. He then applied for further leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    on 6 September 2013 but his application was refused on that same day.


2.   The Appellant was served with notice of  liability  to  removal  on  11
    September 2017 and detained on 19 April 2018.  He  then  made  a  human
    rights claim on 23 April 2018.  This claim was refused  on  7  November
    2018. The Appellant appealed and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie in a determination promulgated on 21 May 2019.


3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson granted  the  Appellant  permission
    to appeal in relation to paragraphs  1  and  2  of  his  grounds  which
    related to paragraphs 10 and 12 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie's
    determination.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING


4.   At the hearing I asked the Home Office Presenting Officer to  make  her
    submissions first so as to give the Appellant an opportunity to  better
    understand the case being made against him. The Appellant then replied.
    I have taken both of their submissions into account when coming  to  my
    decision below. Some of the Appellant's submissions related to  grounds
    on which he had not been granted permission to appeal and, therefore, I
    have not referred to these below as I can only consider the grounds  on
    which permission has been granted.


ERROR OF LAW DECISION


5.   The Appellant's human rights application was based on the  family  life
    he enjoyed with his partner, who is a British citizen. They  have  been
    living together since 2 May 2017 and plan to marry. However, he  cannot
    meet the requirements of GEN.1.2 of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules as they are not married and have  not  been  cohabiting  for  the
    necessary period of time to be classified as living in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage.


6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie accepted that the Appellant  was  in
    a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his  partner,  that  they
    intended to marry and that they were undergoing fertility treatment.


7.   However, in order to succeed under paragraph  EX.1.1.  of  Appendix  FM
    the Appellant had to show that there would be insurmountable  obstacles
    to him and his partner  enjoying  a  family  life  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.


8.   The ground on which permission to appeal was granted was  that  it  was
    not clear, on the basis of the evidence before the Judge, that he  gave
    clear reasons for finding that the Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    partner was accepted by his parents and that they would  fund  him  and
    his partner on their return to Cameroon.


9.   However, this ground had to be considered in the  context  of  findings
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  in  sub-paragraphs  9(1)(c)
    (i) to (iv) or (d) of his decisions, on which permission to appeal  had
    not been granted. In these sub-paragraphs the Judge had found that  the
    Appellant's father had not ceased providing him with financial  support
    in 2012 and that, therefore, this was not the reason why the  Appellant
    did not complete his second year of  his  university  course.  He  also
    found that since 2012 the Appellant's mother has sent the  Appellant  a
    considerable amount of money to cover his tuition fees and  maintenance
    and that the source of this money meant that his father must have  been
    aware that these funds were being sent to him. He also did  not  accept
    that the Appellant's father was a well-known businessman and  that,  if
    the Appellant relocated to any part of Cameroon away from the area from
    which he came, his father's business associates would recognise him and
    inform his father.


10.  In his oral submissions  the  Appellant  relied  on  the  statement  of
    additional grounds submitted by Greenfields Solicitors, dated  17  July
    2018, and which was before First-tier Tribunal. It said:


         "In addition, the applicant explains to us that due to  Cameroonian
         culture and according to his tribal customs, he is not permitted to
         marry outside of his tribe as the marriage would  not  be  accepted
         and he would be exiled from his tribe and family for going  against
         well-established customs, particularly so when his partner  is  not
         even a Cameroonian but of an entirely different ethnicity which  is
         unacceptable according to his  heritage.  As  such,  the  applicant
         would be  entirely  destitute  if  returned  to  Cameroon  in  such
         circumstances and would have no means of survival".


11.  He also noted  that  at  most  the  Judge  concluded  in  sub-paragraph
    9(1)(b) that "it is often the case in  modern  times  that  persons  of
    different cultural backgrounds decide to  marry  and  to  settle  in  a
    country whose culture is alien to them".


12.  He then explained that in Cameroon tribal custom would not  approve  of
    him marrying outside his tribe and if he married his partner  he  would
    be exiled from his tribe and would not be party  to  customary  rituals
    handed down from his ancestors and would  not  receive  any  blessings.
    family and his partner.


13.  It is correct that First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie did  not  address
    this issue in any detail in his decision. But, as I  explained  to  the
    Appellant, the assertions made by his solicitors in their statement  of
    additional  grounds  were,  at  best,  bare  assertions.  As  were  the
    statements made by  the  Appellant  before  me.  He  not  provided  any
    evidence as to his membership of a particular tribe or its customs  and
    practices. Therefore, even if First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  had
    addressed these  assertions,  there  would  not  have  been  sufficient
    evidence upon which he could find on a balance  of  probabilities  that
    the Appellant would be  "exiled"  from  his  family  and  tribe  if  he
    returned to the Cameroon and wished to marry his  present  partner.  In
    addition, there would have  been  insufficient  evidence  on  which  to
    conclude that his partner would be  neglected,  rejected  and  isolated
    because she did not come from the same tribe as the Appellant.


14.  In addition, as submitted by the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  as
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  had  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    Appellant's father would not be able to trace him within  Cameroon  and
    would in case not cause him any harm.


15.  Therefore, the failure on the  part  of  the  Judge  to  address  these
    issues did not amount to a material error of law.


16.  Furthermore, in paragraph 12 of his decision he gave  detailed  reasons
    for finding that there were no exceptional  circumstances  which  would
    justify the  Appellant  being  granted  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and this finding was not challenged in the grounds of
    appeal.


17.  As a consequence, I find that there were no material errors of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie's decision.


DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie's decision is upheld.


Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 22 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
