
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/24812/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 July 2019                    |On 13 August 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     Y J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary but  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Brien promulgated on 18 January 2019, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was  born  on  26  December  1975  and  is  a  national  of
Zimbabwe. On 5 October 2015  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  for
leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge O'Brien ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal on article 8 ECHR  grounds.
Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 21  March  2019  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Davey granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      Grounds 1 and 3


      The Judge gave adequate  and  sufficient  reasons  why  there  was  no
      current family life  rights  being  exercised  [D52-54}  and  why  the
      respondent's  decision  was  an  interference   in   the   appellant's
      "...substantial private life in the UK" and Article 8 ECHR was engaged
      [D55].


      The fact that the appellant had sole responsibility for Sherwin  Spain
      (date of birth 30 July 1997)(AB297), now an adult, was not the current
      issue, but whether family life rights were being exercised.


      Sherwin, although 21 and no longer a child, has  a  statement  of  SEN
      until May 2015, lives at home, functions of the level of  a  child  or
      very young teenager according to an ISW report dated 1 December  2018,
      it is arguable that the Judge's finding on the exercise of family life
      rights was flawed.


      Given the history of this matter, if an error of law is established it
      plainly would be desirable for this matter to be  dealt  with  in  the
      Upper Tribunal,


      Ground 2 and the fear of violence are not errors of law by the Judge.

The Hearing

5. (a) The appellant was present but was not represented.  I  discussed  her
application for permission to appeal and the grant of permission  to  appeal
with her. The appellant told me  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  properly
consider article 8 family life. She told me that the Judge  gave  inadequate
reasons for dismissing the independent social  work  report.  The  appellant
told me that if the Judge had paid full attention to the independent  social
work report he would have come to the conclusion that article 8 family  life
exists because of her son's continuing dependency upon  the  appellant.  She
told me that the Judge's findings between 49 and 54 flawed

(b) The appellant told me that the Judge's  proportionality  assessment  was
inadequate and that although the Judge  gives  consideration  to  article  8
private life, the Judge does not adequately explain his conclusion that  the
appellant's established article 8 private life is outweighed by  the  public
interest in immigration control.

(c) The appellant told me that she feels that she has been unfairly  treated
by the respondent and spoke about the history of applications,  blaming  the
respondent for delay in consider the case.

6. For the respondent, Ms Aboni told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors of law. She told me that the Judge's  proportionality  assessment  is
properly carried out. She told me that the Judge concluded  that  article  8
family life is not established and gives adequate reasons for doing so.  Mrs
Aboni told me that the Judge took account of the appellant's sons  needs  at
secondary school, but said that those needs were in the past.  She  told  me
that the Judge gives adequate reasons for finding that the  appellant's  son
is now an independent adult. Mrs Aboni urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and
allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. The appellant entered the UK  as  a  visitor  on  16  January  2002.  The
appellant was then granted leave to remain as a student,  which  expired  on
24 July 2009. The appellant's son entered the UK as a visitor on 29  October
2002 when he was five years old. He was  granted  leave  to  remain  as  the
appellant's dependent. On 30 May 2014 the appellant  applied  for  leave  to
remain on article 8 grounds. That application was refused  &  the  appellant
did not have the right to appeal the decision.

8. In the meantime, the appellant's son submitted his  own  application  for
leave to remain. The appellant's son  was  granted  leave  to  remain  until
January 2019. He now has an outstanding application  for  further  leave  to
remain. The appellant submitted  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  on
article 8 grounds on 30 November 2015. That application lead to the  refusal
decision dated 5 October 2016 which remains the subject of this appeal.

9. This case turns largely on the relationship  between  the  appellant  and
her son Sherwin. Sherwin was born in 1997  and  is  now  22  years  old.  He
experienced difficulties as a child and  was  identified  as  a  child  with
special educational needs between August 2009 and April 2015.

10. More than four years have passed since the appellant's son  had  special
educational needs. The adaptations  provided  to  assist  him  in  secondary
school bore fruit, because he completed his A levels and has been offered  a
place to study an  undergraduate  degree.  He  has  not  taken  a  place  at
University because, at the moment, he cannot  secure  funding.  Instead,  he
now has full-time work and enjoys the company of his girlfriend.

11. An independent social work report  dated  1  December  2018  was  placed
before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Judge  considered  that  the  report
between [48] and [53]  before  reaching  his  conclusion  that  family  life
within the meaning of article 8 does not exist  between  the  appellant  and
her son.

12. In  Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of Appeal said  that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In PT (Sri  Lanka)  v  Entry  Clearance
Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ  612  it  was  held  that  some  tribunals
appeared to have read Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR  170  as  establishing  a
rebuttable presumption against any relationship between an adult child  and
his parents or siblings being sufficient to engage Article 8. That was  not
correct.  Kugathas  required  a  fact-sensitive  approach,  and  should  be
understood in the light of the subsequent case law  summarised  in  Ghising
(family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT  160  (IAC)  and  Singh
[2015] EWCA Civ 630.  There is no legal or factual presumption  as  to  the
existence or absence of family life for the purposes of Article  8  nor  is
there any requirement of exceptionality. It all depends on the  facts.  The
love and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings do  not  of
itself justify a finding of a family life. There has to be something  more.
A young adult living with his parents or siblings  would  normally  have  a
family life to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family life
with his parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life at  midnight
as he turned 18 years of age. On the  other  hand,  a  young  adult  living
independently of his parents might well not have  a  family  life  for  the
purposes of Article 8.

13. The Judge gives clear  and  sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  he
cannot rely on the independent social work report. The author of the  report
was not available to give evidence;  the  appellant's  son  was.  The  Judge
explains at [51] that  having  seen  and  heard  the  appellant's  son  give
evidence he  could  not  liken  him  to  the  young  man  described  in  the
independent social work report. The Judge explains that  the  special  needs
identified for the appellant's son are an  historical  matter.  There  is  a
difference between the appellant's sons needs between 2009 -  2015  and  his
needs at the date of the Judge's decision.

14. Between [48] and [54] the Judge sets out adequate  reasons  for  finding
that the appellant does not establish family  life  within  the  meaning  of
article 8 of the 1950 convention. The Judge does  not  simply  look  at  the
appellant's  son's  age.  The  Judge  considers  all  of  the  evidence  and
evaluates the evidence to determine the nature of the  relationship  between
the appellant and her son. Having  done  that,  the  Judge  finds  that  the
nature  of  the  relationship  between  two  adults  lacks  the  degree   of
dependency necessary to engage article 8. The  Judge  finds  that  it  is  a
relationship of love and affection.

15. At [55] the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  establishes  article  8
private life. At [58] the Judge considers paragraph  276ADE  of  the  rules,
and finds that the  appellant  does  not  establish  that  very  significant
obstacles to integration exist.   From  [59]  to  [68]  the  Judge  takes  a
balance sheet approach, weighing the component parts of  article  8  private
life that the appellant enjoys against the public  interest  in  immigration
control. Having carried  out  that  assessment,  the  Judge  makes  a  clear
finding at [68] that the respondent's decision, against which the  appellant
appeals, is proportionate.

16. In R (on the application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v  SSHD  (NIA  2002:  Part
5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC) it was held  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
considering whether there is an error of law in the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal involving Article 8 proportionality, the  task  of  the  Upper
Tribunal  is  confined  (at  that  point)  to  deciding  if  the  First-tier
Tribunal's  assessment  of  where  to  strike  the  balance  was   unlawful,
according to the error of law principles set out in  R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
Civ 982. In R (Iran) v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 the  Court  of  Appeal  said
that a decision on proportionality of an Adjudicator  or  Immigration  Judge
who has properly directed himself can only be overturned on  reconsideration
on traditional public law grounds.

17. I have no doubt that there is a strong, reciprocated, bond of  love  and
affection between the appellant and her son, but the  Judge  gives  adequate
reasons for finding that the relationship is a normal  relationship  between
parent and adult child lacking the extra element of dependency  which  would
engage article 8. The Judge  gives  sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that
article 8 family life is not engaged in this appeal. The  Judge  finds  that
article 8 private life is  established,  and  carries  out  a  well-balanced
proportionality exercise.

18.     In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

19. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the evidence. There is nothing unfair in the procedure adopted  nor  in  the
manner in which the evidence was considered. There  is  nothing  wrong  with
the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  The  appellant  might  not  like  the
conclusion that the Judge arrived at, but that conclusion is the  result  of
the correctly applied legal equation. The  correct  test  in  law  has  been
applied. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

20.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

21.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 18 January 2019, stands.





Signed
                   Date 5 August 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
