
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24446/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|means)                               |                                     |
|On 9th March 2021                    |On 29th March 2021                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 DEVI GURUNG
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph of Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    file contained the documents  primarily  in  paper  format,  with  some
    documents available electronically.

 2. In an error of law decision promulgated on 8 December 2020 and  annexed
    to this decision, I found an error of law in the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Scolly  promulgated  on  16  July  2019  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  her  human  rights
    claim was dismissed.   That  decision  was  set  aside  with  preserved
    findings of fact.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 27 July 1969, who applied
    together with her mother for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as
    dependent family members of her late father, a Gurkha  soldier,  on  14
    August 2018.  The Appellant's mother's application was  successful  and
    she came to the United Kingdom on 2 December 2018.

 4. The Appellant's application was refused on 29 October 2018 on the basis
    that the Appellant did not meet the requirements for a grant  of  leave
    to remain under the Immigration Rules, nor under the Gurkha policy.  It
    was not accepted that the Appellant had family life with her mother for
    the purposes of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human rights
    and in any event, the refusal was proportionate.  The Respondent relied
    upon the Appellant's mother's choice to settle in the United Kingdom in
    the knowledge that the Appellant would not qualify and that there  were
    remaining siblings in Nepal.  An Entry Clearance Manager maintained the
    decision on 12 March 2019.

 5. The Appellant's appeal is to be remade on Article 8  grounds  with  the
    following preserved findings of fact:

       - the Appellant has lived all of her life in Nepal, living  with  one
         or both of her parents up until  her  mother  came  to  the  United
         Kingdom on 2 December 2018;

       - the Appellant's father served in the British Gurkha  regiment  from
         23 December 1961 to 26 July 1976.  The Appellant's father  died  on
         24 February 2016 and at that time was married  to  the  Appellant's
         mother, his second wife.  The Appellant's father's first wife  died
         on 6 January 2014 and his third wife, whom he married  on  22  June
         2015, survives him and is living in Nepal with her mother;

       - the Appellant's mother is in receipt of housing benefit and pension
         credit, from which  she  has  provided  financial  support  through
         remittances to the Appellant in Nepal;

       - the Appellant's mother has a savings account in Kathmandu  and  she
         has given the Appellant  authority  to  operate  this  account  and
         withdraw funds from it;

       - the Appellant's father did not  and  would  not  have  applied  for
         residence in the United Kingdom, even if he had the opportunity  to
         do so prior to 2009 and he did not do so after that point up to his
         death (as such there is no historic injustice in the present case).

 6. There was  no  further  evidence  submitted  by  the  Respondent.   The
    Appellant  submitted  an  updated  bundle,  including  further  written
    statements and evidence updating the position since the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The Appellant's written statements, dated 8 July 2019 and  22  December
    2020,  set  out  her  family  and  her  education/qualifications.   The
    Appellant states that she has  never  been  married,  in  any  form  of
    relationship nor has she ever  had  any  employment.   The  Appellant's
    father wanted to settle in the United Kingdom but previously there  was
    no route for the family to move together and in his later years he  was
    too ill to apply.

 8. The Appellant feels lonely and isolated in Nepal without her mother and
    worries about her living in the United Kingdom by herself and not being
    able to speak English.  They continue to communicate using viber,  with
    the assistance of the Appellant's mother's landlord as she is illterate
    and would not be able to use a smartphone to  communicate  by  herself.
    The Appellant has not celebrated any national festivals in Nepal  since
    her mother left, feeling lonely, stressed and anxious, with  difficulty
    sleeping and has lost weight.

 9. The Appellant states  that  the  her  mother  has  pain  in  her  legs,
    diabetes, gastric problems, high blood pressure  and  uric  acid.   The
    Appellant's mother has told her that life is more  challenging  in  the
    United Kingdom and more stressful, as  she  must  rely  on  others  for
    shopping, cooking, making an appointment  with  the  GP  and  household
    chores.  There are no close family members in the United  Kingdom.   In
    Nepal, the Appellant would take care  of  her  mother,  cook  for  her,
    change her clothes, wash her and take her to the doctors.

10. The Appellant's mother's written statements, dated 5 March 2019 and  23
    December  2020,  set  out  her  family   relationships   and   personal
    circumstances.  The Appellant's mother states that  she  is  illiterate
    and had never been to school, only being able to count a  small  amount
    of money.  She is unable to walk at all without assistance, feels tired
    quickly  and  has  arthritis,  diabetes,  high   blood   pressure   and
    cholesterol; for which she is on medication but  sometimes  forgets  to
    take it.  The Appellant's mother is unable to  perform  ordinary  tasks
    and requires permanent care, which the Appellant used to  give  her  in
    Nepal.  Life in the United Kingdom is more stressful for her as she has
    to rely on the Nepalese community  for  small  amounts  of  help.   The
    Appellant's  mother  feels  very  lonely  and  misses  the   Appellant,
    constantly worrying about her safety and security in Nepal.

11.  The  Appellant's  mother  refers  to  being  nervous  and  not   quite
    understanding the previous court  hearing;  stating  that  her  husband
    agreed that he would settle with her  in  the  United  Kingdom  (having
    previously  taken  his  first  wife  to  Hong  Kong  with  him).    The
    Appellant's  mother  also  confirms  ongoing  communication  with   and
    financial support to the Appellant.

12. In addition there was documentary evidence of financial remittances and
    communication between the Appellant and her mother,  using  viber.   In
    the first appeal bundle, there  was  further  documentary  evidence  in
    relation to the Appellant's family and  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's mother's health from the Area Welfare Centre Bagmati  (part
    of the Gurkha welfare trust).  The latter stated that she has diabetes,
    hypertension,  osteoarthritis  and  an  eye  problem;  she  is   taking
    medication, has difficulties with mobility and has needed a carer  from
    February 2018 on a daily basis.  The Appellant's daughter  was  trained
    to look after her mother.  There is further evidence of  test  results,
    medication and  assessment  from  the  National  Center  for  Rheumatic
    Diseases.

The hearing

13. The hearing proceeded by way of  submissions  only  on  behalf  of  the
    parties, with neither the Appellant or her mother being called to  give
    oral evidence.

14.  On  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  Mr  Melvin  relied  on  his  written
    submissions and  opposed  the  appeal.   Whilst  family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights may
    have existed between the Appellant and her mother at the  date  of  her
    mother's departure from Nepal in 2018, the Respondent does  not  accept
    that it still subsists at the date  of  hearing;  even  accepting  that
    there is little evidence that the Appellant has formed  an  independent
    life in Nepal.

15. If family life is found to exist for the purposes of  engaging  Article
    8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights,  Mr  Melvin  submitted
    that in any event the decision is proportionate  because  there  is  no
    applicable historic injustice to the Appellant or her family consequent
    upon the  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant's father never had any intention  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom nor made any attempt to do so.

16. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Joseph relied on his  skeleton  argument
    and submitted that family life for the  purposes  of  engaging  Article
    8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights was clearly established
    in this case, with ties over and above those in a normal  adult  family
    relationship.  There are unchallenged findings that the  Appellant  had
    always lived with her family as a physical unit  and  evidence  of  the
    Appellant providing care to her mother in Nepal.  The Appellant and her
    mother made their applications for entry clearance  together,  with  no
    intention of being separated and the Appellant's mother was  forced  to
    travel alone when she did otherwise she would have lost  the  right  to
    settle in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant has been seeking  to  join
    her mother in the United Kingdom ever since.

17. The Appellant is financially  dependent  on  her  mother,  even  though
    dependency is  not  necessary  to  engage  Article  8(1)  family  life.
    Although the Appellant has qualifications in Nepal, she has been unable
    to obtain employment when she has applied for jobs in  the  past.   The
    Appellant has not deliberately manipulated her financial or  employment
    circumstances for the purposes of this application, she  is  simply  of
    limited financial means and has not been able to secure employment.  In
    any event, the Appellant is not  socially  or  emotionally  independent
    from her mother, in addition to financial dependence.

18. The family life between the Appellant  and  her  mother  has  not  been
    broken since her mother has been in the United Kingdom.  The  emotional
    and financial bonds have been  maintained,  with  regular  contact  and
    mutual emotional support and continuing financial support.

19. In relation  to  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise,  Mr  Joseph
    acknowledged the preserved finding of fact that there was  no  historic
    injustice in this case such that there needed to be a normal  balancing
    exercise.  There  is  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  importance  of
    maintaining immigration control, but it was submitted that  there  were
    no other factors adverse to the  Appellant  and  nothing  else  in  the
    public interest to be taken  into  account.   For  the  Appellant,  her
    mother's current position with support from her landlord is not tenable
    in the long term, she requires not  only  day  to  day  care  but  also
    emotional care  from  a  family  member  which  goes  beyond  practical
    assistance.  Mr Joseph accepted that there  was  only  limited  medical
    evidence available in relation to the Appellant's  mother's  conditions
    and no assessment of care needs or evidence of any approach to the  NHS
    or social services for support.  The Appellant would be  able  to  find
    work in the United Kingdom as she speaks English and has qualifications
    and still be able to provide care  for  her  mother.   Overall  it  was
    submitted that there are exceptional circumstances in this appeal which
    outweigh the public interest.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first issue in this case is whether family life exists between  the
    Appellant and her  mother  to  engage  Article  8(1)  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  If so, the second  issue  is  whether  the
    refusal of entry clearance is a disproportionate interference with  the
    Appellant's right to respect for such family life.

 2. The legal position for cases such as these considering whether  Article
    8(1) is engaged, is summarised by the Court of Appeal in  Rai  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320, from paragraphs 17  onwards,  as
    follows:

         "17. In Kugathas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2003] EWCA Civ  31,  Sedley  LJ  said  (in  paragraph  17  of  his
         judgement) that "if dependency is read down as  meaning  "support",
         in the personal sense, and if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  to  the  word
         "support", then it represents... the irreducible  minimum  of  what
         family life implies".  Arden  LJ  said  (in  paragraph  24  of  her
         judgement) that the "relevant factors...  include  identifying  who
         are the relatives of the appellant, the nature of the links between
         them and the appellant, the age of the appellant,  where  and  with
         whom he has resided in the past, and the forms of  contact  he  has
         maintained with the other members of the family with whom he claims
         to have a family life".  She acknowledged (at  paragraph  25)  that
         "there is no presumption of family life".  Thus "a family  life  is
         not established between an adult child and his surviving parent  or
         other siblings unless something more exists than  normal  emotional
         ties".  She added that "[such] ties might exist  if  the  appellant
         were dependent on his family or vice versa", but it  was  "not  ...
         essential that the members of the family  should  be  in  the  same
         country".  In Patel and others v Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Mumbai
         [2010] EWCA Civ  17,  Sedley  LJ  said  (in  paragraph  14  of  his
         judgement, with which Longmore and Aikens LJJ. agreed)  that  "what
         may constitute an extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what
         constitutes dependency, and a good many adult children... may still
         have a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
         leave or by force of circumstances but by long-delayed right".

         18. In Ghising (family life - adults -  Gurkha  policy)  the  Upper
         Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that  the
         judgements in Kugathas had been "interpreted  to  restrictively  in
         the past in order to be read in light of  subsequent  decisions  of
         the domestic and Strasbourg courts", and  (in  paragraph  60)  that
         "some of the [Strasbourg] Courts  decisions  indicate  that  family
         life between adult children and parents will more readily be found,
         without evidence of exceptional dependence".  It went on to say (in
         paragraph 61):

             "61.  Recently, the  [European  Court  of  Human  Rights]  has
             reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012] Imm.  A.
             R. 1), finding that a significant factor will  be  whether  or
             not the adult child has founded a family of  his  own.   If  a
             child is still single living with his parents, he is likely to
             enjoy family life with them ...".

         The Upper Tribunal set out the  relevant  passage  in  the  court's
         judgement in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs 46  to  49),  which
         ended with this (in paragraph 49):

             "49.  An examination of  the  Court  case-law  would  tend  to
             suggest that the applicant, a young adult 24  years  old,  who
             resides with his mother and has not yet founded  a  family  of
             his own, can be regarded as having "family life"."

         19.  Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasised  when  giving  the
         judgement of the court in Gurung (at paragraph 45),  "the  question
         whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends
         on  careful  consideration  of  all  the  relevant  facts  of   the
         particular case".  In some instances "an adult child  (particularly
         one who does not have  a  partner  or  children  of  his  own)  may
         establish that he has a family life with  his  parents".   As  Lord
         Dyson M.R. said, "[it]  all  depends  on  the  facts".   The  court
         expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46), as "useful" and as indicating
         "the correct approach to be adopted", the Upper  Tribunal's  review
         of the relevant  jurisprudence  in  paragraphs  50  to  62  of  its
         determination in Ghising (family life - adults  -  Gurkha  policy),
         including his observation (at paragraph 62) that  "[the]  different
         outcomes  in  cases  that  have  superficially   similar   features
         emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly  fact-
         sensitive".

         20.  To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
         Burnton in Singh v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgement):

             "24.  I do not think that  the  judgements  to  which  I  have
             referred contain any difficulty  in  determining  the  correct
             approach to Article 8 in cases involving adult  children.   In
             the case of adults, in the  context  of  immigration  control,
             there is no legal or factual presumptions as to the  existence
             or absence of family life for the purposes of  Article  8.   I
             point out that the approach of  the  European  Commission  for
             Human Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not include any
             requirement of exceptionality.  It all depends on  the  facts.
             The love and affection between an adult  and  his  parents  or
             siblings would not of itself justify finding of a family life.
              There has to be something more.  The young adult living  with
             his parents or siblings will normally have a family life to be
             respected under Article 8.  A child  enjoying  a  family  life
             with his parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life
             at midnight as he turned 18 years of age.  On the other  hand,
             a young adult living independently of his parents may well not
             have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."

 3. In essence, for family life to be established to engage Article 8(1) of
    the European Convention on Human Rights,  there  needs  to  be  support
    between adult family members which is real, committed or effective  and
    looking at the circumstances of  the  individuals  involved.   In  this
    case, despite the Appellant's age (now  in  her  fifties),  it  is  not
    disputed that she has not formed an  independent  life  away  from  her
    parents,  particularly  her  mother  since  her  father's  death.   The
    Appellant has, until her mother came to  the  United  Kingdom  in  late
    2018, always lived with one or both parents as a physical family  unit;
    has not married;  has  never  been  employed  and  remains  financially
    dependent on her mother.  These findings were either  preserved  and/or
    are upon matters on which there was no real challenge or dispute to the
    evidence by the  Respondent.   There  is  support  between  the  family
    members which is real, committed  and  effective;  both  emotional  and
    financial.  I find that family life for the purposes  of  Article  8(1)
    existed in Nepal and has not ceased to exist since December  2018  when
    the Appellant's mother moved to the  United  Kingdom.   Other  than  no
    longer physically living together, the Appellant  and  her  mother  are
    still in regular contact, providing mutual emotional  support  to  each
    other and the Appellant is still financially supported by  her  mother.
    In these circumstances, Article 8(1)  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights is engaged and following the five stage approach in Razgar
    v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27,  there
    would be an interference with the Appellant's family life but it  would
    be in accordance with the law and in pursuit of the legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control.  The final question is  whether  the  interference
    would be proportionate.

 4. On behalf of the Appellant and in light of  the  preserved  finding  of
    fact that the Appellant's father did not and would not have applied for
    residence in the United Kingdom at any time  prior  to  his  death;  Mr
    Joseph accepted that although this is broadly a Gurkha  case,  this  is
    not one which involved any historic injustice to the Appellant  or  her
    family.  As such, this is not a case in which the  public  interest  in
    immigration control, without more, would be outweighed  by  a  historic
    injustice if Article 8(1) is engaged.  In the present case, absent  any
    historic injustice, a  normal  proportionality  balancing  exercise  is
    required.

 5. On the public interest side of the scales, there is a  public  interest
    in the maintenance of immigration control in  circumstances  where  the
    Appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  or
    the Gurkha policy for a grant of entry clearance and where there is  no
    reduction to the weight of the public interest caused by  any  historic
    injustice.  It is not in dispute that  the  Appellant  speaks  English,
    which is at best a neutral factor.   The  Appellant  is  not  currently
    financially independent, but dependent on her  mother  who  herself  is
    supported primarily  by  public  funds  (through  housing  benefit  and
    pension credit) and by a widow's pension.   Whilst  the  Appellant  has
    some educational qualifications in Nepal, she has no work experience or
    employment history at all, such that it is at least questionable as  to
    whether she would be able to obtain employment in  the  United  Kingdom
    sufficient that she would not have recourse to public funds.

 6. On the Appellant's side of the scales, there is strong family life with
    her mother which has subsisted for her entire life.  That  family  life
    continues to subsist whilst living in separate countries  and  has  not
    been severed by the physical separation of  mother  and  daughter,  who
    have, albeit to a more limited extent,  continued  to  communicate  and
    support each other, emotionally and financially.  The interference with
    that family life is limited to the continued physical separation of the
    Appellant and her mother and is likely otherwise to continue as it  has
    done since December 2018.

 7. I have also taken into account the following matters.  First, there  is
    a  lack  of  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  mother's  current  medical
    conditions or their impact on her and nothing to  indicate  that  there
    has been any assessment of her care needs, or whether she  is  entitled
    to any more formal support in the United Kingdom beyond the  assistance
    given by her landlord (from whom there is also no evidence  as  to  the
    support currently given).  The Appellant's  evidence  is  that  current
    support is not viable long-term, but there is nothing  to  suggest  any
    alternatives have been considered and nothing to suggest there are  any
    needs are not currently being met.  It is undoubtedly the preference of
    the Appellant and her mother that any care needed  for  the  latter  is
    given by the Appellant, but little if anything  to  support  the  claim
    that it can only be given by  the  Appellant  as  a  family  member  in
    circumstances where there has, since the Appellant's  mother's  arrival
    in the United Kingdom, continued to be  mutual  emotional  support  and
    alternative practical support on a day to day basis.

 8. Secondly, although the Appellant's mother has leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, she also remains a national of Nepal entitled to reside
    there and there was no evidence before me at  all  as  to  whether  she
    would choose to remain in the United Kingdom or return to Nepal  to  be
    with the Appellant if this appeal were unsuccessful.  The evidence from
    the Appellant and her mother was both  that  life  was  hard  in  Nepal
    (financially and practically) but that life for the Appellant's  mother
    was also hard and stressful in the United Kingdom because she could not
    speak English and needed to rely on others - albeit I accept that  that
    may be eased with the Appellant's physical presence and support if  she
    were here.  Neither the Appellant nor her mother  have  identified  any
    obstacles to family life continuing in Nepal, as it did prior to  2018.
    However it  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  Appellant's  mother's
    finances may be affected if she  left  the  United  Kingdom  as  public
    benefits would not be available as they are now.

 9. Thirdly, there is no interference with the Appellant's right to respect
    for private life in the refusal; which she  has  undoubtedly  developed
    having lived her whole life in Nepal.

10. Overall, taking into account all of the circumstances set out above,  I
    do not find that the public interest is outweighed by the  strength  of
    family life between  the  Appellant  and  her  mother,  such  that  the
    Respondent's refusal is not a disproportionate interference with  their
    right to respect for family life.


Notice of Decision

As set out in the decision annexed, the making of the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal did involve the making of a material error of  law.   As  such
it was necessary to set aside the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and re-make  the  appeal
as follows:

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         19th March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

ANNEX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24446/2018(P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2020                         |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                 devi gurung
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Directions were issued by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  17  September  2020
    indicating  the  provisional  view,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, that this case was suitable to determine whether  there  was
    an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  if  so,
    whether that decision should be set aside, by a remote  video  hearing.
    The parties were given the opportunity to make  representations  as  to
    the proposed means of hearing.

 2. The Appellant had no objections to the proposed remote hearing  of  the
    appeal, nor did the Respondent in  her  submissions.   I  have  however
    considered that contrary to the initial view, this is a case  which  is
    on its facts suitable to determine the error of law  issues  without  a
    hearing at  all,  specifically  because  the  Respondent  appropriately
    accepts that there is a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal such that it must be set  aside  and  a  fresh  all
    hearing listed to remake the appeal.  In the circumstances it  is  most
    efficient and in the  interests  of  justice  to  issue  this  decision
    without a hearing to save any further delay to the final  determination
    of this appeal.  In reaching this decision I have  taken  into  account
    the Pilot Practice Direction issued by  the  Senior  President  of  the
    Tribunals on 19 March 2020 and the decision of Fordham J in  The  Joint
    Council for the Welfare of Immigrants v President of the Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2020] EWHC  3103  (Admin),  including
    the  benefits  of  an  oral  hearing  and  requirements  of  procedural
    fairness.  On the basis that there is essentially no dispute as  to  an
    error of law in this case, not that the decision should be  set  aside,
    there is no need for a hearing and this decision is therefore made with
    the benefit of the full appeal file under rule 34.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Scolly promulgated on 16 July 2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  her  human  rights
    claim (in the context of an application  for  entry  clearance  as  the
    adult dependent of the widow of an ex-Gurkha) dated 29 October 2018 was
    dismissed.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Nepal born on 27 July 1969, who  applied
    together with her mother for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as
    dependent family members of her late father who was a  Gurkha  soldier,
    on 14 August 2018.  The Appellant's mother's  application  was  granted
    and she came to the United Kingdom on 2 December 2018.

 5. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not meet the requirements for a grant of  leave  to  remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules, nor under the Gurkha policy.  For  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had established family life  under  Article
    8(1) and  in  any  event  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  would  be
    proportionate and any historical injustice outweighed.  The  Respondent
    relied upon the Appellant's mother's choice to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the knowledge that  the  Appellant  would  not  qualify  for
    settlement and that  there  were  siblings  remaining  in  Nepal.   The
    decision was maintained on review by an Entry Clearance Manager  on  12
    March 2019.

 6. Judge Scolly dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  16  July
    2019 on all grounds.  I return below to the detail of the decision, but
    in  substance  it  was  found  that  the  Appellant  was  (within   the
    Appellant's cultural context) emotionally dependent on her mother,  but
    not financially dependent other than by choice;  that  the  Appellant's
    mother chose to relocate to the United Kingdom leaving the Appellant in
    Nepal and that the Appellant was not an adult  dependent.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal also found that there was no historic injustice  in  this
    case because on the evidence the Appellant's father had no intention of
    settling in the United Kingdom, even if he had the opportunity to do so
    previously.   Finally,   and   overall,   the   refusal   was   not   a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right to respect for
    private and family life under Article 8.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on two grounds as follows.  First, that the First-
    tier Tribunal had materially erred in  law  in  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test for whether family life existed  between  adults  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(1) of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    placing too high a threshold on the level of  support  required,  which
    only needs to be support which is real, or committed, or effective  and
    dependency, whether or not by choice, is not required.  Secondly,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in concluding that  the
    Appellant's father never had an  intention  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom even if permitted to do so on  the  basis  that  in  his  later
    years, he had not made  any  such  application.   Although  no  further
    written submissions on the appeal were invited or received on behalf of
    the Appellant, the grounds of appeal are  clear  and  detailed  and  in
    light of the Respondent's position on this appeal, I  have  not  issued
    directions for any further written submissions.

 8. In her rule 24 response, the Respondent does not oppose the Appellant's
    appeal and invites the Upper Tribunal to find an error of  law  on  the
    first ground of appeal and list an oral hearing to remake the  decision
    under  appeal,  specifically  considering  whether  the  Appellant  has
    established family life with her mother for  the  purposes  of  Article
    8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 9. In relation to the second ground of appeal, the Respondent submits that
    it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to conclude on the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's mother, that her father  never  had  any  intention  to
    settle in the United Kingdom,  which  is  ultimately  relevant  to  the
    proportionality balancing exercise which will need to be undertaken  if
    family life is engaged.

Findings and reasons

10. The Respondent's position not to oppose the appeal on the first  ground
    and to accept that there was a material error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal is entirely appropriate on the  facts  of  this
    case and a position with which I agree.  Whilst the First-tier Tribunal
    has set out much of the relevant legal position in relation  to  Gurkha
    families in paragraphs 15 to 17 of the  decision,  expressly  including
    reference to the decision in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320 as to family life for the  purposes  of  Article  8(1)  between
    adults; the latter has not been applied when findings of fact were made
    in this case or conclusions reached.

11. In paragraph 47 of the decision, there is further self-direction as  to
    the question of whether Article 8(1) is engaged on the  facts  of  this
    case, with express reference to the requirement that support  be  real,
    or committed, or effective and that  a  fact  sensitive  assessment  is
    required.  The conclusions are set out  in  paragraphs  49  and  50  as
    follows:

         "49.  Given my findings of facts on employment and despite the fact
         that the appellant is single and has lived with her  parent(s)  for
         most of her life, I  find  that  the  appellant  is  not  an  adult
         dependent.  I accept that she made arrangements for her  mother  to
         have a home in the UK when  her  UK  family  asked  her  to  leave,
         however although she intends to care for her mother in the UK  this
         is not suggested to be an alternative to her working in the UK  and
         I therefore find that there is only a limited need for the  sponsor
         to have care.

         50.  I consider that Article 8 is not engaged as the  appellant  is
         currently able to enjoy family life  with  her  mother  should  she
         return to Nepal.  The sponsor is able to live in Nepal."

12. The First-tier Tribunal's decision on the engagement  of  Article  8(1)
    makes no actual reference to the legal test that has been properly  set
    out and instead appears to conclude that family life is not engaged for
    these purposes because the Appellant is not an adult dependent (despite
    being single and having lived with her parents for most  of  her  life)
    and because family life  could  be  enjoyed  in  Nepal  instead.   With
    respect neither of those points are relevant to the correct test and on
    its face, there is a contradiction in paragraph  50  which  appears  to
    accept family life in Nepal but  not  generally  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8(1).

13. The lack of relevant consideration of the correct test  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in its conclusion above is not improved by a  reading  of
    the decision as a whole, which includes extensive findings of  fact  in
    paragraphs 18 to 43 of the decision but which similarly do not  address
    the question of whether support is provided from the Appellant's mother
    to her (or vice versa) which is real, or committed, or effective.   The
    assessment of evidence and  findings  of  fact  focus  heavily  on  the
    Appellant's education, employment opportunities and that  she  is  only
    financially dependent on her mother as a matter of choice; which is not
    strictly relevant, as dependency is not required and even  if  it  was,
    the fact of dependency as opposed to whether it is  by  choice  or  not
    would be the central question.  Further, there is no clear  finding  by
    the First-tier Tribunal as to whether  there  is  emotional  dependency
    between the Appellant and her mother as claimed,  to  the  extent  that
    emotional support is real, or effective, or committed and instead  only
    a significantly qualified  finding  is  made  of  emotional  dependence
    within the cultural context,  the  significant  of  which  is  entirely
    unclear within the overall assessment.

14. Overall, the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing  to
    apply the correct test on the facts of this case as to  whether  family
    life was established for the purposes of engaging Article 8(1)  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal
    purported to go on to in any event to consider the  proportionality  of
    the decision for completeness, this assessment is infected by the  same
    errors as in relation to whether family life  is  established  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(1) as shown by the reliance on the same  findings
    of fact in paragraph 54 of the decision  to  conclude  that  there  are
    reasons other than the public interest to justify refusal.   For  these
    reasons the error in the first ground of  appeal  is  material  to  the
    outcome of the Appellant's appeal, such that the decision must  be  set
    aside and remade.

15. The second ground of appeal remains relevant despite the findings above
    given that it relates to what (if  any)  findings  of  fact  should  be
    preserved in the remaking and also because the Respondent  has  opposed
    this ground of  appeal.   The  second  point  concerns  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's conclusion that there was no historical  injustice  in  this
    case because it was not accepted that the Appellant's father  ever  had
    any intention to settle in the United Kingdom,  even  had  he  had  the
    opportunity to do so earlier.  The appeal is  on  the  basis  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to have  adequate  regard  to  the
    evidence before it of the personal  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's
    father, including his first wife, his  son,  his  ill-health  and  that
    there may have been many reasons why he was unable to apply  to  settle
    in the United Kingdom prior to his  death.   The  Appellant's  mother's
    evidence was not that he did not want to settle in the United  Kingdom,
    but merely that she did not know why he had not done so.  Overall,  the
    Appellant's case is that there was not a sufficient or reasonable basis
    for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  a  positive  finding  that  the
    Appellant's  father  made  a  positive  decision  not  to   apply   for
    settlement.

16. I find no error of law in the second ground of  appeal,  which  amounts
    only to disagreement with the findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on this issue.  The Appellant's mother's statement  asserted  that  her
    husband would have settled in the United Kingdom a long time  ago  with
    the family had he been given the opportunity after his  retirement  and
    that he had always mentioned  to  her  about  doing  so.   However,  as
    recorded in the decision, in the Appellant's mother's oral evidence she
    could not say why no application had ever been made, she had  told  him
    to apply but he did not.

17. The grounds of appeal by reference to wider circumstances and  possible
    reasons why no such application would be made, are  not  based  on  any
    evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  only  evidence
    which there was, was that the reason no application was  made  was  not
    known to the Appellant's mother.  On the  basis  of  all  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal on this issue, it was rationally open to
    the Judge to find, in  all  the  circumstances,  that  the  Appellant's
    father did not and would not have applied for residence in  the  United
    Kingdom, even if he had the opportunity to do so prior to 2009  and  he
    did not do so after that point up until his  death.   That  finding  of
    fact is therefore preserved for the purposes of remaking this appeal.

18. In addition, I also preserve the following findings of fact  which  are
    not infected by the error of law by the First-tier tribunal:

       - the findings in paragraphs 20 and 40, that the Appellant has  lived
         all of her life in Nepal, living with one or both of her parents up
         until her mother came to the United Kingdom on 2 December 2018;

       - the findings in paragraph 21 as to the Appellant's father's  family
         and circumstances; and

       - the findings in paragraphs 23 and 24 as to the Appellant's mother's
         financial circumstances and financial support to the Appellant;

19. I do not preserve any of the findings in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    employment or job seeking, nor about emotional or financial  dependency
    given that no clear findings were made on these matters  which  can  be
    separated from the errors of law identified above.

20. On the basis that only limited further findings of fact are required to
    consider the first issue in this appeal as to whether Article  8(1)  is
    engaged in accordance with the correct  test;  and  if  so,  go  on  to
    consider the proportionality of the decision to refuse entry clearance;
    the remaking of this appeal is retained in the Upper Tribunal with  the
    listing directions as set out below.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Listing Directions

Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and the  UTIAC  Guidance  Note
No 1 of 2020, and having  considered  all  the  material  on  file,  I  have
determined that the forthcoming hearing can and should be held remotely,  by
Skype.

 1. No later than 7 days after these  directions  are  sent  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal:

    (a) the parties may file and  serve  by  email  any  objection  to  the
        hearing being a remote hearing, giving reasons; and


    (b) without prejudice to  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  any  such
        objections, each party shall also notify the Tribunal and the  other
        party of the email address to which  the  electronic  invitation  to
        join the hearing should be sent.

 2. If no email address  is  furnished  under  paragraph  3(b)  above,  the
    invitation to the party concerned will be sent to the email address  to
    which these Directions are sent by way of service.

 3. Any application to submit further written evidence must be  accompanied
    by the proposed evidence and must be filed and served no later than  21
    days after these directions are sent out by the Upper Tribunal.


 4. Any application to call further oral evidence must be accompanied by  a
    witness statement capable of standing as the evidence in chief and must
    be filed and served no later than 21 days after  these  directions  are
    sent out by the Upper Tribunal and must indicate whether an interpreter
    would be needed for that  evidence  and  if  so  in  what  language  or
    dialect.

 5. A composite bundle is to be filed and served by the Appellant  in  both
    electronic and hard copy format no later than  14  days  prior  to  the
    relisted hearing.

 6. The parties are at liberty to file a skeleton argument, no later than 7
    days prior to the relisted hearing.


 7. The appeal to be listed before any UTJ on the first available date from
    4 January 20210, with a time  estimate  of  1.5  hours.   A  notice  of
    hearing will follow in due course.


 8. Documents and submissions filed in response to these directions may  be
    sent by, or attached to, an  email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
    reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the  subject
    line.  Attachments  must  not  exceed  15  MB.   This  address  is  not
    generally available for  the  filing  of  documents.   Service  on  the
    Secretary of State may be to [email].


Signed   G Jackson                           Date     30th November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


