
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24617/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2018                            |On 12th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    [E P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
                    Solicitors (Merton High Street)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Loughridge
    made following a hearing at Newport on 8th September 2017.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Albania  born  on  [  ]  1983.  He  was
    diagnosed with a serious mental health problem shortly after his birth.
    In June 2010 he applied to join his father in the UK.

 3. The appellant's father first came to the UK in  September  2001  as  an
    asylum seeker. He had separated from the appellant's mother some  years
    previously, in 1997, and the appellant and  his  sister  remained  with
    their mother after the separation. He met his British wife in the UK in
    2003 and they started a relationship. He then left the  UK  in  January
    2007 and submitted an application for entry clearance as a  fianc�.  He
    reentered the UK on 22nd April 2007, and married in February 2008. That
    marriage has since broken down. He has been here ever since, and is now
    a British citizen.

 4. The appellant remained in Albania, first  with  his  mother  and  then,
    after she died, in February 2007 after a long illness, in the  care  of
    his sister.

 5. The appellant's sister got engaged to her husband in June 2010 and  the
    appellant applied to join his father in the UK.  He was refused and the
    subsequent appeal was dismissed.

 6. The appellant submitted a human rights application to remain in the  UK
    on the basis of his mental health and his family life with  his  father
    on 20th January 2014.  He was refused without a right  of  appeal.   It
    seems that he entered the UK unlawfully in  October  2013.  His  sister
    arrived in January 2014 with her husband and two small children. He was
    encountered by Thames Valley Police in December 2014.

 7. The appellant submitted a further human rights claim in July  2016  and
    it was the refusal of this claim which was the subject  of  the  appeal
    before the Immigration Judge.

The Immigration Judge's Decision

 8. The Judge  set  out  the  relevant  law,  the  appellant's  claim,  the
    submissions made and then turned to his conclusions.  He said  that  he
    found the  appellant's  father  to  be  a  straightforward  and  honest
    witness.  The appellant himself was unable to give evidence.  The judge
    recorded that although the appellant could feed himself he only used  a
    spoon and that although he was able to dress  independently  he  needed
    prompting and his personal hygiene was poor.  The judge  accepted  that
    he displayed childlike behaviour from time to time, for example  having
    tantrums and becoming difficult.

 9. The judge did not doubt that when the appellant was living  in  Albania
    he was cared for first by his mother and then his sister.  He said that
    he did not receive any publicly available support from  the  healthcare
    or Social Services in that country, which was strong evidence that  the
    availability of that support was likely to  be  minimal.   It  did  not
    necessarily follow that some sort of professional  care  could  not  be
    arranged privately but that would not adequately address his  emotional
    or psychological wellbeing.

10. In any event, the appellant's father was not in a  sufficiently  strong
    financial position to pay for such care.  The judge wrote:

         "The harsh reality is that if the appellant returns to  Albania  on
         his own he would be extremely vulnerable and would not  be  capable
         of integrating into society in that country in any meaningful  way.
         If he went out alone he would be at risk of abuse from  members  of
         society   who   are   unsympathetic   to   people   with   learning
         difficulties."

11. The judge concluded that the only sensible  way  forward  was  for  the
    appellant to be under  the  day-to-day  care  and  supervision  of  his
    family.  He said that whilst the appellant's sister had been in the  UK
    for three and a half years and was here unlawfully it did not  seem  to
    him to be reasonable to expect her to return to  Albania  in  order  to
    look after the appellant.  She is a young woman with a life of her  own
    with caring responsibilities.  She could not be expected to devote  her
    live to caring for her sibling.

12. However, the judge said that what  was  reasonable  to  expect  of  the
    appellant's father was a different matter.  He  acknowledged  that  the
    father was in a difficult situation and he had the Tribunal's sympathy.
     He had looked after the appellant admirably for almost four years.

13. The judge concluded:

         "Overall, therefore, whilst I accept that  the  appellant's  father
         would suffer significant interference with his private life  if  he
         returns to Albania with his son, and whilst as a British citizen he
         clearly cannot be compelled  to  return,  it  is  not  in  my  view
         unreasonable to expect him to make that choice with the consequence
         that  the  appellant  would  not  be  left  to  fend  for   himself
         independently in that country but would instead have his father  to
         look after him.  I take into account the fact that the  appellant's
         father is no longer in a relationship with his second wife and that
         his relationship with his current partner, is relatively recent and
         has developed at a time when the appellant has been present  in  eh
         UK and the future has therefore been uncertain in terms of  whether
         the father might need to consider returning to Albania.  If he  has
         not previously thought about that option that is, in  my  view,  an
         oversight on his part.  It  is  clear  that  he  still  has  strong
         connections with Albania given that he has  returned  on  a  yearly
         basis to visit friends and there is no suggestion that he  has  not
         retained his Albanian citizenship.   I  see  no  reason  why  those
         friends could not offer help and support in  the  early  stages  if
         necessary while the  appellant  and  his  father  are  establishing
         themselves.  It may well be that the appellant's sister  will  also
         return to be with them assuming she is not  successful  in  seeking
         lawful status in the UK.

         In terms of the consequences of these findings to the Rules, and to
         Article 8, it seems to me the position  is  as  follows:  paragraph
         276ADE of  the  Rules  is  not  met  because  there  are  no  'very
         significant obstacles' to the appellant's integration into Albania,
         given that it is  open  to  his  father  to  return  with  him  and
         reasonable  to  expect  his  father   to   do   so;   it   is   not
         disproportionate to expect the father to compromise his own private
         life in the UK in order to look after his son in  Albania,  bearing
         in mind the very weighty public policy considerations in favour  of
         removal; and the difference in the provision  of  healthcare/Social
         Services support, as between the UK and Albania, is not such as  to
         satisfy an Article 8 private life claim on  the  basis  of  health,
         bearing in mind the high threshold for such a claim, the fact  that
         such provision is likely to make only a relatively small difference
         to the appellant and the fact that  until  2013  he  had  lived  in
         Albania without any significant problems."

14. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

15. The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  a  number  of  different
    grounds.  It was submitted, inter alia, that requiring the appellant to
    return to Albania and forcing his father to leave the UK  and  relocate
    to Albania would  clearly  be  unreasonable  under  Sanade  and  others
    (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2011] UKUT 00048.   Second,  it
    was argued that the judge had failed to have regard to material factors
    and established case law in relation to Article 8.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Simpson on 15th January 2018.
     Regrettably there was no reply filed by the respondent.

Submissions

17. Mr Lee submitted that the basis for  this  appeal  was  that  the  only
    practical way for the appellant to be  cared  for  was  by  his  father
    returning with him to Albania.  His father was a British citizen and  a
    citizen of the EU.  Compelling him to leave would  offend  against  the
    Zambrano principle.  On the findings of the judge, the  father  had  no
    choice but to leave the UK, which was impermissible.

18. He relied on the decision in Patel v The Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2028 where the court  held  that  there
    was no alteration in the test of compulsion, i.e. the  question  to  be
    decided is whether the British citizen would be compelled to leave  the
    UK and the focus should be not on whether the EU citizen  could  remain
    in legal theory but whether they could do so in practice.

19. Mr Tufan observed that there were a number of positive findings made by
    the judge which the Secretary of State could not challenge because  she
    had won the appeal.  He submitted that in practice there  would  be  no
    compulsion for the father to return to Albania because his  own  mother
    had returned there for medical treatment and it  was  clear  that  some
    support was available for the family there.   In  effect,  this  was  a
    disguised dependent relative application which could only be made  from
    abroad.

20. By way of reply Mr Lee submitted that on  the  findings  of  the  judge
    there was no-one in Albania available to  assist  the  appellant.   The
    judge had found the father to be a credible witness  and  had  accepted
    his evidence that he did not now have any family  remaining  in  there.
    The judge had also  found  that  there  was  unlikely  to  be  publicly
    available healthcare or Social Services support and had discounted  the
    possibility of his sister's assistance.  No challenge had been made  to
    those findings since no Rule 24 reply had been served.

Consideration of whether there is a material Error of Law

21. This is a detailed, sensitive  and  well-reasoned  determination.   The
    judge has approached his task with care.  Nevertheless I  am  satisfied
    that the basis of his decision was that the appellant's father would in
    practice have to return to Albania with his son. But for  the  father's
    return, on his findings, there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration into the country to which he would have  to
    go if required to leave the  UK  (paragraph  276AD(vi)).  However,  his
    reasoning offends against the Zambrano principle, which  holds  that  a
    British citizen cannot be compelled to leave the EU.

22. On that basis the judge's decision is set aside.

Remaking the Decision

23. I heard brief oral evidence from the sponsor.  Mr Lee established  that
    the sponsor was comfortable giving his evidence in English and  he,  Mr
    Lee, was content that that was appropriate.

24. [AP] told me that his mother lives with his sister in Greece.   She  is
    over 80 years old.  She  has  returned  to  Albania  for  a  couple  of
    operations for kidney stones and a gallbladder problem because  it  was
    cheaper for her to have surgery in Albania than to have  the  operation
    in Greece.  When she was there she was looked after  by  her  daughter,
    the  sponsor's  sister,  and  they  stayed  with  his  brother-in-law's
    cousins.  The sponsor said that he himself had three or four cousins in
    Albania and he sometimes went to see them when he  visited  there.   He
    had been in the  UK  for  eighteen  years  but  went  back  to  Albania
    reasonably regularly.  His late  wife  had  siblings  who  remained  in
    Albania as well.

25. His daughter was pursuing applications in the hope of remaining in  the
    UK but so far had been refused.

Submissions

26. Mr Tufan repeated his comment that  this  in  effect  was  a  disguised
    dependent relative application and it was  open  to  the  appellant  to
    return to Albania, possibly accompanied by his father, in order to make
    that application.  It was clear that there were other  extended  family
    members with whom the sponsor was in contact since he had been  to  see
    them on his various visits.

27. Mr Lee submitted that the appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi).  The only way that the test could not be met  would  be  by
    compelling an EU citizen to leave the EU, which could not be the proper
    answer.  The appellant's grandmother lived in Greece  and  was  in  her
    80s.  The fact that the appellant might have cousins in Albania was not
    relevant if they could not offer practical  support.   The  appellant's
    needs were great and it was not reasonable to  expect  members  of  the
    wider family to offer the kind of assistance which he needed.

28. Mr Lee submitted that the issue of whether the appellant could  succeed
    in making an application from abroad was  irrelevant  to  the  decision
    under paragraph 276ADE(vi).  He referred me  to  paragraph  51  of  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in R (on the application  of  Agyarko)  v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 where the court held at paragraph 51:

         "Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled  to
         remain in the UK only temporarily,  however,  the  significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be.  For example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable.  If, on the other hand, an applicant  -  even
         if residing in the UK unlawfully -  was  otherwise  certain  to  be
         granted leave to enter, at least if an application were  made  from
         outside the UK, then there might be no public interest  in  his  or
         her removal.  The point is illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba
         v SSHD."

29. There was therefore a spectrum of cases  whereby  the  public  interest
    diminished the more certain the  appellant  was  to  be  granted  entry
    clearance were he to return.  In any event, even if the  appellant  was
    not certain of succeeding in an out of country  application,  the  only
    way in which he could properly have his  needs  met  would  be  by  his
    father returning with him.  He emphasised that there was a  significant
    difference  between  the  theoretical  solution  of  the  wider  family
    providing support and practically whether they would do so.

Findings and Conclusions

30. This is an application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  that
    it would be a breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights were he to  be
    returned to Albania.

31. The only relevant Rule is paragraph 276ADE(vi), which  states  that  in
    order to succeed, the appellant has to show that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into the country to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.

32. The appellant was born in 1984.  He lived with his parents  in  Albania
    until 1997 when his father separated from his mother.   From  2001  his
    father was in the UK.  He left his son in the care of his wife and  his
    elder sister.  When his wife died in 2007 the sponsor did not return to
    Albania but left his son in the care of his sister.  It was after  that
    arrangement broke down, following the sister's marriage,  that  it  was
    decided that the appellant would be better off living with  his  father
    and his father has taken care of him for the last five years.

33. On the evidence it would appear that the sponsor's  mother  returns  to
    Albania voluntarily in order to seek medical  treatment.   Contrary  to
    the observations of the previous judge, the fact that the appellant did
    not receive publicly available support  before,  does  not  lead  to  a
    conclusion that it is not available.  The appellant did not need it  at
    that stage because he had his family looking after him.

34. There is clearly practical support from the wider family.  The  sponsor
    returns to see friends and family annually.  His mother and sister live
    with relations when they return for  his  mother's  medical  treatment.
    His late wife has siblings  and  they  have  children.   Moreover,  his
    daughter has no leave to remain in the UK and whilst the  evidence  was
    unclear it seems that her application to remain here has been refused.

35. The sponsor works very hard here.  He has two jobs.  He would therefore
    be able to use the resources which he presently spends on  his  son  in
    providing paid for care in Albania.  He himself would not be  compelled
    to live there because of the availability of help from the wider family
    and the possibility of paying for help for his son.  He would  be  able
    to see him on a regular basis by visiting or staying for longer periods
    if he chose to do so.

36. I conclude that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) because of the strong connections which the family
    retain with Albania. Until 2013 the appellant lived in Albania  without
    any significant problems.  For the last twelve years of that  time  his
    father was in the United Kingdom.  He still has his wider  family,  the
    likelihood of his sister's return and the financial contribution  which
    his father could make towards paid care in Albania.

37. The starting point for a wider consideration of whether  the  appellant
    meets the requirements for success under Article 8 of the ECHR  is  his
    ability or otherwise to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
    Whilst the requirements of the entry clearance Rules are  not  directly
    relevant to  the  consideration  of  whether  there  are  very  serious
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into  the  country,  they  are
    relevant in terms of the weight to be attached to the  public  interest
    in removal.

38. The Rules with respect to entry clearance for dependent relatives set a
    very high bar. In order to succeed the appellant  would  have  to  show
    that he was unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
    sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where  he
    was living because, either it was not available and there was no person
    in that country  who  could  reasonably  provide  it,  or  it  was  not
    affordable. It is by no means certain that they are met in this case.

39.  There  are  also  strong  public  policy  reasons  in  favour  of  the
    appellant's removal.  His presence in the UK will in the future involve
    a significant burden on UK taxpayers.  He would, as the original  judge
    said, most probably qualify for a range of welfare benefits.  There  is
    no prospect of his underlying medical condition improving.  There would
    be a drain on public resources were he to stay.

40. I do not doubt the difficulties which he would encounter on  a  return,
    having been in the UK for five  years,  but  he  has  spent  the  great
    majority of his life including his formative years in  his  country  of
    nationality.  Support would be available either from the family or from
    the State or by being paid for privately or a mixture of the three.

41. In these circumstances it would not be disproportionate for him  to  be
    removed.

Decision

The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.  It  is  remade
as follows.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 8 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
