
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/24299/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2021                      |On 04 October 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            mehrabuddin tarakhel
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J Rothwell, Counsel, instructed by Osmans
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hodgkinson ("the judge"), promulgated on  4  September  2019.  By  that
    decision, the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision, dated 15 November 2018, refusing a human  rights
    claim which had been made in the context of deportation proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born in 1994. He arrived  in
    this country in 2005 as a minor, was  initially  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain on that basis, and then obtained  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in March 2014. Between 2011  and  2016,  the  appellant  accrued
    seven convictions for offences including criminal damage to  possession
    of Class B drugs. The police also obtained information suggesting  that
    he had been involved in  additional  criminal  activity  for  which  no
    prosecutions had resulted. In August 2018 the respondent  notified  the
    appellant that deportation proceedings  were  being  initiated  on  the
    basis of his criminality. The  appellant  put  forward  representations
    which  were  deemed  to  constitute  a  human   rights   claim.   These
    representations  asserted  that  the  appellant   had   established   a
    significant private life during his time in the United Kingdom and  was
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a British citizen, Ms  K.
    The respondent refused the human  rights  claim,  concluding  that  the
    appellant was a "persistent offender", that there was  no  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Ms K, and that in  all  the  circumstances
    Article 8 ECHR did not preclude removal from the United Kingdom.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge considered both the convictions and the evidence relating  to
    additional criminal conduct. On the basis of that  evidence,  including
    admissions or non-denials from the appellant himself, the  judge  found
    that there had been involvement, as claimed by the police.  Taking  all
    matters  into  account,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  a
    "persistent offender" within the meaning of section 117D(2)(c)(iii)  of
    the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2002, as amended (the  2002
    Act). He then concluded that, in respect of the private life  exception
    under section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act, the appellant had not shown that
    he was socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.  In  a
    further  finding  the  judge  concluded  that  there  were   no   "very
    significant obstacles"  to  the  appellant  reintegration  into  Afghan
    society.

 4. As to the family life exception under section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act,
    the judge accepted that the appellant's  relationship  with  Ms  K  was
    genuine and subsisting. However, Ms K could  not  be  regarded  as  the
    appellant's "partner" due to the absence of cohabitation.  Further,  he
    found that it would not be unduly harsh for Ms K to go  and  live  with
    the appellant in Afghanistan, nor would a separation have unduly  harsh
    consequences for her.

 5. Finally, the judge considered whether there were  any  very  compelling
    circumstances in the appellant's case and  concluded  that  there  were
    not. The appeal was therefore dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. As drafted, the grounds of appeal essentially raised three  challenges.
    First, it was  said  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant was a persistent offender.  Second,  it  was  said  that  the
    private life exception  was  met  and  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    concluded otherwise. Third, it was said that the  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of Ms K's circumstances.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 25
    February 2020.

 8. Following the grant of permission, the respondent provided  a  rule  24
    response, opposing the appellant's challenge on all grounds.

 9. An application by the appellant  to  adduce  new  evidence  under  rule
    15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal's procedure rules was made in  advance  of
    the hearing. It was accepted that this had no bearing on the  error  of
    law issue.

The hearing

10. Ms Rothwell acted with customary professionalism in acknowledging  that
    her challenge was limited to the issues raised in the grounds of appeal
    (of which she was not the author). There was no  application  to  amend
    those grounds and, for the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  any  such  late
    application would have faced a very steep uphill struggle indeed.

11. The three ground of challenge identified  above  were  relied  on.  The
    essential thrust of the submissions under  the  first  ground  was  the
    absence of any or any adequate reasons by the judge in respect  of  the
    persistent offender issue. On the second ground, it was said  that  the
    judge  should  have  concluded  that  there  was  social  and  cultural
    integration, particularly in light of the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2027, which had come  out  after
    the judge's decision had  been  promulgated.  Finally,  the  judge  had
    failed to consider all relevant factors when  assessing  whether  Ms  K
    could go to Afghanistan with the appellant.

12. Ms Rothwell quite properly recognised that there had been no  challenge
    to the judge's finding on  the  separation  limb  of  the  family  life
    exception.  She  tentatively  suggested  that  there  was  a  "Robinson
    obvious" issue in this regard.

13. Mr Tufan relied on the rule 24 response and submitted that  there  were
    no errors, at least none which were material.

Conclusions on error of law

14. I have concluded that there  are  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

Ground 1

15. The judge was of course entitled  to  rely  on  the  seven  convictions
    accrued by the appellant, all save one having occurred after he reached
    his majority in July 2012. There has been no dispute in this case as to
    the ability of the judge to have taken into account  criminality  which
    had not  resulted  in  convictions.  Thus,  the  meaning  of  the  term
    "offender" in the  phrase  "persistent  offender"  does  not  fall  for
    detailed consideration here.

16. As to the judge's assessment of the evidence relating to the additional
    criminal conduct, I conclude that he was entitled to take into  account
    not simply the untested  evidence  from  the  police  officer  who  had
    compiled the evidence (but did not attend the hearing),  but  also  the
    implicit acceptance by the appellant that he had indeed  been  involved
    in conduct which, on any reasonable view, was criminal in nature. It is
    clear to me that the judge was aware of the various  sentences  imposed
    on the appellant and was conscious of the fact that the police officers
    evidence had not been subject to  cross-examination.  Contrary  to  the
    assertion made in the grounds and amplified by  Ms  Rothwell,  adequate
    reasons were provided by the judge between paragraphs 44 and 56 of  his
    decision. The stated  finding  in  the  first  sentence  of  that  last
    paragraph must be read in  light  of  what  preceded  it.  In  all  the
    circumstances, the appellant's challenge in truth seeks to require  for
    reasons for reasons.

17. The judge correctly directed himself to the guidance on the meaning  of
    who is a  "persistent  offender".  He  quoted  key  passages  from  the
    decision in Chege ("is a persistent offender") Kenya  [2016]  UKUT  187
    (IAC). That guidance was subsequently approved by the Court  of  Appeal
    in SC (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 929. I can see no misdirection in  law
    on the judge's part. He applied the facts to  the  law  and  reached  a
    sustainable conclusion.

18. There is no error in respect of ground 1.

Ground 2

19. On the issue of social and cultural integration,  the  judge  correctly
    identified the question as being fact-sensitive. He directed himself to
    what was  said  in  Binbuga  (Turkey)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  551  and  the
    impossibility of having had regard to  CI  (Nigeria)  really  makes  no
    material difference: the issue remains  a  fact-sensitive  one,  to  be
    assessed in light of all relevant circumstances. Here,  the  judge  had
    regard to a variety of factors: the overall criminality; the absence of
    any significant work history in this country; the absence  of  evidence
    to  indicate  involvement  in  "prosocial  society";  the  absence   of
    involvement in any criminal gang;  the  relationship  with  Ms  K;  the
    absence of immediate custodial sentences; the appellant's age when  the
    offending took place. It is quite clear that the judge had in mind  the
    appellant's relatively lengthy residence in United Kingdom and the  age
    at which he arrived here.

20. All-told, I am satisfied that no errors have been committed.

Ground 3

21. There is an insuperable obstacle in the appellant's path here. Whatever
    the merits of the challenge to the judge's finding that it would not be
    unduly harsh for Ms K to go and live in Afghanistan, the  fact  remains
    that no  challenge  has  been  made  to  the  additional  finding  that
    separation would not be unduly harsh either.

22. I do not regard the issue as  being  "Robinson  obvious".  Indeed,  the
    judge's conclusion is perfectly sustainable. Thus, there is no error in
    respect of the family life exception under section 117C(5) of the  2002
    Act.

23. In any event, I see no errors in relation to the judge's assessment  of
    the "go" scenario. The judge took account of  matters  relevant  to  Ms
    Khan, including her mental health.

Other matters

24. Whilst nothing else of any substance  was  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, for the sake of completeness  I  conclude  that  there  are  no
    errors in  relation  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  very  compelling
    circumstances under section 117C(6) of the  2002  Act,  or  indeed  any
    other aspect of his decision.

25. My conclusions inevitably lead to  the  dismissal  of  the  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

26. In light of recent events  in  Afghanistan,  it  may  be  that  further
    correspondence between the  appellant  and  the  respondent  will  take
    place. That of course is not a matter for me in this appeal.

Anonymity


27. The First-tier Tribunal made no direction and nor do I.



Notice of Decision

28. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


29. The appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.




Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 23 August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

