
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24478/2018
                                                               HU/24480/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2019                |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              (1) Musammat [B]
                                  (2) [R J]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    D S Borsada, promulgated on 15th  May  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 1st May 2019.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants  subsequently
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are both nationals of Bangladesh.  The  first  Appellant
    was born on 28th December 1981.  The second Appellant was born on  13th
    December 2006.  The  first  Appellant  is  the  mother  of  the  second
    Appellant, who is 13 years of age.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The background to the Appellants' appeal is that she entered the UK  on
    a spouse's visa on 20th June 2015 with valid leave until 27th  February
    2018.  On 15th February 2018 the Appellants  submitted  an  application
    for further leave to remain which was  refused.   The  Appellant's  son
    entered the UK at the same time as her mother, the first Appellant  and
    also made a similar application.  The basis of  the  refusal  is  that,
    although it was accepted that the Appellant was in a relationship  with
    a UK national and that the suitability and eligibility requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules were met, the  financial  requirements  were  not
    met.  This is because the sponsoring husband of the first Appellant was
    not working.  He was a British citizen.  Furthermore, the Appellant had
    a stepdaughter, who was aged 21 years, and  was  the  daughter  of  her
    husband from a previous marriage, and she was a  student  in  full-time
    education, such that she was also settled here as a British citizen and
    was unlikely to want to return to Bangladesh, if the Appellant and  her
    son, the second Appellant, were to be removed back to Bangladesh.

The Reason for Refusal

 4. In the refusal letter, the Respondent made it  clear  that  the  second
    Appellant was not a qualifying child under Section 117B(6).  No  reason
    was given why the Appellant, her son, and her Sponsor/husband could not
    live with her mother in Bangladesh which is where  she  had  previously
    resided.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge was clear that the Appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with her husband, the UK based British citizen.  The judge
    also accepted that the Appellant and her son had come to the UK for the
    purpose of settlement.  He observed that "therefore would have  had  an
    expectation   of   remaining   here   permanently"    (paragraph    7).
    Nevertheless, their failure, in circumstances where  their  status  was
    still "precarious", to remain in the UK was on account of their failure
    to meet the Immigration Rules, which made it clear  that  they  had  to
    satisfy the "financial requirements" of the  Rules.   If  it  had  been
    argued before the judge that there had been the tragedy of  the  murder
    of the Appellant's son in the UK, leading to a period of  grievance  on
    the part of the family.  However, the sponsoring husband of  the  first
    Appellant had not  been  working  even  before  then.   Whilst  it  was
    accepted that the first  Appellant's  husband  had  diabetes  and  high
    cholesterol, this was not a reason for his not working.  Moreover,  the
    judge was of the view that "it is difficult to understand why no family
    members came to the hearing and no  evidence  of  third  party  support
    (financial) was produced" (paragraph 7).

 6. The judge concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances to the
    Appellant's claim.  It was open  to  them  to  enjoy  family  life,  in
    circumstances where they had failed to meet the Immigration  Rules,  in
    Bangladesh, should they wish to do so.  There was no disproportionality
    involved in this regard.  The appeal fell to be  dismissed  both  under
    the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  undertake  a
    proportionality assessment, assessing the public interest under Article
    8(2) and applying the provisions of Section 117B, separately  from  his
    consideration of the Appellant's position under the Immigration  Rules.



 9. On 17th June 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 5th July 2019 the Respondent submitted a detailed and  comprehensive
    Rule  24  response,  pointing  out  that  the  grounds  are  merely   a
    disagreement with the negative outcome of the appeal.  The  Appellant's
    Sponsor had a British daughter, and she was an adult aged 21 years, and
    she could live independently in the UK if she so  chose.   The  younger
    child (the second Appellant) had lived in  the  UK  for  a  very  short
    period of time and was not a qualifying  child.   The  conclusion  with
    respect to proportionality was one  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 2nd September 2019, Mr Ahmed, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant,  had  a  skeleton  argument,  based  upon  the
    grounds of application.  He then raised  a  number  of  protracted  and
    confusing submissions.  He submitted that  there  was  a  21  year  old
    daughter, the stepchild of the first Appellant, with  whom  the  family
    relationship was  in  evidence.   The  judge  had  come  to  the  wrong
    conclusions under the Rules when assessing  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    (EX.1), but even if he was wrong about this, the  position  had  to  be
    looked at outside the Immigration Rules, and the judge had failed to do
    so.  Had he done so, the balance of considerations may well have fallen
    in favour of the Appellants, so that the judge would not  have  decided
    that family life had to be continued in Bangladesh, if at all.

12. For her part, Ms Aboni relied upon the detailed Rule 24 response.   She
    submitted that all relevant factors were considered by the judge.   The
    Appellants simply could not satisfy  the  financial  requirements.   No
    reasons had been advanced for why the Sponsor  had  not  been  working.
    The compassionate circumstances have not been overlooked.  The death of
    the young son had been properly acknowledged by the judge.  The medical
    condition of the sponsoring husband was noted.  All of this was done in
    relation to the  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  claim  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was not necessary for the judge to do  the  same
    when looking at Article 8.



Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  My reasons are as follows.

14. Although Mr Ahmed himself was unable  to  draw  my  attention  to  this
    despite my asking him to explain to me why the  Appellant's  sponsoring
    husband  could  not  relocate  to  Bangladesh  and  continue  with  the
    enjoyment of his family life in  that  country,  the  evidence  was  in
    existence before the Tribunal, such that it ought to have been factored
    into an Article 8 evaluation by the judge.  Thus, it was clear from the
    Respondent's refusal decision that the Appellant's  sponsoring  husband
    had maintained that he "was a British citizen, has friends  and  family
    in the UK, has worked here and may not wish to uproot  to  relocate  to
    Bangladesh and it may be very difficult for the couple to  do  so  ..."
    (see paragraph 4(i)) of the determination.

15. Although it was not Mr Ahmed who had represented the Appellants  below,
    their  representative  before  Judge  Borsada  had  argued  that   "the
    Appellant and her son had come here with the expectation  of  permanent
    settlement and the  evidence  they  had  given  for  why  returning  to
    Bangladesh was not possible was both  plausible  and  credible.   Given
    that the Sponsor/husband had been here in the UK for more than 40 years
    and therefore had developed a social and cultural life in this country,
    it will be unreasonable for him to give up this settled  life  and  the
    benefits of being a UK citizen" (see paragraph 4(iii)).

16. Accordingly, the fact that there was evidence to the  effect  that  the
    Sponsor who had lived in the UK for 40 years was not in a  position  to
    leave this country to relocate to Bangladesh or something  that  should
    have  been  considered  in  the  context  of  freestanding  Article   8
    jurisprudence, because it would mean that  family  life  could  not  be
    continued in Bangladesh.

17. This was an important consideration given that this was already a  case
    where the family life  was  being  enjoyed  between  the  named  family
    families this country already.  It was not a case of  the  family  life
    being resurrected in another country.

18. The question was whether the existence of a present family  life  could
    be continued in another country.  If  the  Sponsor  had  set  his  face
    against going to Bangladesh then such a family life will  be  ruptured.
    The  question  then  was  whether  in  the  light   of   Section   117B
    considerations of the public  interest,  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's could be justified.

19. Had the judge considered the position under Article 8, then what he had
    observed at paragraph 8, namely, that "a separation was given  that  he
    had held that, "I did  accept  that  the  couple  were  physically  and
    emotionally close and therefore I agree with  the  proposition  that  a
    separation  was  not  something  that  should  be   contemplated   ..."
    (paragraph 8).  The complete sentence went on to say that  "however  if
    they both went to live in  Bangladesh  they  would  not  be  separated"
    (paragraph 8).   The  Appellant's  sponsoring  husband  was  a  British
    citizen who had lived  in  this  country  for  40  years  and  had  not
    indicated any intention to go to Bangladesh and to live there.

20. In those circumstances, separation would have become  a  reality.   The
    judge had to consider this in the context of Article 8.  He had  to  do
    so because the judge also allowed  for  the  possibility  that,  "I  do
    accept  that  for  the  Sponsor/husband  the  adjustment  to  life   in
    Bangladesh  would  be  difficult  ..."  (paragraph  8).   It  is  well-
    established that he could not be compelled, as a British citizen, to go
    to Bangladesh.

21. The question was whether he would do so himself in  order  to  preserve
    his family life.  He had given no such indication.   All  the  evidence
    was to the contrary.  In the same way,  the  Appellant's  stepdaughter,
    was already living in this country  as  a  21  year  old  in  full-time
    education, but she lived as part of the family household under the same
    roof, and enjoyed a pre-existing family life with her stepbrother,  the
    second Appellant, as well as her stepmother.  Her position too,  needed
    to be considered under freestanding Article 8  jurisprudence.   In  the
    circumstances, given the failure to do so, the decision  of  the  judge
    below amounted to an error of law and stands to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (see
Section 12(1) of TCEA 2017).   I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This
appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be  determined  by  a
judge other than Judge Borsada, pursuant to  Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  of
the Practice Directions.

No anonymity direction is made.

The appeals are allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019




