
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 30 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 M S (INDIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel instructed by
     London Imperial Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge James sitting at Taylor House on 4 February 2019) dismissing his
    appeal from the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Department") to refuse to grant him leave to remain as
    a child who has accrued over  seven  years'  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   As  the  appellant  is  a  minor,  I  consider  that  it  is
    appropriate that he is accorded anonymity for these proceedings in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India, who was born in the UK  to  Indian
    parents on 17 November 2011.  Immediately after his 7th  birthday,  his
    legal representatives applied for him to be granted leave to remain  on
    the basis of family and private  life  established  in  the  UK.   They
    submitted that the appellant qualified  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private life under Rule 276ADE(1)(iv), as it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him  to  leave  the  UK.   Powerful  reasons  were
    required to remove a child from the UK who has been here for more  than
    seven years, and no such reasons existed in this  case.  Moreover,  the
    best interests of the appellant would be best served by  him  remaining
    in the UK  for  two  reasons:  (1)  the  socio-economic  situation  and
    facilities in India were far below standard or non-existent compared to
    the ones that he enjoyed in the UK; and (2) having been in the  UK  for
    seven years, he had established connections and friendships here  which
    it would be unduly harsh to disrupt.

 3. On 29 November 2018 the Department gave their reasons for refusing  the
    appellant's application.  His parents had entered the UK in 2010.  They
    were still nationals of India and therefore they could return to  India
    with him to reside there as a family unit.  Both parents had resided in
    India for the majority of their lives, and  therefore  they  could  use
    their knowledge of Indian society, culture and language to help him  to
    adjust to the way of life there.  It was reasonable to expect  him  and
    his parents to return to India as a family unit,  and  to  continue  to
    enjoy their family life together there.  While  this  might  involve  a
    degree  of  disruption  to  the  appellant's  private  life,  this  was
    considered proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining effective
    immigration control and was in accordance with the SSHD's duties  under
    section 55.

 4. His parents would be able to support him while he became used to living
    in India and enjoying his full rights as an Indian citizen.   He  might
    be enrolled in education in the UK, but it was clear from the objective
    information available that India had  a  functioning  education  system
    which he would be able to enter. He  had  provided  no  evidence  which
    indicated that his parents would not be able to maintain him in  India,
    or that they would be unable to provide for  his  safety  and  welfare.
    His parents had shown great resourcefulness whilst living  in  the  UK,
    and these skills would be transferable to India.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Both parties were legally represented before Judge James.  The  parents
    were in attendance at the hearing, and statements had been  taken  from
    them.  However, the parents were  not  called  as  witnesses.   In  her
    subsequent decision, Judge James explained that, at the outset  of  the
    hearing, the legal representatives on both sides had confirmed that  it
    was agreeable to deal with the matter by way of submissions only.   She
    continued: "This was accepted to be on the basis that all the  evidence
    would be weighed, both positive and negative, and it was not taken that
    the Appellant's evidence was unchallenged."

 6. The bundle of documents filed by the appellant's legal  representatives
    included a report dated 28 January  2019  from  an  Independent  Social
    Worker ("ISW").  The ISW concluded:

         "For a child that [is] making good academic progress in the  UK  to
         struggle within school in India could prove to  be  a  demoralising
         experience and affect  his  self-esteem  and  confidence.   Removal
         therefore has the potential to  adversely  affect  [M's]  emotional
         behavioural  development  and   identity   (Common   Framework   of
         Assessment  -  Child  Developmental  Needs).   [The  parents]  have
         advised me about the uncertainty that they may face,  in  terms  of
         even having appropriate accommodation and to cater for their  basic
         needs.  Consequently, this may infringe on [the  parents']  ability
         to provide [M] with basic care and stability.  (Parental  Capacity-
         Common Assessment Framework - Appendix 4)."

 7. In her decision promulgated on 26 February 2019, Judge James  conducted
    a detailed analysis of  the  documentary  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    appellant, and devoted over two closely-typed pages to a deconstruction
    of the report of the ISW.   In  a  passage  towards  the  end  of  this
    section, to which Mr Raza drew my attention, the Judge said as follows:



         "He refers to a potential adverse effect on the  child's  emotional
         behavioural  development  and  identity,  in  changing  school  and
         country, but fails to assess the positive aspects  of  such  travel
         and re-engagement in person with his heritage and  extended  family
         members in India.  All of these issues are addressed by the  social
         worker, which together with  his  negative  "assumptions"  are  not
         bolstered by any statements of the child,  thus  makes  his  report
         unreliable, and I give it little to no  weight.   That  the  social
         worker uncritically accepts all the claims of the  parents  without
         question, or reflection or the need to have it evidenced  by  other
         documents or information, is also a concern.  Such as the claim  to
         be homeless and without financial support upon return, and  failing
         to assess how this family unit has been able  to  live  in  a  more
         expensive country of the UK since  their  leave  was  curtailed  in
         December 2012, and the claims that neither parent works in  the  UK
         (the last employed position seems to  have  been  in  2011  as  per
         details on the  birth  certificate).   The  social  worker's  total
         failure to assess how the family have lived in the UK from December
         2011 to January 2019, the date of his report, a period of over  six
         years, is a major hiatus in his report, which materially undermines
         his comments and conclusions, as well as his opinions."

 8. The Judge went on to find at paragraph [10] that  the  appellant  spoke
    Punjabi; that he came from an international multi-cultural  school  and
    community, and that  he  was  versed  in  his  religious  and  cultural
    heritage of the Gurdwara. He was bright and  making  good  progress  at
    school, and there was no reason to believe that this progress would not
    continue upon his return to  India,  with  the  support  of  his  well-
    educated mother  and  his  well-travelled  parents,  who  had  had  the
    resilience to relocate to another country.

 9. At paragraph [11], the Judge held that the appellant may have  been  in
    full-time schooling since 5 September 2016, but he was  wholly  reliant
    physically and psychologically on his parents, and was  dependent  upon
    them for his learning environment  and  upbringing.   Although  he  had
    unknown friends at school, and an unnamed friend next door,  little  to
    no information had been provided about his  private  life  or  positive
    aspects of his life in the UK, as most of the evidence  relied  on  was
    mere assertions and arguments against returning  in  a  negative  light
    only.

10. At paragraph [12], the Judge held that during, his  very  early  years,
    the appellant would be primarily focused and centred on the  caring  of
    his parents and he had only start forming  an  embryonic  private  life
    since starting school in September 2016, which was fairly recent.   The
    Judge continued:

         "The best interests of child are a primary consideration  and  this
         includes remaining with the family unit,  i.e.  with  his  parents.
         Taking into account his  linguistic  skills  and  his  Anglo-Indian
         environmental background in the UK,  this  tips  the  balance  more
         towards remaining with his parents  and  travelling  with  them  to
         India (EV (Philippines & Others) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.   That  there
         is no educational imperative at this stage  in  his  early  primary
         school career, tends to weaken  the  private  life  claim  in  this
         appeal.  I do not accept that the Appellant has been distanced from
         his Indian heritage and country, in light of the  above  facts  and
         ongoing contact with his extended family in  India,  together  with
         their funding of his placement in the UK."

11. At paragraphs [14] and [15], the Judge applied the case law  of  Azimi-
    Moayed & Others (Decisions affecting children: onward  appeals)  [2013]
    UKUT 197 (IAC) and KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  At paragraph [16], the
    Judge concluded that it was in the best interests of the  appellant  to
    remain with his parents, and that it was reasonable for him  to  return
    to India with them.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. On 16  April  2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "The appellant says the Judge erred in her assessment of the social
         work report.  This is arguable as the Judge notes the social worker
         fails to assess how the family has lived in the UK for 6 years with
         neither parent working.  That is not necessarily  a  matter  for  a
         social worker to consider.

         It also appears that the Judge has not given full consideration  to
         [s117B(6)] bearing in mind the appellant has now spent the first  8
         years of his life in the UK."

The Rule 24 Response

13. On 14 May 2019 Christopher Bates of the Specialist Appeals Team  served
    a Rule 24 response  opposing  the  appeal.   The  Judge  had  correctly
    approached the issue of reasonableness from  a  KO  (Nigeria)-compliant
    starting point, having assessed relevant considerations.   The  Judge's
    criticisms of the Independent Social Worker's report was centred on the
    instructions given by the solicitors,  and  the  inconsistency  between
    suggestions that no  discussion  took  place  with  the  child  over  a
    potential return to India, and the Social Worker's assumptions based on
    inconsistent/omitted evidence from  the  parents  on  relevant  matters
    relating to the family unit's ties to  India  (not  least  to  extended
    family).   The  family  had  at  least  been  partially  supported   by
    remittances from abroad, a fact not appreciated by the  Social  Worker,
    who did not question how the family was supported within the  UK  since
    December 2012.  The Judge gave ample reasons to  sustain  a  conclusion
    that, notwithstanding the existence of a qualifying  child,  return  as
    part of the family unit was reasonable.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Raza (who did not appear  below)  referred  me  to  a  skeleton
    argument which he had prepared.  He developed two  grounds  of  appeal.
    The first was that the  Judge  had  misdirected  herself  in  law.   He
    submitted that she had not properly considered reasonableness  in  line
    with  KO  (Nigeria),  paragraph  [49]  of  MA   (Pakistan),   and   the
    Department's IDIs on family migration published on 23 January 2019.  He
    further submitted that the Judge had misinterpreted or  misapplied  the
    guidance on best interests given in Azimi-Moayed. Ground 2 was that the
    Judge had erred in law in attaching little or no weight to  the  report
    of the ISW. In reply, Mr Tarlow adhered to the Rule 24 response settled
    by his colleague.  He submitted that it was a matter for the Judge what
    weight she gave to the evidence relied upon by the appellant.

Discussion

The Latest Jurisprudence on the Reasonableness Question

15. On 24 October 2018 the Supreme Court gave their judgment in the case of
    KO (Nigeria) & Others -v- Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53.  Lord Carnwath, with whom the  other  Justices  agreed,
    said at paragraph  [16]  that,  unlike  its  predecessor  DP5/96,  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) contains no requirement to consider  the  criminality  or
    misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor and that it was impossible
    in his view to read it as importing such a requirement by  implication.
    At paragraph [17],  he  said  that  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
    substance of the Rule without material change, but  this  time  in  the
    context of the right of a parent to remain.  He inferred  that  it  was
    intended to have the same effect.  The  question  again  was  what  was
    reasonable for the child.

16. In assessing what was reasonable for the child, Lord Carnwath  endorsed
    as a highly relevant consideration the following guidance contained  in
    an Immigration Directorate Instruction (IDI) of the Home  Office  cited
    at paragraph [10]:

         "It is generally the case that it is in a child's best interests to
         remain with their parents.  Unless special  factors  apply,  it  is
         generally reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK  with  their
         parents, particularly if the parents have no right to remain in the
         UK (my emphasis)."

17. At paragraph [17], Lord Carnwath said:

         "The list of relevant factors set out in the IDI Guidance (para  10
         above) seems to me wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the
         context of section 117B(6) as with paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)."

18. At paragraph [18], he continued:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI Guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it would normally be reasonable for  the  child  to  be  with
         them.  To that  extent,  the  record  of  the  parents  may  become
         indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have  a  right
         to remain here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even  on  that
         hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to leave  that
         the provision may give the parents a right to remain."

19. Lord Carnwath went on to say that the point was well expressed by  Lord
    Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) -v- SSHD [2007] SLT 1245 at  22,  and  also  by
    Lewison LJ in  EV  (Philippines)  -v-  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  at
    paragraph [58].  Lewison LJ said, inter alia, as follows:  "If  neither
    parent has the right to remain, then that is a background against which
    the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question would  be:  is
    it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to
    remain to the country of origin?"

20. Lord Carnwath said, at [19], that, to the extent that Elias LJ may have
    suggested otherwise in  MA  (Pakistan)  at  paragraph  [40],  he  would
    respectfully disagree.  There was nothing in  the  section  to  suggest
    that "reasonableness" was considered otherwise than in the  real  world
    in which the children find themselves.

21. At paragraphs [46]-[52], in which Lord Carnwath gave  his  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeals of NS and AR.  Both appeals  featured  blameless
    children who had resided in the UK for over 10 years at the time of the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 5 November 2014.

22. Both claimants had entered the UK as students, on 19 February 2004  and
    4 February 2003 respectively.  NS's wife and older child had entered as
    dependants of NS in December 2004.  AR's wife and child had entered  as
    AR's dependants in February 2004.  In October 2008, NS and AR had  made
    separate applications for leave to remain as Tier 1  (Post-study  work)
    migrants.  In early 2009 the SSHD refused  these  applications  on  the
    basis that both NS and AR were involved in a scam  by  which  they  and
    numerous others falsely claimed to have  successfully  completed  post-
    graduate courses at an institution  called  The  Cambridge  College  of
    Learning.

23. NS and AR both appealed against the SSHD's decision, and their  appeals
    were ultimately joined, and came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins.
    In his decision issued on 5 November 2014, he  dismissed  the  appeals.
    With regard to the children, he had no difficulty  in  concluding  that
    the best interests of the children required that they remain in the  UK
    with their parents. That, from their point of view, would be  an  ideal
    result.  He reminded himself that one of  the  children,  particularly,
    had been in the UK for more than 10 years,  and  this  represented  the
    greater part of her young  life  and  she  was  someone  who  could  be
    expected to be establishing a private and family life outside the home.
     He also reminded himself that none of the children had any  experience
    of life outside the UK and they were happy,  settled  and  doing  well.
    But the fact was that their parents  had  no  right  to  remain  unless
    removal would contravene their human rights. Given their behaviour,  it
    would be outrageous for them to be permitted to remain in the UK: "They
    must go and in all the circumstances I find that the  other  appellants
    must go with them."

24. Mr Knafler QC, on behalf of the children, submitted that  the  decision
    of UTJ Perkins was erroneous in law as parental misconduct should  have
    been disregarded.  However, Lord Carnwath said at paragraph [51]:

         "I accept that UTJ Perkins' final conclusion is  arguably  open  to
         the  interpretation  that  the  "outrageousness"  of  the  parents'
         conduct was  somehow  relevant  to  the  conclusion  under  section
         117B(6).  However, read in its full context,  I  do  not  think  he
         erred in that respect.  He correctly directed  himself  as  to  the
         wording of the subsection.  The parents' conduct  was  relevant  in
         that it meant that they had  to  leave  the  country.   As  I  have
         explained (para 18 above) it is in that context that it had  to  be
         considered whether it is reasonable for the children to leave  with
         them. Their best interests would have been for the whole family  to
         remain here.  But in the context where the parents  had  to  leave,
         the natural expectation would be that the children  would  go  with
         them, and there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by  the  Judge
         to suggest that that would be other than reasonable (my emphasis)".

25. The outcome for the child who had over 10 years residence was thus  the
    same under the new dispensation as it was under the  old  one.  It  was
    reasonable to expect her to leave the UK under a real world assessment.
    It was also reasonable to expect her to leave the UK  pursuant  to  the
    "ideal world" two stage test such as  was  classically  articulated  by
    Clarke LJ in EV (Philippines), and which was  cited  with  approval  by
    Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  Stage  1  was  an
    assessment of the child's best interests in an ideal world, without any
    immigration  overtones.  Stage  2  was  taking   into   account   wider
    proportionality considerations, which might tip the balance  in  favour
    of removal of parent and child, particularly if the best  interests  in
    the child remaining in the UK were not overwhelming.

26. The effect of KO is that the two stage test is no longer permissible as
    a means of answering the question whether it is  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the UK.  As is illuminated by the discussion of  the
    Upper Tribunal in JG (S 117B (6): Reasonable to leave UK) Turkey [2019]
    UKUT 00072 (IAC), the consequence of  a  real  world  assessment  which
    excludes from consideration the gravity of the parent's  misconduct  is
    that what might otherwise be reasonable, and hence proportionate, under
    the two stage approach is not necessarily going to be reasonable  under
    the required KO approach, particularly as the ratio decidendi of JG  is
    that Section 117B(6) requires a court of tribunal to  hypothesise  that
    the child in question would leave the UK, even if this is not likely to
    be the case.

27. However, while the required KO approach saved the day for the  claimant
    in JG, logically it would have been problematic in MT and  ET  (child's
    best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] 88  (IAC),  which  the
    appellant's legal representatives cited in their covering  letter.  The
    ratio decidendi of that case was that the immigration  history  of  the
    parent was not so bad as  to  constitute  a  powerful  reason  for  the
    removal of the erring parent and the qualifying child to  Nigeria.  But
    in retrospect the wrong question was  being  answered,  and  the  wrong
    methodology was being applied (the two stage test discussed supra). The
    question should have been: was it reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK with the parent who had no right to remain?

Ground 1

28. In the application for permission to appeal, which was not  settled  by
    Mr Raza, the asserted misdirection in law by  the  Judge  is  put  very
    starkly.  It is pleaded that the Judge misdirected herself at paragraph
    [15] in stating that the ultimate question is whether it is  reasonable
    to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to the
    country of origin. It is  pleaded  that  such  an  approach  completely
    defeats the purpose of section 117B(6),  and  it  is  surely  not  what
    Parliament intended.

29. The line taken by Mr Raza is more nuanced.  He accepts that  the  Judge
    has posed the right question at paragraph [15] of her decision.  But he
    submits that the Judge has failed  to  factor  into  her  analysis  the
    countervailing principle affirmed by the Upper Tribunal in  cases  such
    as MT & ET, and also by the Court of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan).   The
    principle in question is that once a child  has  accrued  seven  years'
    residence in the UK, powerful reasons are required  to  remove  such  a
    child. At paragraph [49] of MA, Elias LJ said: "The fact that the child
    has been in the UK for seven years would need to be  given  significant
    weight in the proportionality exercise for two related reasons:  first,
    because of its relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the
    child's best  interests;  and  second,  because  it  establishes  as  a
    starting point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
    reasons to the contrary."

30. I do not consider that the  Judge  misdirected  herself  in  law.   The
    entire discussion in MA (Pakistan) is predicated on the  acceptance  of
    the "ideal  world"  two  stage  test  expounded  by  Clarke  LJ  in  EV
    (Philippines).  KO (Nigeria) has transformed the  landscape  such  that
    the ideal world approach is no longer fit for purpose in the context of
    resolving the question of reasonableness. KO (Nigeria)  resurrects  the
    alternative real world approach also  championed  in  EV  (Philippines)
    where the immigration status  of  the  parents  becomes  the  essential
    background to the assessment, and not a matter which is postponed until
    after the best interests of the child have been assessed  in  an  ideal
    world  (i.e.  in  a  world  where  the  parents'  lack  of  status   is
    irrelevant).

31. In Azimi-Moayed & Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal gave the following guidance:

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

32. The effect of KO (Nigeria) is that the first principle  stated  in  the
    Azimi-Moayed guidance is elevated in its significance and  impact:  the
    fact that both parents have no right to remain in  the  UK  becomes  in
    itself a powerful reason why it is both in the qualifying child's  best
    interests to leave the UK with both his parents, and also reasonable to
    expect the child to do so.  This is typified  by  the  outcome  of  the
    appeals NS and AR in the Supreme Court.   The  qualifying  children  in
    those appeals had very strong private life claims, as they had  accrued
    well over seven years' residence from the age  of  four.   Nonetheless,
    applying a real world assessment, the outcome was the same, even though
    the adverse immigration history of their parents  could  not  be  taken
    into account.

33. The Judge was right to direct herself in line with the  best  interests
    guidance given by the Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed,  as  this  guidance  is
    more in line with the required real world approach  than  is  the  best
    interests guidance given, for example, by Clarke LJ in EV (Philippines)
    which, as previously canvassed, is now an inappropriate  mechanism  for
    answering the reasonableness question.

34. Mr Raza submits that the Judge misapplied the guidance in Azimi-Moayed,
    as she failed to give adequate recognition to the third  principle.  He
    submits that it is implicit that "compelling reasons to  the  contrary"
    does not include the fact that both parents have no right to remain, as
    this has already been catered for in the first principle.

35. Arguably the guidance in Azimi-Moayed requires  updating  in  order  to
    bring it fully  into  line  with  KO  (Nigeria).   Nonetheless,  as  it
    presently stands, the guidance is  sufficiently  open  textured  as  to
    provide a working template for the  consideration  of  a  child's  best
    interests in a real world context. I do not consider that it only lends
    itself to the narrow construction which Mr Raza seeks to place on it.

36. The Judge did not focus exclusively on the first principle.  Consistent
    with principles two to four, she also took into account other  relevant
    considerations bearing on the question of where  the  appellant's  best
    interests lay, including  the  relative  strength  of  the  appellant's
    social, educational  and  cultural  ties  to  the  UK  as  against  his
    corresponding ties to India, and the advantages of him of returning  to
    the country of which he is a citizen.

Ground 2

37. The case pleaded in the permission application is that the reasoning of
    Judge James would be immaculate "if and only if the facts of this  case
    were different".  It is pleaded that the  Judge  committed  a  material
    error of law  in  holding  that  the  report  of  the  ISW  was  of  no
    consequence or of little consequence, as no doubts were cast  upon  the
    ISW's qualifications or experience.  It is  further  pleaded  that  the
    Judge completely disregarded the documentary  evidence  in  the  bundle
    confirming that the appellant had numerous connections in the UK  "just
    like any other child that was born and brought up in the UK."; and that
    the following findings of fact were contrary  to  the  evidence  and/or
    based on assumptions which were unsustainable: (a) that the child could
    effectively communicate in the language that the parents would speak in
    India; and (b) that the child  was  familiar  with  Indian  culture  by
    virtue of living with his Indian parents.

38. It was open to the Judge to treat the report of the ISW as  not  having
    independent  probative  value.   The   mere   fact   that   the   ISW's
    qualifications and experience were not in doubt did not mean  that  the
    Judge had to accept the ISW's conclusions.

39. Firstly, the Judge was the ultimate arbiter of questions of  fact,  and
    also the ultimate arbiter on the question of where the  best  interests
    of the appellant lay; and of the question whether the relocation of the
    family unit to India would  be  detrimental  to  the  appellant's  best
    interests.  Secondly, the conclusions expressed by the ISW  were  based
    upon the information which the ISW had received  from  the  appellant's
    parents.  If such information was inaccurate (as the Judge found), this
    was  calculated  to  undermine  the  probative  value  of   the   ISW's
    conclusions.

40. The Judge cannot be faulted on adequacy of reasoning.  On the contrary,
    the reasoning which underpins both her findings  of  primary  fact  and
    also her finding on the probative value of the ISW report is remarkable
    for its depth and detail.

41. It was open to the Judge to find that the appellant  could  effectively
    communicate in Punjabi and that he was familiar  with  Indian  culture,
    for the reasons which she gave. These included the fact that his father
    communicated in Punjabi and the fact  that  the  appellant  attended  a
    Gurdwara for religious worship.

42. Credibility is the province of the Judge, not the ISW, and so  arguably
    it was harsh of the Judge to criticise the ISW for not questioning  the
    parents' claim that they might struggle to make ends meet in  India  by
    interrogating them about their sources of funding in the UK (which - as
    was established at the hearing - is in part  derived  from  remittances
    made to them by extended family in India).  But the broad thrust of the
    Judge's critique of the report of the ISW is entirely sustainable.  The
    instructions given to the ISW were slanted so as to encourage  the  ISW
    to make negative assumptions about the  prospects  for  the  family  on
    return to India and the child's ability to adapt, and  this  negativity
    was reinforced by some of the information given by the  parents,  which
    the ISW took at its face value.

43. At the beginning of her deconstruction of the report, the  Judge  said:
    "It is unfortunate that instead of allowing the social worker to assess
    matters in an objective and open manner, the  instructions  are  biased
    and  slanted  with  assumptions,  such  as  referring  to  the   Indian
    environment as "alien", and the assertion that the  child  only  speaks
    English and is "unable to speak Punjabi".  As  the  judge  went  on  to
    observe, the latter  claim  was  undermined  by  the  ISW's  subsequent
    observation that due to the father's lack  of  proficiency  in  English
    language, he was reliant on the mother to interpret for him for some of
    the interview.

44. As the Judge also noted, at the interview that the  ISW  had  with  the
    parents on 13 January 2019, the ISW was given the information that  the
    appellant did not want to go to India  because  he  did  not  know  the
    country and did not know who was living there.

45. But, this was not a response that the ISW elicited from  the  appellant
    directly.  At the same time, the appellant's mother also told the ISW -
    in apparent contradiction of the statement referred to in [44] above  -
    that she and her husband had not had a discussion  with  the  appellant
    about the possibility of the family being removed to India.

46. Against this background, it was open to the  Judge  to  find  that  the
    wishes  of  the  child  were  a  matter  of  conjecture  and  that  the
    conclusions of the ISW were flawed because, among reasons, "[t]here  is
    an assumption on the part of the report-writer  that  new  experiences,
    including relocation to another country, is a negative matter and  that
    new learning experiences are negative for children,  which  is  clearly
    not the case.  It is also  assumed  by  the  social  worker,  based  on
    conversations with the parents, that the child has not had any exposure
    to India or its climate, failing wholly to address the Indian  diaspora
    and the international nature of  the  school  he  attends,  his  Indian
    heritage, and that he resides in a home where his  father  only  speaks
    Punjabi and little English ... or his links to and  contacts  with  his
    paternal and maternal extended family members in India".


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson











