
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24864/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34 of the Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Procedure                                   |                               |
|(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008                 |On 27 May 2020                 |
|On 21 May 2020                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                jagat gurung
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nepal,  appeals  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie who, following a hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 27 August 2019, dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the
    refusal by the respondent of the appellant's human rights claim.

 2. The appellant sought entry clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    dependant of the widow of a former  Gurkha  soldier.   The  appellant's
    father had retired from the British Army before the appellant's  birth.
    The appellant's parents subsequently travelled to  the  United  Kingdom
    and obtained  settlement  there.   The  appellant's  older  sister  and
    younger brother were  also  able  to  gain  settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant, however, remained in Nepal.

 3. After his father's death, the appellant received visits each year  from
    his mother.  The appellant has two children of his own, who  live  with
    him and his partner in the former family home.

 4. Having heard evidence  from  the  appellant's  mother,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge concluded that the evidence, taken as a whole,  did  not
    establish that there was a real,  committed  and  effective  system  of
    support between the appellant and the sponsor  or  that  the  appellant
    enjoyed a family life, protected by Article 8, with  the  sponsor.   In
    particular, the judge noted that the appellant, aged 39, had a  partner
    and two children, with whom he lived  in  Nepal.   The  appellant  had,
    according to the judge, set up an  independent  family  unit  with  his
    partner and children.  It was not material that the appellant  received
    financial support from his mother and family in the United Kingdom.  It
    was not uncommon for persons settled in  the  United  Kingdom  to  send
    financial support to their family members.

 5. The  judge  further  found  that  the  appellant  had  established  his
    independent family unit, at the time  that  his  mother  left  for  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge did not  consider  that  "considerations  of
    historic injustice weigh in the appellant's favour in the assessment of
    whether family life has been established".  The judge  considered  that
    the appellant "comes from a distinguished family of Gurkha soldiers who
    have served the British Crown with distinction and loyalty".   In  this
    regard, the judge gave consideration to evidence given at  the  hearing
    by the appellant's brother.

 6. In his grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  West  of  Counsel
    submitted that it was simply perverse of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    to state that the issue of whether  the  appellant  received  financial
    support  from  his  mother  was  not  material  for  the   purpose   of
    establishing whether there was an Article 8 family life  between  them,
    pursuant to the guidance on this issue contained in  the  judgments  of
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31 and Ghising (family life -  adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT
    00160.  Financial dependency was, Mr West submitted, a factor that  was
    highly relevant to the sensitive assessment of dependency for Article 8
    purposes.

 7. Mr West criticised the First-tier Tribunal Judge for giving  no  reason
    for his finding that the appellant enjoyed an independent life  at  the
    time that his mother had come to the United Kingdom.  In any event,  at
    that time, the appellant had been living with his wife  but  also  with
    his  parents,  in  the  same  home,  for  some  years.   The  question,
    accordingly, was whether the asserted family life existed at  the  time
    of his parents' departure and had endured beyond  it:  Jitendra  Rai  v
    Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ  320.   The  grounds
    submitted that it was difficult to see how the judge could  have  found
    the appellant was living an "independent life" when he simply  remained
    in the same family home,  with  his  wife,  as  an  unemployed  person,
    relying upon financial support from his mother in the  United  Kingdom,
    as well as his father's pension.  All of this  was  "exactly  the  same
    situation as at the time when his parents left to come  to  the  UK  in
    2005".

 8. The grounds further contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    erred in failing to make any findings upon the evidence of  visits  and
    communication  between  the  appellant  and  his   mother.    Emotional
    dependency was "a crucial factor in the assessment  of  whether  family
    life exists under Article 8(1)".  Substantial evidence  as  to  contact
    via messaging and calls had been put before the judge; but no  findings
    were made on this issue.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 10  February  2020.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who
    granted permission was concerned to highlight the ground  of  challenge
    regarding the  appellant  having  remained,  essentially  in  the  same
    position, both physically and financially, after his family left Nepal,
    as he had been, when living with them in the family home there.

10. The Upper Tribunal  hearing  was  listed  for  Monday  23  March  2020.
    Because of the Covid-19 pandemic, that hearing was cancelled.

11. Having reviewed the case, I reached a provisional view, in the light of
    the pandemic and in accordance with the overriding objective,  that  it
    would be appropriate in this case  to  determine,  without  a  hearing,
    whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the  making  of  an
    error of law; and, if  so,  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.  In so doing, I stated that I  had  taken
    into account the grounds drafted by Mr West.  I stated that there  was,
    as matters stood, a strong case that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    give adequate reasons for its findings and  that  the  case  should  be
    remitted.  My Note and Directions were sent to the parties on 24  April
    2020.  The directions  provided  for  the  appellant  to  make  further
    submissions, if so advised; likewise, the respondent.

12.  No  such  submissions  were  received  from  the  appellant   or   his
    representatives, Everest Law Solicitors.  However, by  letter  dated  7
    May 2020, Mr McVeety, a Senior Presenting Officer, informed  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the respondent "accepts that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is materially flawed for the reasons  identified  in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal and therefore accepts that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside in  its  entirety".   It
    was stated that the respondent "would be content for any re-hearing  to
    take place in either the First-tier or the Upper Tribunal".

13. In all the circumstances, I consider that the errors identified by  the
    appellant's Counsel are such as to constitute errors of  law,  for  the
    reasons advanced.  I further  consider  that,  as  a  result  of  those
    errors, an entirely fresh fact-finding  exercise  is  necessary  to  be
    undertaken.  In those circumstances, I consider  that  the  appropriate
    course is for this matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law.  I  set  the
decision aside.  I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


                      Signed


                      Mr Justice Lane   Dated: 21 May 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

