






UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/24822/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 12 August 2019                   |On: 03 September 2019                |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                 Miss C U O
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, counsel, instructed by Chris
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

                                  Anonymity

         Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. Both parties agreed at the error of law hearing on 26  June  2019  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 1 February 2019,
    should be set aside and re-made. I re-make the decision.

 2. Permission was given to the appellant to file and serve any  additional
    evidence. The appellant's  solicitors  produced  a  further  bundle  of
    evidence consisting of some 50 pages.

 3. At the commencement of the hearing I was shown a letter, dated 6 August
    2019, addressed to the appellant  from  Barnet,  Enfield  and  Haringey
    Mental Health Trust. This confirmed  an  appointment  for  her  at  the
    Haringey Community Services Farrell Unit scheduled for 19  August  2019
    with an intended duration of 60 minutes.

 4. The appellant's brother attended the  hearing  and  gave  evidence.  He
    adopted his witness statement signed and dated 30 July 2019 - pages  5-
    7. He confirmed that the contents are true and correct.

 5. He is the "biological senior brother" of the appellant. He  resides  at
    [~], Tottenham. He is a lawyer, working with [~] Solicitors in Hackney.



 6. He is a British national and is resident in the UK.  He  is  the  "sole
    carer" of his sister and she lives with him. He cooks food for her;  he
    shops for her;  he  administers  and  supervises  her  compliance  with
    medication. He provides all domestic assistance for her. In  the  event
    of a crisis he contacts the ambulance team. He takes  her  to  hospital
    appointments.

 7. His sister relies on him and feels relaxed when he is  around  her.  He
    supports her emotionally and financially. His other siblings also  make
    'little contributions' towards her care.

 8. The appellant has suffered from mental illness when she was  still  ill
    in Nigeria but it was not serious then. She became known to the  mental
    health services in the UK in December 2013. That is  when  her  illness
    became serious and she was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.

 9. The symptoms of her illness include  paranoia,  persecutory  delusions,
    grandiose delusional  beliefs  and  religious  references,  visual  and
    auditory hallucinations, stressful voices, response to external stimuli
    and not eating properly. She also has disturbed sleep.

10. She currently receives medical treatment from a psychiatrist, Dr Shamin
    Ahmad, to assist  her  mental  health  recovery.  He  referred  to  the
    psychiatric report of Dr Ahmad, produced in the bundle at pages  24  to
    29.

11. If the appellant were to be returned to Nigeria there would  be  nobody
    to take care or support her, as all her biological family  members  are
    resident in the UK and Ireland. His sister will have nobody  to  return
    to in Nigeria and will find it very difficult to adjust  and  it  would
    cause serious detrimental effect to her mental health.

12. Their only surviving parent, their mother, is permanently  resident  in
    the USA. She is a 72-year-old woman who suffers from  medical  problems
    herself. She is being looked after in the US by her sister,  [BO].  She
    is unable to care for the appellant on account of  her  age  and  other
    health conditions. He referred to a medical letter to that effect  from
    her doctor, Dr Borgman, dated 7 August 2019, produced at page 29 in the
    bundle.

13. He contends that the appellant will suffer from stigma  if  she  is  to
    return to Nigeria due to  the  misconceptions  and  'misbelieve'  (sic)
    about mental illness by Nigerian citizens. The general  belief  of  the
    cause of mental illness is that of supernatural forces,  evil  spirits,
    witches and gods of the land. People therefore isolate from  themselves
    those with mental illness and violently attack them by flogging them in
    the context of their beliefs that it will chase out the evil spirits.

14. His sister will not be able to access free medication and  may  not  be
    able to have treatment if she is to  return  to  Nigeria  due  to  poor
    mental health facilities for treatment and lack of personal  treatment.
    The cost of medication is high, assuming that it is available.

15. In reply to supplemental questions, he said that the appellant came  to
    the UK in 2008 to study. She completed a Masters in  accounting.  After
    that she started working in 2009 for two years.

16. He referred to letters from the appellant's younger  brother  and  from
    her younger sister, dated 30 July 2019 in which they  state  that  they
    are unable to attend the hearing.

17. He said that the he, the appellant and  two  sisters  are  in  the  UK.
    Another two elder brothers also live in the UK. There  are  accordingly
    four brothers and three sisters. There are no other brothers or sisters
    in Nigeria. His mother is in the USA and lives with her younger sister.



18. In cross-examination he said that his sister is  still  having  medical
    treatment. She takes medication, including antipsychotics. He  referred
    to the appellant's care plan produced in the report of Dr  Ahmad  dated
    21 June 2019. He states at p. 27 that the appellant will  benefit  from
    an injectable form of  antipsychotic  medication  and  he  proposes  to
    prescribe her Abilify Maintena Depot injection, to be administered once
    a month. Before that she has to take this medication in oral  form  for
    at least two to three weeks before they could arrange administration in
    depot form.

19. Dr Ahmad notes that he has had a discussion with her brother to monitor
    the medication which he has understood. He has  given  her  FP  10  for
    Aripiprazole 10mg once daily. He requests  that  her  GP  repeats  this
    medication and sends copies of her blood results done over the last six
    months. He will review her in three to four weeks for a follow up.  She
    has an appointment with the mental health trust scheduled for 19 August
    2019.

20.  He  works  full  time  in  a  law  firm.  He   is   qualified   as   a
    barrister/solicitor in Nigeria in 2002. He came to the UK in  September
    2008. He has a Masters from the  UK.  He  was  called  to  the  Bar  in
    Nigeria. He practised there for between three and four years.

21. He administers medication to his sister each day, in  the  morning.  He
    lives alone with the  appellant.  She  takes  10mg  of  the  medication
    prescribed each day.

22. Ms Jones asked why she would not be able to take this medication if she
    were alone in Nigeria. He said she has refused to  take  medication  in
    the past. When she stopped taking it, she had 'bizarre behaviours'. She
    responds to various voices talking to her. She claims  that  she  hears
    noises and that threats are made. He however cannot hear it.

23. The routine is that when he goes to work each  day,  she  goes  to  the
    library near the house and draws the whole day. He calls her from  time
    to time on the phone to confirm her 'wellbeing'.

24. She does not eat during the day. He gets her to eat vegetables  in  the
    morning. She purchases biscuits near their house. She eats  'this  junk
    food' during the day. She shows him the work that  she  has  done.  She
    does not read books.

25. Ms Jones asked whether she can get up and go to the library herself. He
    said she cannot. He follows her to the library and drops her there.  On
    some days she goes on her own. He then calls her in  order  to  confirm
    that she is in the library. She shows him  the  artwork  that  she  has
    done, which confirms that she has been in the library.

26. He sometimes goes there from work and he sees her there. He goes by bus
    from work to the library, which takes 20-25 minutes. He arrives at  his
    work between 9.30 and 10am and leaves the house at about 8am. He  drops
    her off at 8.10am. She  remains  in  the  library  between  8.20am  and
    5.30pm.

27. He said that there is no comparable facility available in Nigeria.  The
    appellant has also become religious. This has taken her over. There are
    'loads of her paper writings' on the table.

28. When Ms Jones asked why the appellant could not go  to  the  church  in
    Nigeria where she could spend the day, he said that  not  all  churches
    are open all day, or indeed every day. Some are only open at  scheduled
    times, such as during main services on a Sunday.

29. If there is a library, it is located in the  city  and  it  would  take
    about two hours to go there. She attends church on Sundays. She goes in
    the morning and returns at about 5pm or 6pm.

30. Ms Jones referred him to a passage of Dr Ahmad's psychiatric report  at
    page 26, page 3 where he stated that during his  assessment  it  became
    obvious that she was not eating very well. She  had  become  vegetarian
    and had lost weight. She complained of her food smelling  bad  even  if
    she had cooked it herself. She complained of water smelling bad as well
    as drinking only flavoured water from a bottle.

31. He also noted that her sleep  was  also  disturbed  but  had  no  fixed
    pattern and sometimes her sleep was disturbed  by  voices  saying  that
    "they will attack  her."  Her  sister  noticed  that  she  was  praying
    excessively and reading the Bible, sometimes for the whole day. She was
    going to church on a regular basis and sometimes was noticed talking to
    herself.

32. He said that the appellant lived in Tottenham. He has been there  once.
    She moved with her children from his house where they stayed until they
    could find their own house. They left about two years ago. He  has  not
    been to see them apart from on the one occasion.

33. He last went to Nigeria  about  three  years  ago.  He  has  a  British
    passport.

34. Ms Jones put to him that he has four flats in a building in Nigeria. He
    said his late father owned this property which was  passed  on  to  his
    mother. He died in about 2002. His mother owns it now. The property  is
    looked after by the caretaker. His mother receives the rental payments.



35. The appellant can wash herself and is able to get  dressed.  He  washes
    her clothes.

36. Ms Jones asked whether the appellant attends courses. He said she  does
    not. She did her Masters in 2008 until 2009. She has never divorced her
    husband. Her husband became 'unreasonable' when she shouted at night.

37. The appellant was seen by psychiatric services in 2012.

38. Ms Jones referred to paragraph 2 of page 1 of Dr Ahmad's  report.  With
    regard to her past psychiatric history, it seemed that she  was  living
    in Derby and was referred to psychiatric services  which  she  did  not
    attend. Full details are not available. She was seen by a  psychiatrist
    in Nigeria in 2012 and was given some medication which she stopped  due
    to side effects. There is no prior history of contact with  psychiatric
    services, nor any admission to previous hospitals.

39. He said that the appellant took a BTech and then did support  work  for
    children when she completed her Master's degree.

40. He confirmed that he was  present  when  she  was  interviewed  by  the
    psychiatrist, who has confirmed that her sister and brother  with  whom
    the appellant came, were helpful and provided further information which
    the appellant herself was hiding.

41. He said that there was a time that he called  the  mental  health  team
    when the appellant had a crisis. They talked to her, but after a  while
    they stopped.

42. She saw a psychiatrist in Nigeria in 2012 as she had a breakdown. He is
    not aware that any family  members  were  present  when  she  had  that
    breakdown in 2012. He became aware of this when she came to the UK. She
    had gone back to Nigeria with her husband. They later returned  to  the
    UK together. He does not know whom she stayed with in Nigeria.

43. Ms Jones referred to a medical  report  from  Dr  Garba,  a  consultant
    neuropsychiatrist at Wuse District Hospital dated  25  March  2019,  at
    page 10 of the bundle.   The  report  is  addressed  "to  whom  it  may
    concern". He notes that  he  has  been  instructed  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant to advise on the affordability and treatment of mental health
    patients in Nigeria.

44. In the report, Dr Garba stated that  the  numerous  challenges  that  a
    mental health patient goes through in "our  environment"  includes  the
    high cost of medication, poor facilities  for  treatment  and  no  free
    medical treatment. He described himself as a  consultant  psychiatrist.
    His report is written on formal hospital stationery. He does  not  know
    how the letter was  obtained.  Nor  does  he  know  who  paid  for  her
    treatment in 2012.

45. Ms Jones asked that evidence be adduced as to the  provenance  of  that
    letter. In response to that request, the appellant's solicitors sent  a
    letter to the Tribunal dated 13 August  2019.  They  request  that  the
    letter be taken as confirmation that they had instructed the Health and
    Human Service Secretariat, Wuse District Hospital, Abuja, to provide  a
    letter about the affordability and treatment of mental health  patients
    in Nigeria.

46. They have also enclosed a copy of their instruction letter sent to  the
    hospital on 4 February 2019, in which they informed the  hospital  that
    they are writing  about  the  appellant,  their  client,  and  ask  the
    hospital to provide a  comprehensive  expertise  report  regarding  the
    affordability, treatment, and challenges of mental health  patients  in
    Nigeria. Dr Garba then produced his letter in response.

47. He told Ms Jones that he last saw his mother some time ago.  He  speaks
    to her on the phone. She is looked  after  by  Mrs  [BO],  her  younger
    sister. His mother is diabetic. She has not been back to  Nigeria.  The
    rental is paid to her aunt in Nigeria. His mother will call the tenants
    by phone. She will then check her bank account from the USA.

48. In re-examination, he said that his mother  has  a  caretaker  to  look
    after the properties. However, he is not allowed to collect the rent.

49. The appellant started to do care work from 2009. This  was  through  an
    agency. She was working for about two years at care and support  homes.



50. The appellant has lived with him since about September 2018.  When  she
    married she lived in Derby with her husband. She  has  lived  with  him
    since she left her  husband.  She  came  back  to  him  after  she  had
    problems. He said he thinks she has been living with him  since  August
    2018.

51. When asked what else he does for the appellant, he said  he  cooks  for
    her; he does shopping; he washes  her  clothes;  at  night  he  watches
    television with her. When she goes to  her  room  she  plays  Christian
    music, which is sometimes loud and he has to turn the TV  off  as  this
    disturbs him.

52. On one occasion he called the ambulance for her because she was unwell.
    She was behaving bizarrely. They took her to A&E. She was later brought
    back. She was advised by the team to obtain mental health assistance.

53. He took her to a psychiatrist who prescribed medication.

    The appellant's assessment and her current care plan

54. I was referred to the  "mental  state  examination"  undertaken  by  Dr
    Ahmad. He found that she was not  paranoid  and  did  not  have  formal
    thought disorders, but  admitted  to  having  auditory,  olfactory  and
    gustatory hallucinations but would not elaborate much. Her  insight  is
    intact and she understands that she is suffering  from  mental  illness
    and needs medication, but her compliance is poor.

55. He notes that during his assessment, he came to know that she does  not
    have any relatives living in Nigeria. If she has to go back  he  stated
    that it will be quite difficult for her to adjust there and it would be
    detrimental to her mental health. Further, she will not be able to have
    access to free medical treatment and may not be able to have  treatment
    due to the  high  cost  of  medication.  His  impression  is  that  the
    medication he has proposed may not be available there.

56. His impression is that she is suffering from schizophrenia. She  showed
    a good response to antipsychotic medication, Olnzapine, however, it  is
    becoming very clear that she will not  be  able  to  comply  with  oral
    medication. He had a discussion with her brother and agreed to the care
    plan, in which it is suggested that she take a depot injection.

    Evidence on attitudes to mental health in Nigeria

57. I have also had  regard  to  the  reports  dated  2017,  regarding  the
    knowledge of, and attitudes to, mental illness in Nigeria, starting  at
    page 33. The conclusion is that in a country like Nigeria,  where  poor
    mental health facilities, poor health outcomes, health inequalities and
    disparities exist, the need for mental health  literacy,  and  workable
    health policies, are vital. This will reduce the  stigma  and  increase
    health seeking behaviour of the mentally ill.

58. It is noted that many  Nigerians  have  misconceptions  and  misbeliefs
    about mental illness, hence stigmatising people  with  mental  illness.
    Mentally  ill  persons  are  frequently  referred  to   as   dangerous,
    suspicious, unstable,  unreliable,  irresponsible  and  homicidal.  The
    labels aggravate stereotypes, provoking further  prejudices  on  people
    with mental illness.

59. The methodology of that review is set out in some detail from pages  34
    onwards. There are a  number  of  cross-sectional  comparative  studies
    collecting  opinions  and  responses  regarding  attitudes  to   mental
    illness. The review was undertaken in various communities.

    Submissions

60. Ms Jones relied on the reasons for  refusal.  She  submitted  that  the
    appellant's witness is not credible. This is not  mere  confusion.  The
    evidence was vague because he does not know the answers. The  appellant
    has only lived with him since about August 2018.

61. In no part of the psychiatric report is it asserted that the  appellant
    cannot give evidence. There is no suggestion that she could not  answer
    basic questions. She  attended  with  her  brother  and  sister  to  be
    assessed by  the  psychiatrist  -  page  24.  She  attended  follow  up
    appointments until 20 June 2019.

62. She gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. She  has  only  lived
    with the sponsor for a little over a year. Before that she appeared  to
    be living with her husband in Derby. She was able to get  treatment  in
    2012. She married her husband in 2013.

63. The assertion by Dr Ahmad that there is  no  appropriate  treatment  in
    Nigeria is not substantiated. Ms Jones did not accept that there is  no
    treatment available in Nigeria as the appellant did  receive  treatment
    there in 2012.

64. The appellant has siblings. There is a property which she  is  able  to
    access. She referred to the decision in GS (India) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 40.

65. The family has supported the appellant financially. Dr  Ahmad  did  not
    say that she is unable to work. She can function in  society.  She  has
    qualifications. She receives  antipsychotic  medication.  Moreover,  Dr
    Ahmad relies on what was told to him.

66. Her brother has given evidence that he leaves  her  from  8.20am  until
    5.30pm during which time  he  calls  her.  Ms  Jones  'challenged'  the
    support that he claimed to give the appellant. There have been gaps  in
    his evidence which he tried to fill. There is not even a mention in the
    psychiatric report that she was taken to hospital.

67. Whilst the appellant would have to go to a hospital for  an  injection,
    it cannot however be said that she is not coping. She  referred  to  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64.

68. There is no evidence that there were no family members who attended the
    wedding. There may still be some family members in  Nigeria  who  could
    assist the appellant where needed.

69. She referred to at page 27 of Dr Ahmad's report, where  he  noted  that
    there had been non-compliance with the medication prescribed  and  that
    she stopped medication for one month without any obvious reason. If so,
    what her brother says about giving  her  medication  each  day  is  not
    correct and undermines his evidence. She accepts however, that she  did
    not put any of this to the appellant's brother.

70. In summary, she submitted that it is not accepted  that  there  are  no
    family members in Nigeria. Even if there are none, it is  not  accepted
    that the sponsor offers such support  as  is  material  to  her  mental
    stability. She has only lived with him for just over a year.

71. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Ume-Ezeoke relied on Article  8  private
    life under the Rules as well as outside the Rules.

72. He was critical of Ms Jones attempt to rely on matters  in  respect  of
    which there has been no cross examination and thus no opportunity given
    to her brother to address the matters which she raised  for  the  first
    time at her submissions. There was moreover no cross examination as  to
    how long the appellant and  her  husband  were  in  Nigeria  when  they
    travelled in 2012. He referred to the stamps in the  various  passports
    at C2. The appellant and her husband could not have been  there  for  a
    year. The stamps indicate that they travelled twice.

73. There are also two stamps for 21 April 2013 and 29 April 2013. There is
    no suggestion that anyone apart  from  her  husband  was  with  her  in
    Nigeria between 2012 and 2013.

74. It has never been put to her brother when she  stopped  complying  with
    the medication. However, she went back to hospital in 2013. There was a
    long history of taking medication.

75. Significantly, however, Dr Ahmad's impression at page 27, is  that  the
    appellant suffers from schizophrenia. It is clear that she will not  be
    able to comply with the regular  taking  of  her  medication  which  is
    needed. Her brother stated that he gives her  medication  to  her  each
    day. He sees to it that she complies. He said that is his duty to  give
    her the medication as per the care plan.

76. The position today is that the appellant suffers from a  severe  mental
    illness. At page 25 of Dr Ahmad's report, he refers to  her  assessment
    in  2013.  She  has  thus  had  symptoms   of   auditory   and   visual
    hallucinations for several years, which went away  after  a  period  of
    time. However, they resurfaced later on. This is not the picture  of  a
    person who would be able to survive alone.

77. It has been contended that she goes to the library alone and can go  to
    church:  she can do the same in Nigeria. However, the big difference is
    what happens at night? If she undertakes the day to  day  things,  will
    this leave her stressed? It is only her  brother  who  helps  with  her
    stress. It is not simply a question of taking medication.

78. The appellant comes from the Niger Delta region. The evidence  relating
    to the barriers to mental health services in Nigeria is  noted  in  the
    report from page 11. The appellant would 'suffer a stigma'.  She  would
    become isolated. She would also be liable to  assault.  This  is  clear
    from  the  report  from  pages  33  onwards.  There   are   fundamental
    misconceptions and misinformation relating to  the  subject  of  mental
    illness amongst Nigerians.

79. He noted from the report referred at  page  19,  from  BBC  News,  that
    according to the World Health Organisation, one in ten medications sold
    in Africa are either fake  or  substandard.  The  problem  is  rife  in
    Nigeria, but the healthcare industry is trying to stop  it.  The  Chief
    Operating Officer at a hospital in Lagos told the BBC that because  the
    people who manufacture the drugs are so skilled, they are able to  make
    it look authentic.

80. He submitted that the appellant's mother cannot return  to  Nigeria  to
    assist her. She herself is looked after and cared for.

81. Nor has the appellant been alone since her illness started. She was  in
    Nigeria for a period of time between  2012  and  2013  and  lived  with
    someone. She has always  lived  with  someone,  including  living  with
    someone in the UK until she joined her brother.

82. There would accordingly  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  re-
    integration into Nigeria. In  the  circumstances  there  is  no  public
    interest requirement.

83. He referred to [38] in AM (Zimbabwe), supra. There the Court held  that
    so far as the Human Rights Court and the Human  Rights  Convention  are
    concerned, the protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases
    is now not confined to deathbed cases where death is  already  imminent
    when the applicant is in the removing  country.  It  extends  to  cases
    where "substantial grounds have  been  shown  for  believing  that  the
    applicant, although not at imminent risk of dying, would  face  a  real
    risk, on account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the
    receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed
    to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  her  state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
    expectancy. Accordingly, the  boundary  of  Article  3  protection  has
    shifted to imminence of intense suffering in the receiving state  which
    may only occur because  of  the  non-availability  in  that  state,  of
    treatment which had previously been available in the removing state.

84. With regard to the submission that the appellant did not give evidence,
    he submitted that she was not in a position to give  evidence  now.  No
    inference  should  be  drawn.  She  does  have  severe  mental   health
    circumstances. Moreover, her brother plays a significant  role  in  her
    treatment.

85. Finally, Dr Ahmad assessed that in the absence of any relatives  living
    in Nigeria, it would be difficult for her to adjust there and it  would
    be detrimental to her mental health. He was concerned that she may  not
    be able to have access to free medical treatment or to  have  treatment
    due to the high cost of medication.  Further,  the  medication  he  has
    proposed may not be available in Nigeria.

86. He submitted that significant weight should be given to his report when
    read together with  the  other  background  material  relating  to  the
    situation for people with mental health problems in Nigeria.

    Assessment

87. I have considered the evidence, both oral  and  documentary,  that  has
    been placed  before  the  Tribunal.  I  have  taken  into  account  the
    submissions made on behalf of both parties.

88. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the  appellant  has  severe
    mental health problems and also concluded that there is  discrimination
    against those with such problems in Nigeria. He further found that  she
    may have very significant obstacles to her return to Nigeria.

89. There was however no clear finding by him as to whether  the  appellant
    had shown on the balance of probabilities  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration into Nigeria given the finding
    that she would have accommodation there.

90. Ms Jones on behalf of the respondent contended that the evidence of the
    appellant's brother is  not  credible.  His  evidence  was  vague,  not
    because of confusion having regard to the time  that  has  passed,  but
    because he does not know the answers. Moreover, the appellant has  only
    lived with him since about August 2018.

91. It is contended that the appellant has siblings in  Nigeria.  There  is
    also a property which she is able to  access.  She  would  be  able  to
    receive depot injections in Nigeria and would be  able  to  go  to  the
    library just as she has been doing in the UK.

92. I found that the evidence of the appellant's brother  was  credible  in
    its core aspects. He has given detailed evidence relating to the day to
    day care that he has  provided,  and  continues  to  provide,  for  the
    appellant. It was never put to him that he is not the sole carer of the
    appellant, as he has contended. The appellant lives with him. He  cooks
    food for  her,  shops  for  her  and  administers  and  supervises  her
    compliance with medication.

93. He has given sound reasons for his contention that she would  not  take
    her medication if alone in  Nigeria.  This  includes  the  unchallenged
    evidence that she has refused to take medications in the past. She then
    behaves in a bizarre fashion. Her various symptoms,  including  hearing
    noises and voices talking to her, will return.

94. Moreover, it is he who sees to it that she eats properly, otherwise she
    would eat junk food during the day. Mr Ahmad stated that it was obvious
    that she was not eating very well. She had lost weight. She  complained
    that food which she cooked herself was smelling bad.  Similarly,  water
    smelled bad. Her sleep was disturbed. She has been praying excessively,
    sometimes reading the bible for the whole day.

95. Whilst Mr Ahmad did not indicate that the appellant was unable to  give
    evidence, as she had given evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    there is also no evidence from  him  that  she  is  capable  of  giving
    evidence.

96. More significantly, Ms Jones did not challenge the finding of Dr  Ahmad
    that the appellant appears to be suffering from schizophrenia and  that
    she will not  be  able  to  comply  with  the  regular  taking  of  her
    medication  which  is  needed.  Her  inability  to  comply   alone   is
    substantiated by the evidence of her brother  who  states  that  he  is
    responsible for giving her her medication each day.

97. Dr Ahmad noted that the appellant was seen by a psychiatrist in Nigeria
    in 2012 and was given medication which she stopped. She became known to
    mental health services in the UK since December 2013. Dr Ahmad referred
    at page 25 to her assessment in St Anne's Hospital  in  December  2013.
    After further review by  Dr  Cheng,  the  consultant  psychiatrist,  it
    became clear that she  was  not  suffering  from  obsessive  compulsive
    disorder,  but  she  suffered  from  Schizophreniform  psychosis.   She
    revealed at that time that she experienced auditory hallucinations  and
    visual hallucinations for the past four years. The symptoms  are  fully
    set out in Dr Ahmad's report at page 25.

98. I find that the appellant continues to  suffer  from  a  severe  mental
    illness. I also find in the light of the evidence that she family  life
    with her brother. This is evident from the extent of his daily care for
    her. She is also emotionally dependent on him

99. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that  the  appellant  has  been
    receiving medical care for paranoid  schizophrenia  which  is  of  some
    severity from late 2012. It has also been accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that there is discrimination against those with mental  health
    problems  in  Nigeria.  The  evidence  presented  at   the   re-hearing
    reinforces that contention.

100. It has been contended that  the  appellant's  mother  could  return  to
    Nigeria to assist  her.  However,  it  is  evident  from  the  evidence
    presented to the Tribunal that she is permanently resident in the  USA.
    She is a woman of 72 who suffers from medical problems herself. She too
    is looked after by her sister. This is confirmed in a medical letter to
    which I have referred.

101. Although contended by Ms Jones that there may  be  other  relatives  in
    Nigeria who would be able to assist the appellant, her  brother  stated
    in evidence that there are no other brothers or sisters in Nigeria. His
    mother is in the USA and she lives with her younger sister.

102. Mr Ume-Ezeoke also made point that, even assuming the  appellant  would
    be able to obtain her medication on her own and to attend to day to day
    matters if she were returned to the Niger Delta region, that is on  the
    basis that the  medication  she  requires  would  be  available.  There
    remains the problem regarding fake drugs which are sold in Africa. They
    may in addition be substandard. The problem is rife in Nigeria,  albeit
    that the healthcare industry is trying to stop this.

103. Moreover, the evidence established that there are significant  barriers
    to mental health services in Nigeria. In particular, she  would  suffer
    from  stigma  and  would  become  isolated.  There  is  a   fundamental
    misconception as well as misinformation regarding the  whole  topic  of
    mental illness in Nigeria.

104. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, I find that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to her integration in  Nigeria.  Her  mother
    has chosen to live in the USA. Her brother is  in  the  UK.  She  would
    accordingly be returning to Nigeria as a person who suffers from severe
    paranoid  schizophrenia,   and   has   daily   visual   and   olfactory
    hallucinations.  She  will  suffer  from  stigmatisation   and   become
    isolated. She would not be able to access appropriate medication,  even
    if it were available.

105. I find that the appellant accordingly meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Article 8 ECHR Immigration Rules. In the  circumstances,  there  is  no
    public interest in her removal and no balancing exercise is required.

    Notice of Decision

    I re-make the decision and allow the appellant's appeal.

    An anonymity direction is made.





   Signed                                                           Dated
                               28 August 2019


                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer








