
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24700/2018 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House on              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2021 by Skype             |On 16 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     K m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F. Connolly, Counsel instructed by Fisher and
Fisher Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Syria born in 1994, presently  living  in
    Germany.  On 3 August 2019 he made an application for  entry  clearance
    under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") in order to
    join his mother.  In other words, this was  a  refugee  family  reunion
    application.

 2. The respondent refused the application in a decision dated  26  October
    2018. The respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules in terms of age (not being under the  age  of
    18), and in terms of his relationship to the sponsor, his mother.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox  ("the  FtJ")  at  a  hearing  on  28
    November 2019 whereby the appeal was dismissed.  Permission  to  appeal
    having been granted on the  basis  of  arguable  errors  in  the  FtJ's
    Article 8 assessment, the appeal came before me.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The following is a summary of the FtJ's decision.  The FtJ  noted  that
    it was accepted on behalf of the appellant that he was not able to meet
    the requirements of the Rules, specifically because he  was  not  under
    the age of 18 years.  At the date of the application he was 25 years of
    age, and 26 years of age at the time of the  hearing  before  the  FtJ.
    The appeal, therefore, proceeded before the FtJ as an Article 8 appeal.



 5. The FtJ's  summary  of  the  evidence  included  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's mother, SM, who said she had difficulties  because  of  her
    health and age.  She does not speak English and was, at the time of the
    hearing before the FtJ, 55 years of age.  Her husband had died in 2013.
     She last saw the appellant seven years ago.  The FtJ at [19] said that
    there was no evidence before him to suggest that the appellant's mother
    was not "in a state of robust good health".

 6. He referred to her evidence that she has two children JM and SBM,  aged
    31 and 29 years, respectively.  They are both profoundly deaf. SM  said
    in evidence that they can both lip-read but not in English, although he
    observed that at the same time she claimed that  they  were  unable  to
    communicate.  He found that to be an overstatement.  With reference  to
    her evidence that they are "unable to do a lot of things"  he  referred
    to medical records, specifically letters from their GP dated 23  August
    2018.  He summarised that medical evidence.

 7. At [22] the FtJ said that in relation to both of the children there was
    no mention of any depression requiring treatment, support, referral  to
    psychiatry, psychology or community mental  health  assistance.   There
    was, similarly, no indication of any medication or outside  input  that
    they were receiving from other sources  of  an  educational  or  social
    support nature.  That evidence would have been  included  in  the  GP's
    report, he concluded.  He thus found that SM's statement  and  evidence
    had been "coloured by exaggeration".

 8. Although SM claimed  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  provide
    stimulation for his brother and sister, he noted that  he  remained  in
    contact with his family by various means,  and  that  contact  was  not
    disputed.

 9. At [24], the FtJ referred  to  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's
    youngest sibling MM, who was aged  15  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Referring to the claim that he was extremely upset by  separation  from
    the appellant, the FtJ noted that there was no witness  statement  from
    MM in support of that contention, stating that there was  "no  evidence
    before me today that this contention can be supported".  He  said  that
    MM would appear to be doing well at  school  if  he  was  studying  for
    GCSEs, and if he was not doing well it may be that correspondence  from
    the school could have been provided to that effect.

10. In the same paragraph he noted that there was no  medical  evidence  to
    suggest that MM suffers any adverse consequences from  being  separated
    from the appellant, referring to that separation as having been ongoing
    for seven years.  He said that there was  no  evidence  before  him  to
    suggest that MM was in anything other  than  robust  good  health.   He
    found that MM was an integral member of the family unit and  there  was
    no evidence before him that would support a claim that he would benefit
    from the presence of his older brother within the family unit, over and
    above the contact that they already have.

11. At [25], the FtJ said that all the family  would  probably  grieve  and
    miss their father who died in or around 2013.  Although SM claimed that
    the appellant had not had the opportunity to grieve for his father  and
    deceased sister within the comfort and confines of a family  unit,  and
    that she longed for him to be reunited with her and  his  siblings,  no
    supporting evidence had been adduced in that respect.

12. At [27], referring to a lack of evidence in relation to  any  community
    support provided by social services, the FtJ said that it was clear  on
    the evidence that the appellant's family unit functions well in all the
    areas of daily living and would appear to  thrive  as  a  family  unit,
    particularly as far as the youngest child, MM, is concerned.

13. The FtJ  accepted  that  both  the  elder  children  have  hearing  and
    communication difficulties and again noted that  medical  evidence  had
    been provided by their GP.  Nevertheless, at  [29]  he  concluded  that
    looking at the evidence in the round, the family  is  functioning  well
    both individually and as a unit.  He found that there was "no  evidence
    before  me  today  that  would  amount  to  conditions  that  could  be
    interpreted as being unjustifiably harsh, including the consequences of
    a refusal to admit the Appellant to the United  Kingdom".   He  further
    found that adequate support services are available to them in the UK.

14. He also said at [30] that he was not aware of any conditions that would
    inhibit the appellant and his family  from  meeting  elsewhere  in  the
    world and continuing the standard of contact that they already have.

15. Although it was argued on behalf of the appellant that  he  could  help
    the family in relation to contact with the outside world, it was  noted
    that he does not speak English and is only studying German.  He  found,
    therefore, the appellant's presence in the  United  Kingdom  would  not
    assist in any contact that may be  required  over  and  above  what  is
    already available to the family.  He concluded that  MM,  the  youngest
    child, is best placed to provide a medium of contact in English.

16. The FtJ referred to Article 8 at  [33]  in  the  context  of  an  entry
    clearance appeal.  He concluded that the refusal of entry clearance was
    in accordance with the law and pursued a legitimate aim.  He also added
    this, however,

           "I have also considered whether removal by the UK Government  is
           proportionate in a democratic society to the legitimate  aim  to
           be achieved".

17. At [35], the FtJ said this:

         "The  Appellant  fails  to  adduce  evidence  of  any   exceptional
         circumstances or  insurmountable  objects  that  would  present  as
         making his entry to the UK unduly harsh or  impossible,  or  indeed
         generating consequences of such nature that he  and/or  his  family
         would suffer. Still exists between the  family  and  the  appellant
         (sic)."

18. In the same paragraph he concluded that he enjoyed "a  form  of  family
    life that is acceptable and reasonable, in all the circumstances."   He
    repeated that MM appeared to be thriving in spite of the fact  that  he
    may not have seen the appellant in seven years.  He still  has  contact
    with him and, he said, MM has not suffered as a  result  of  no  direct
    personal contact.  He found that the appellant appeared  to  be  in  "a
    state of robust good health" and appeared to be to be getting  on  well
    in Germany.

19. Again referring to Article 8, the FtJ concluded that the  decision  was
    proportionate and that although there "has been family  life  that  has
    been interfered with" that interference is proportionate.

20. I quote [42] in full as follows:

         "The  Immigration  Rules  now  include  provisions  for  applicants
         wishing to remain in the United Kingdom based on  their  family  or
         private life. These rules are located at Appendix FM and  paragraph
         276 ADE respectively. Should the Appellant wish the UK  Immigration
         Authority to  consider  an  application  on  this  basis  then  the
         Appellant should make a  separate  charged  application  using  the
         appropriate specified application forms,  for  the  5-year  partner
         route, or for the 5-year parent route, or the  10-year  partner  or
         parent route, or the 10-year private life route. As  the  Appellant
         has not made a  valid  application  for  Article  8  consideration,
         consideration has not been given  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
         removal from the UK would breach Article 8 of the ECHR. I also have
         not considered such removal within an Article 8 ECHR context. It is
         to be noted that the decision not to issue a  Residence  Card  does
         not require the Appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
         Appellant could otherwise demonstrate that they  have  a  right  to
         reside under the Regulations.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

21. The parties' written and oral submissions can be summarised as follows.
    On behalf of the appellant it is contended that in various respects the
    FtJ failed to have full regard to SM's evidence, in particular  as  set
    out in her witness statement.   That  witness  statement  explains  the
    difficulties that the family have on a day-to-day  basis.  It  is  also
    pointed out on behalf of the  appellant  that  SM's  evidence  was  not
    challenged  in  cross  examination  at  the  hearing  before  the  FtJ.
    Emphasis is placed in particular on  SM's  evidence  in  terms  of  the
    impact on MM of separation from the appellant in  the  context  of  his
    already having suffered the loss of his father and sister when  he  was
    aged 10.  It is argued that the FtJ's conclusions  in  respect  of  the
    effect of separation on MM are perverse.

22. Likewise, the conclusion that the family appear to  be  thriving  as  a
    unit is contrary to the evidence, for example in relation to two of the
    children being profoundly deaf and  the  difficulties  that  they  have
    communicated to their GP as set out in the medical evidence.

23. It is argued further,  that  there  was  an  inadequate  assessment  in
    relation to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
    in relation to MM. Various authorities are relied on.

24. What the FtJ said at [42], apparently  considering  that  this  was  an
    Article 8 removal case, was plainly in error, given that this was not a
    removal case but a refusal of entry clearance.

25. In written submissions on behalf of the respondent it is contended that
    the  FtJ  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  evidence  of  SM  was
    exaggerated.  He was also entitled to take into  account  the  lack  of
    supporting evidence in relation to SM's evidence.  Similarly, there was
    no independent evidence in relation to MM.  It was open to the  FtJ  to
    take into account that all the family, except one, were adults.  At [6]
    of the respondent's written submissions it is argued that it  was  open
    to the FtJ to find that there had been no interference with family life
    as the evidence failed to show that their ties were over and above  the
    normal emotional ties between adult family members.

26. The high threshold for establishing perversity or irrationality is also
    relied on by the respondent. The FtJ's s.55 assessment was open to  him
    on the evidence.  Overall, the grounds amounted only to a  disagreement
    with the FtJ's findings of fact.

27. In oral submissions before  me,  Ms  Connolly  relied  on  her  written
    submissions.  She submitted that there was a 'domino effect' of  errors
    of law in the FtJ's decision, illustrated by what the FtJ said at [42].



28. Mr Melvin, similarly, relied on the respondent's  written  submissions.
    It was argued that, read holistically, clear findings of fact had  been
    made on the evidence provided.  The FtJ had noted a lack of documentary
    evidence of the appellant's status in Germany and  a  lack  of  medical
    evidence apart from the two very brief letters from the GP.

29. The FtJ was entitled to find that the family were settled  in  Northern
    Ireland, and had been for three years.  There was a lack of evidence of
    any community  support  provided  to  the  family  in  respect  of  the
    difficulties that the two children have in relation to their deafness.

30. So far as s.55 is concerned, there  is  no  actual  evidence  from  the
    youngest son and the only evidence being from his mother  in  terms  of
    his upset in being separated from the appellant.

31. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that he was not able to meet
    any of the requirements of paragraph 352D.  He left Syria  at  least  a
    year before the family went to Iraq.  He  left  to  seek  work  and  to
    escape conscription.  His witness statement was not  signed  or  dated,
    and he was not available for cross examination from Germany.   The  FtJ
    was entitled to conclude that little weight could be  attached  to  the
    assertions in that witness statement.

32. Similarly, the  FtJ  was  entitled  to  find  that  SM's  evidence  was
    exaggerated.  He found that there were no exceptional circumstances  or
    unjustifiably harsh consequences  in  separation  and  he  referred  to
    Gen.3.2.2 .

33. Although [42] was unusual in its inclusion in the decision, read  as  a
    whole the decision was completely sustainable.  There  was  no  medical
    evidence in relation to SM.  The family is able to remain  in  contact.
    The FtJ concluded that because the  appellant  did  not  speak  English
    there was nothing to  indicate  that  they  would  be  able  to  obtain
    assistance from him in that respect.

34. Although the FtJ's decision could  have  been  structured  better,  and
    better proof read, looking at all the evidence and  the  six  or  seven
    year interval between the appellant leaving the family and the  hearing
    before the FtJ in 2019, as well as the contact that they already  have,
    the decision is sustainable.

35. In relation to the death of the appellant's father in 2013,  there  was
    nothing in the appellant's witness statement  or  his  application  for
    entry clearance about that.  He left some 18 months  after  his  father
    died.  That is ample time to grieve the loss of his father and the  FtJ
    did not need to comment on that issue particularly in the assessment of
    whether there were exceptional circumstances.  There  was  no  evidence
    that they needed an extended time to grieve.  Although  the  FtJ  found
    that there was family life, there was nothing  exceptional  about  that
    family life.  It was the appellant's choice to leave  in  2013.   As  a
    Syrian citizen he was required to fight in the Syrian military.   There
    was little from the authorities in Germany about the appellant's status
    there.

36. In reply, Ms Connolly submitted that this was a clear case of  multiple
    errors of law in the FtJ's decision.  The article 8  assessment  needed
    careful scrutiny which is lacking.

37. It was wrong to characterise  the  medical  evidence  as  being  simply
    letters from a GP.  Those letters in respect of the family set out  the
    background of their attendance at the GP's surgery in  terms  of  their
    health and lack of integration.

38. What the FtJ said at [42] illustrates  that  he  was  wrong  about  the
    nature of the appeal, for example stating that he  had  not  considered
    removal within the Article 8 context.  The whole basis  of  the  appeal
    before the FtJ was in terms of Article 8.  On  that  basis  alone,  the
    error of law is sufficient for the decision to be set aside.

39. The analysis of s.55 in [24] fails  to  take  proper  account  of  SM's
    witness statement, for example [11] in which she refers to her youngest
    son's upset in being separated  from  the  appellant.  In  the  witness
    statement she also refers to the loss of her husband,  the  appellant's
    father, and the loss of  their  sister.   None  of  this  evidence  was
    challenged in cross-examination.

40. Although the appellant's  witness  statement  was  neither  signed  nor
    dated, had the judge said that no  weight  could  be  attached  to  the
    statement that would have been a different  matter.   However,  stating
    that less weight would be attached  to  the  evidence  meant  that  the
    evidence was still before him.  The fact that the case involved a minor
    was something that needed particular consideration.

41. The FtJ's conclusion at [27] that the family functions well,  fails  to
    take  into  account  other  aspects  of  SM's  witness  statement,   in
    particular the difficulties faced by the two  deaf  children  who,  for
    example, need to be accompanied outside  their  home.   The  conclusion
    that the family are thriving is not supported by the evidence.

42. In addition, Ms Connolly drew  my  attention  to  the  entry  clearance
    application, in particular at question 82, and the detail  given  there
    by the appellant.

    Assessment and Conclusions

43. Although [42] appears at the end of the FtJ's decision, that  paragraph
    illustrates what I consider to be indictive of an error of approach  by
    the FtJ amounting to an error of law.  The appeal was plainly an  entry
    clearance appeal and not a removal case.  The concluding  paragraph  or
    paragraphs of a decision are very  often  a  summary  or  synthesis  of
    conclusions, involving a stepping back from the detail to give a bird's
    eye view of how the judge sees the case overall.  It  is  evident  that
    the FtJ, in apparently undertaking a reflection of all  that  had  gone
    before, fell into serious error.

44. Quite apart from seeming to consider this as a removal case rather than
    an entry clearance appeal (an error foreshadowed in the  last  sentence
    of [33]), the FtJ said in terms in that  paragraph  that  consideration
    had not been  given  as  to  whether  the  'removal'  decision  (as  he
    described it), would breach Article 8.  I agree with Ms  Connolly  that
    that paragraph alone is sufficient  to  undermine  the  FtJ's  decision
    wholesale.

45. But even if I am wrong about that, I am in any event satisfied that the
    FtJ's decision fails fully to reflect the evidence that was before him,
    not only as revealed in SM's witness statement, in the various respects
    to which I was referred, but also in terms  of  the  medical  evidence.
    There are two letters from the  GP,  both  dated  23  August  2018,  in
    relation to the children JM and SBM. Both letters state  that  both  of
    them have attended on multiple occasions from  May  2018  to  recently.
    Various concerns were expressed in terms of  their  mental  health  and
    social isolation, in particular because of their language  difficulties
    caused by their deafness.  Issues in relation to integration were  also
    apparently raised on those visits.  Although the FtJ referred to a lack
    of evidence in terms of psychiatric or social support, that was  not  a
    rational basis for what was, in effect, a side-lining of  that  medical
    evidence.  That similarly undermines the  FtJ's  conclusion  that  SM's
    statement and evidence were coloured by exaggeration.

46. Likewise, the conclusion at [27] that he had not been referred  to  any
    "specific difficulty" and that on the evidence the  appellant's  family
    functions well, is inconsistent with the unchallenged evidence from the
    GP.  To the same effect, the conclusion that the family  thrives  as  a
    family unit, particularly so far as the youngest child is concerned.

47. Furthermore,  as  was  pointed  out  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in
    submissions, the FtJ's decision fails to take into account what is said
    on the application form by the appellant to the effect that his  mother
    struggles to care for his brother and sister who  are  profoundly  deaf
    and have speech problems and depression, and that  JM  cannot  be  left
    alone and is unable to care for himself.  He also refers in the  answer
    to that question to his sister's isolation.  The family's circumstances
    are consistent with his assertion in answer  to  question  82  that  he
    needs to join the family in the UK to assist them.

48. Additionally,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtJ's  s.55  assessment  is
    incomplete at best and irrational at worst.  It fails fully to  reflect
    the uncontested circumstances in terms of the death of their father  in
    2013 and the death of  their  sister.  Although  the  FtJ  referred  to
    separation for a period of seven years and ongoing, the conclusion that
    there was no evidence that would support a claim that he would  benefit
    from the presence of his elder brother over and above the contact  they
    already have, does not fully reflect SM's written  and  oral  evidence,
    the evidence from the GP,  the  age  of  MM  (15  years)  the  profound
    difficulties encountered by his elder two siblings in the UK,  and  the
    family's circumstances overall.

49. It does seem to me that further evidence could have  been  provided  in
    support  of  the  appeal  in  various  respects.   Nevertheless,  I  am
    satisfied, for the reasons given above, that the FtJ erred  in  law  in
    his assessment of the appeal.  Those errors  of  law  are  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside, and for the appeal to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.

50. Although the listing of the appeal  is  a  matter  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I would encourage as early a listing as possible.

    Decision

51. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of Law.  The decision  is  set  aside,  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing  before  a
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox, with no findings of
    fact preserved.


Signed

A.M. Kopieczek
Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  12/08/2021
