
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal ref: HU/25945/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & reasons           |
|                                              |promulgated                  |
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 06 February 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     SB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by JK Law, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Buchanan heard the appellant's appeal on  9  April  2018  and
    dismissed it by a decision promulgated on 18 April 2018.

 2. Mr Caskie referred firstly to a decision by FtT Judge Boyle in the case
    of an appellant, referred to herein as A, which arose  from  a  set  of
    circumstances involving A and this appellant,  SB,  in  the  same  way.
    Judge Boyle heard the case on 15 May 2018 and allowed it on  article  8
    grounds by a decision promulgated on 17 May 2018.

 3. A and SB  both  claimed  to  fear  that  AR,  a  serious  criminal  who
    trafficked them to and enslaved them in the UK, would seek  revenge  on
    them through his associates in Bangladesh, for  having  given  evidence
    leading to his conviction in the UK.

 4. I ascertained the following in course of submissions.  A and SB, up  to
    the time their appeals were decided in the FtT, were represented by the
    same firm of solicitors.  The solicitor representing SB later left that
    firm and set up the firm  now  representing  him.   A  did  not  change
    representatives.  Neither Judge Buchanan nor Judge Doyle  were  advised
    of the other appeal in progress.  Two further persons were also in  the
    circumstances giving rise  to  the  claims.   Neither  party  to  these
    proceedings had any information about those two cases.  No  application
    to link proceedings was made at any stage.  SH has chosen not to make a
    protection claim.  He does  not  wish  to  offer  any  explanation  for
    declining to do so.

 5. Representatives sent a copy of the decision of Judge Doyle  to  the  UT
    and to the Presenting Officers' Unit by email  on  the  evening  of  24
    January 2019.  It was said that a copy was also sent by post about  two
    days earlier, which I accept, although it has not yet  been  linked  to
    the UT file.  Mrs O'Brien was not aware of  the  matter  until  shortly
    before the hearing.

 6. Mr Caskie said that the SSHD had not appealed  the  decision  of  Judge
    Doyle, which was "based essentially on the same  facts".   He  accepted
    that the fact  that  divergent  decisions  had  been  reached  did  not
    disclose error of law.  However, he submitted that where  it  had  been
    established in an indistinguishable case  that  there  was  a  risk  of
    serious harm on  return  to  Bangladesh,  there  was  grave  cause  for
    concern.

 7. Mr Caskie based his further submissions on two points, taken from (iii)
    and (iv) of the grant of permission.

 8. It is necessary to deal only with matters arising from the decision  of
    Judge Doyle, and with the submissions on (iii) and (iv).

 9. The grant says at (iii) that it is arguable that Judge  Buchanan  erred
    when "intimating evidence was weakened and / or damaged if  hearsay  or
    there being a lack of corroboration" at 7.11 - 7.12 of his decision.

10. The issue identified at (iv) is that the judge  addressed  whether  the
    appellant faced  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  of
    returned to Bangladesh "in  an  arguably  narrow  and  /  or  arbitrary
    assessment of mental health issues ... and like treatment of the expert
    evidence thereto, a psychology report and a country expert report".

11. Mr Caskie contrasted 7.11 - 7.12 of Judge Buchanan's decision with 14 -
    15 of Judge Doyle's decision, and suggested there was  an  "attitudinal
    difference" of approach to the evidence of witnesses L and B, who spoke
    to threats uttered by AR.  He submitted that there was no reason for AR
    to portray himself as powerful and connected, if that was not so.   The
    expert report, by its nature,  could  not  confirm  that  AR  had  such
    connections, only that there was a class of such persons in Bangladesh.
     In referring to the "appropriate standard of  proof"  at  7.12,  Judge
    Buchanan erred by finding the evidence insufficient.  He looked for too
    much.  He had not  factored  in  the  consistency  of  the  claim  with
    background evidence and the expert report.   He  was  not  entitled  to
    subject the appellant  to  a  "counsel  of  perfection".   A  different
    outcome from two judges was not in itself an  error  of  law,  but  was
    shown to be such by reference to their respective reasoning.  A had the
    ability and motivation to track SB down in Bangladesh, which was enough
    for his case to succeed on "very significant obstacles".  From the fact
    that the SSHD did not even seek permission to appeal  the  decision  of
    Judge Doyle, the UT should find that Judge Buchanan applied too high  a
    standard of proof to the prospect of revenge in Bangladesh.

12. On the mental health issue, Mr Caskie said that the conclusion at  7.15
    did not follow from the evidence of the psychologist cited at 7.13  and
    7.14.  The UK has an obligation to victims of trafficking.  SB has been
    accepted to be such a victim.  Even if it was not established  that  AR
    presents an objective risk, it was relevant that subjectively SB is  in
    fear of him, because his perceived  need  to  hide  in  Bangladesh  has
    consequences on his mental health. The judge erred by leaving that  out
    of account as an obstacle  to  integration.   That  should  lead  to  a
    remaking, in which context there was further evidence, derived from the
    decision of Judge Doyle, to bring to bear.

13. To clarify his position on  the  admissibility  and  relevance  of  the
    decision of Judge Doyle, Mr Caskie said that it was admissible to  show
    error of law, but even if not, error could be  found  within  the  four
    corners of the decision of Judge Buchanan and on  the  evidence  before
    him (the "standard of proof" point).  The error was merely confirmed by
    reference to the decision of Judge Doyle.

14. On further procedure, if the decision were to be set aside,  Mr  Caskie
    said there was no need for a remit to the FtT or for a further hearing.
    On remaking, he relied heavily on evidence narrated in the decision  of
    Judge Doyle, which had not been  before  Judge  Buchanan  (having  been
    received by representatives between the dates of the two hearings).  At
    19 Judge Doyle refers to a letter from  a  detective  constable  "which
    says that the  trafficker  and  his  wife  have  strong  political  and
    criminal connections in Bangladesh."  That was sufficient to justify  a
    conclusion in the present case as reached by Judge Doyle at  20:  there
    were "very significant obstacles" to return because  that  would  place
    the  appellant  "within  the  range  of  ruthless   ...   traffickers".
    Alternatively, if the reference to the  evidence  in  the  decision  of
    Judge Doyle was not enough, the UT should fix a hearing,  to  give  the
    appellant  the  chance  to  produce  the  letter  from  the   detective
    constable.  Mr Caskie went on to say that, pragmatically, the UT should
    resolve the case on what is now known, rather than the appellant having
    to undertake further lengthy procedure.

15. When replying to the submission for the respondent, Mr Caskie said that
    the decision of Judge Doyle should be  admitted  despite  late  notice,
    because the point of the rules was only to ensure fair notice, and  the
    respondent had been able to  make  a  considered  and  detailed  reply.
    There had been no prejudice.

16. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    it has not been shown that the making of the decision of Judge Buchanan
    involved the making of any error on a point of law.

17. The decision of Judge Doyle is, in  principle,  irrelevant  to  whether
    Judge Buchanan made an error of law.  Any  such  error  must  be  found
    within the bounds of the case put to the judge and his decision on it.

18. There was no submission by reference to rules, directions or  case  law
    on whether the UT  might,  exceptionally,  be  entitled  to  admit  and
    consider the decision of Judge Boyle, for any purpose.  The  length  of
    notice is only one of many criteria.

19. The possible relevance of evidence which was not before Judge  Buchanan
    but was before Judge Doyle must have been apparent long ago.  No reason
    emerges for this not being raised  with  the  respondent  or  with  the
    tribunal until shortly before the hearing in the UT.  It was said  that
    the police letter is in the hands of  other  agents,  but  arrangements
    could have been made to obtain it long ago.  That would  have  revealed
    more detail, and would have removed one of the several apparent  layers
    of hearsay involved.

20. No good reason is shown to consider the  decision  of  Judge  Doyle  in
    relation to error of law, even if it had been promptly intimated.

21. Judge Buchanan did not doubt that the  witnesses  L  and  B  accurately
    reported what AR said to  them.   Hearsay  evidence  is  admissible  in
    tribunals, but there is no rule such that AR's reported statements were
    to be taken at face value.  (He might have been boasting, or  he  might
    have hoped that what he said would be repeated to and would  intimidate
    witnesses; there was other evidence of such behaviour.) Nothing in  the
    decision suggests that Judge Buchanan was not aware  that  the  general
    possibility of AR having powerful criminal and political connections in
    Bangladesh was consistent  with  background  evidence  and  the  expert
    report.   That  matter  was  obvious,  and  it  would  have  been  very
    surprising if the judge thought otherwise.   Within the bounds  of  the
    case which was before Judge Buchanan, the submissions on (iii) are only
    disagreement, couched in the language of standard of proof.

22. Even if the decision of Judge Doyle were to be admitted,  it  does  not
    disclose the making of any error by Judge Buchanan, either on the  case
    which was before him, or constructively, by reference to matters  which
    were not before him.

23. The fact that another judge may have  reached  a  different  conclusion
    based on similar evidence is, in principle, and  as  accepted,  neither
    here nor there.  The criticism is of lesser force  where  the  evidence
    before the other judge was in at least one respect noticeably  stronger
    (the police letter).

24. Judge Buchanan made no error in finding the evidence on  mental  health
    issues to fall short of "very significant obstacles to integration".

25. Mr Caskie suggested that it had been the SSHD's responsibility to apply
    to link the two (or possibly up to four) hearings.  That may be so, but
    there  was  a  similar  responsibility  on  the  appellants  and  their
    representatives.  The tactic of not making  a  protection  claim  where
    that was the obvious course is unexplained, and it is doubtful  whether
    this claim properly fits into the guise of  a  private  life  claim  in
    terms of integration.  Those observations, however, are incidental.

26. It is for the appellant to consider whether a  further  claim,  and  of
    what nature, is available.  Any delay in resolving  matters  lies  with
    him and with his representatives, rather than with  the  respondent  or
    the tribunals.

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

28. The FtT made an anonymity direction. The matter was  not  addressed  in
    the UT, so anonymity is maintained herein.

      [pic]

28 January 2019
UT Judge Macleman




