
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25118/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2019                       |On 28 May 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     ma
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr A E Mohamed
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of the  respondent  who,  on  10
    October 2016, refused the appellant's application for  entry  clearance
    to the United  Kingdom.   The  appeal  has  a  considerable  procedural
    history.  For present purposes it is unnecessary to refer  to  that  in
    any detail.  It is, however, relevant to note that following a  hearing
    that took place at Field House on 11 December 2018,  this  division  of
    the Tribunal decided that there was an error of law in the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham who, on 1 March  2017,  had  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  The reasons for finding  that  there  was  such  an
    error are set out in the decision of the  Tribunal,  written  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kebede dated 25 January 2019.  From  that  decision,  it
    can be seen why the Upper Tribunal took the view that the  errors  were
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal fell to be set aside.
     It  is  for  that  reason  that  we  today  have  heard  evidence  and
    submissions with a view to re-making the decision ourselves.

 2. The facts of the matter  can  be  relatively  shortly  laid  out.   The
    appellant is a lady who suffers from paranoid schizophrenia; so much is
    evident from the materials before us.  She applied for entry  clearance
    in order to be with her sister who lives in the United Kingdom, and her
    brother-in-law, both of whom are doctors.  Her  sister,  however,  does
    not practise medicine in the United Kingdom.  She remains at home  with
    one of the children of her marriage, who is now  aged  11.   The  other
    children are pursuing academic or professional careers.

 3. The essence of the matter is whether or not the appellant  can  satisfy
    the requirements of the relevant provisions of the  Immigration  Rules,
    in this case Section E-ECDR (entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative).  As a result of  Mr  Whitwell's  stance  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, the matter comes down to whether  paragraph  E-ECDR
    2.5 is satisfied in the appellant's case.  This requires the  appellant
    to demonstrate  that  she  is  unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in
    the country where she is living because (a) it  is  not  available  and
    there is no person in that country who can reasonably  provide  it,  or
    (b) it is not affordable.

 4. Although this is a human rights appeal, we put the matter in  that  way
    because it is  common  ground  that  if  the  appellant  satisfies  the
    requirements of that provision of the Immigration Rules, then her human
    rights appeal must succeed.  It must succeed  because  there  would  in
    that eventuality be no legitimate reason  for  the  respondent  not  to
    admit the appellant to the United Kingdom and, given that Article 8  of
    the ECHR is engaged as regards the relationship between  the  appellant
    and her sister in the United Kingdom, it would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with that right not to admit her.  By  contrast,  however,
    if the provisions of the Immigration Rules are not met, then  it  would
    in the circumstances of this case be difficult, to say  the  least,  to
    see how the appellant could succeed.  The reason for this is  that  the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules are framed very much  with
    Article 8 in mind.  They are, if we can put it this way, suffused  with
    Article 8 considerations.  For that reason, there would have to be some
    exceptional factual matrix to demand that  the  appellant  succeeds  on
    Article 8, where she has been unable to meet the requirements of  those
    Rules.

 5. With that in mind, we turn to the evidence in this case.   There  is  a
    considerable amount of it; and it is with no discourtesy to Mr Whitwell
    or to Dr Mohamed, if  we  go  over  it  somewhat  rapidly  in  all  the
    circumstances.  The essence of the matter is that the appellant has for
    several years now been living with a lady called Salwa Kamel Taha,  who
    has been looking after her because despite  the  best  efforts  of  the
    sponsor's sister, no other relative in Egypt was able and willing to do
    so.  In matters of this kind, it is always necessary for  the  Tribunal
    to look with some care at the situation that has led  to  other  family
    members refusing to look after the individual  in  question.   This  is
    because it is relatively easy to construct a case which is self-serving
    in nature.  By this we mean that it is relatively  easy  to  set  up  a
    position where others who might otherwise be expected to  do  so  claim
    that they have their own responsibilities, which mean they  cannot  and
    will not in practice look after the  appellant.   Nevertheless,  having
    made due allowance for that consideration, it is in  our  view  plainly
    the case that this appellant cannot be cared for satisfactorily by  the
    relatives that she has in  Egypt.   This  is  in  essence  because  she
    suffers from paranoid schizophrenia.  As we see from the  materials  to
    be found at page 430  of  the  appellant's  bundle,  the  World  Health
    Organisation regards it as "very important" that there is engagement of
    family members in providing support to someone with this illness.

 6. The evidence in this case indicates that  the  appellant  requires  the
    assistance of close family members in order to maintain something  even
    approximating a satisfactory lifestyle.   The  evidence  that  we  have
    shows that the  lady  with  whom  she  is  currently  living  finds  it
    difficult to get the appellant to take  her  medication  and  that  the
    appellant exhibits symptoms of a quite alarming nature, such as getting
    into a situation where she almost  electrocuted  herself,  as  well  as
    doing such things  as  pouring  water  onto  a  working  TV  set.   The
    appellant lives in a block of flats,  some  five  floors  above  street
    level with no lift.  She is considerably overweight; indeed,  according
    to the latest doctor's report she is obese.  She is unable consistently
    to maintain a proper system of self-hygiene.

 7. The Tribunal is satisfied that, even if the extended family members  in
    Egypt were able and willing to take the appellant in, there would be no
    likelihood of any improvement in the state of affairs that we have just
    described.  It is plain from the evidence, including  the  evidence  of
    the sponsor sister, whom we regard as credible and whose  evidence  was
    not subjected to any material critique, that the appellant regards  the
    sponsor as someone whom she can trust.  On the frequent occasions  when
    the sponsor and her husband have gone to Egypt to visit the  appellant,
    and when the appellant has stayed with them in the flat which they have
    there, the appellant's behaviour has materially improved.  It is  clear
    that, if the appellant were living with her  sister  and  sponsor,  the
    difficulties that we have described are  highly  likely  to  disappear.
    The family history of the appellant is such that  she  would  not  have
    anything like the same relationship with any of the more distant family
    members in Egypt who might in theory be in a  position  to  look  after
    her.

 8. One matter that does concern the Tribunal is whether  or  not,  if  the
    appellant  were  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom,  there  would   be
    reasonable opportunities for social interaction.  We say  that  because
    the appellant would, of course, be coming to a different  country  and,
    given her difficulties as we have described them,  there  may  well  be
    doubt as to whether she would be  able  to  take  any  part  in  social
    activities outwith the immediate family.  We are, however, satisfied on
    the evidence that  the  appellant,  despite  her  difficulties,  has  a
    knowledge of English.  She would also be in an  environment  of  a  bi-
    lingual nature, including the children of the sponsor, and in  all  the
    circumstances we  are  satisfied  that  her  opportunities  for  social
    engagement in the United Kingdom would  be  much  more  than  fanciful.
    But, overall, looking at matters in the round, the significant point is
    that if the appellant's family history and her  medical  condition  are
    such that, if appellant were living with the  sponsor,  as  opposed  to
    anybody who could reasonably be called upon in Egypt, the sponsor would
    be able to get the appellant to take her medication  regularly  and  to
    engage in  self-hygiene;  and  that  the  problems  which  led  to  the
    dangerous activities we have described are, at the very  least,  likely
    to be much less than they currently are.

 9. We are satisfied that the  evidence,  which  has  been  assembled  with
    considerable care by Dr Mohamed, discloses a state  of  affairs  which,
    albeit unusually given the high threshold that is required by the Rules
    and Article 8  in  this  area,  nevertheless  reaches  that  threshold.
    Returning to E-ECDR 2.5, we are satisfied that the appellant is  unable
    to obtain the requisite level of care in the country in  which  she  is
    living at the moment, namely Egypt.

10. In so finding, we record that  there  has  been  considerable  analysis
    given by the Secretary of State to the question of whether the  sponsor
    and her husband, who have the financial means to do so, could  pay  for
    the appellant to live in a residential care home or similar  in  Egypt.
    We are, however, satisfied from the evidence that such  facilities  are
    unavailable  in  all  the  circumstances  of  this  case.    They   are
    unavailable because the evidence discloses that care homes in Egypt  of
    the kind with which we are concerned do not provide  any  or  certainly
    any adequate facilities for persons having the psychiatric problems  of
    this appellant.  That we find is a position  that  extends  across  the
    length and breadth of Egypt.  It is not, therefore, just a question  of
    being unable to find  such  a  place  in  the  locality  in  which  the
    appellant is currently living.

11. The alternative would be  hospitalisation  of  the  appellant.  As  the
    evidence shows, the appellant was hospitalised in the  past,  when  her
    condition deteriorated. It is manifest in our view that  the  Rules  do
    not require this appellant to be an  in-patient  receiving  psychiatric
    care in a hospital in Egypt, as opposed to  living  with  close  family
    relatives, such as the sponsor. That would not be a reasonable state of
    affairs.  It is, accordingly, not a matter of  finance  on  which  this
    case turns.

12. For the reasons that we have given, the appellant would  be  unable  to
    obtain the  required  level  of  care  in  Egypt.   It  is  simply  not
    available, for the reasons that we have given.  Those reasons  turn  on
    the  very  particular  circumstances  of  the  appellant's   case;   in
    particular the nature of her psychiatric  condition.   They  also  turn
    upon her family history, which means  that  the  sponsor  is  the  only
    person available who can  provide  the  appellant  with  the  requisite
    degree of support and give her the confidence she needs  to  avoid  the
    difficulties we have described.  The sponsor has a settled life in  the
    United Kingdom with her husband and her children.  The sponsor's family
    is  well-established  in  this  country.   In  all  the  circumstances,
    therefore, it is not reasonable to expect  the  sponsor  to  return  to
    Egypt to provide the appellant with the care that she requires.

13. In conclusion, for the reasons that we have given, we find that, on the
    facts of this particular case, the appellant has shown on  the  balance
    that she meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules, in particular
    E-ECDR 2.5(a).  For those reasons the  appeal  must  succeed  on  human
    rights  grounds  because  the  Secretary  of  State  can  point  to  no
    legitimate reason for excluding the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
    and so to exclude her would constitute a disproportionate  interference
    with her Article 8 rights and also the Article 8 rights of her  sister,
    the sponsor.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error on  a  point
    of law.  We set aside that decision and we re-make the decision in  the
    appeal by allowing it on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                      Signed   [pic]                  Dated:  23 May 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber





