
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/25315/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 23 November 2018                        |on 28 November 2018           |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                IDRIS FARHAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision  dated  2  November  2016,  refusing  the
         appellant's human rights claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Farrelly, promulgated on 1 May 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 8 May 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 17 July 2018.

     vi) The respondent's rule 24 response, dated 13 September 2018, to  the
         grant of permission.

 2. Mr Winter submitted thus:

      i) The grounds in essence raised a  short  point,  the  absence  of  a
         proper balancing exercise.

     ii) At [12] - [15] the judge set out only negative aspects of the case.
          The positive features, which were encapsulated  in  the  grant  of
         permission, were omitted.

    iii) There was legal error either in failing to take  account  of  those
         positive aspects at all, or in failing to  do  so  in  the  further
         assessment required outside the rules.

     iv) The decision should be set aside.

      v) The decision should be remade by remitting to the FtT; by directing
         further submissions in the UT; or by submissions on the evidence as
         it stood.

     vi) On the third of those alternatives, the appellant relied  upon  all
         the factors to which attention had already been drawn, and  on  the
         respondent's delay, if not in  decision-making  then  at  least  in
         effecting removal.

    vii) This was one of those cases which could succeed on private  life  -
         cf. Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58, 2018 WL 05926586, at [58].

   viii) The decision should be remade in favour of the appellant.

     ix) In reply to the submissions for the respondent, Mr Winter  observed
         that  although  there  was  a  history   of   non-compliance   with
         immigration formalities, that appeared to  consist  simply  of  not
         reporting, rather than of  absconding,  and  that  the  appellant's
         whereabouts had remained known.

 3. Having considered also the submissions for the  respondent,  I  am  not
    persuaded either that the making of the decision of  the  FtT  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, or that if remade,  the  case
    would realistically have any other outcome.

 4. There are cases, although not very many, which succeed on private  life
    grounds only.  While each case  turns  ultimately  on  its  own  facts,
    Rhuppiah, which the Supreme Court thought might have been  an  example,
    is based on  circumstances  very  much  stronger  than  those  of  this
    appellant.

 5. The statutory starting point, as Mrs O'Brien submitted,  was  that  the
    private life of the appellant was to be given little weight.

 6. Time going by during which a person has no right to remain in  the  UK,
    and is legally bound to leave, but seeks to  avoid  doing  so,  as  the
    judge found at [14], can count very little, if at all, in his favour.

 7. The features of the appellant's private life which he advanced  in  his
    favour are recorded at [8] - [10] of the  decision.   The  judge  found
    that he had not shown his business to  be  a  viable  proposition.   No
    error is suggested in that  view.   Even  if  he  had  shown  financial
    success and independence, that would be little more than neutral.

 8. Reading the decision as a whole, there  is  no  reason  to  think  that
    positive features were not considered; rather, they were rightly  found
    to be feeble.

 9. The case fell well short of the terms of the rules, and, taking account
    also of the  further  submissions  for  the  appellant  today,  he  has
    disclosed nothing by which he might have been found to have a right  to
    remain in the UK, other than through compliance with the rules.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]
            23 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




