
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25362/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2018                          |On 21 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                Waleed Anwar
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, instructed by MA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Mr Anwar appealed to a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 22 January 2016 refusing him leave  to
    remain based on  his  human  rights.   That  appeal  was  allowed,  but
    subsequently in a decision promulgated on 28 August 2018 I  found  that
    there were errors of law in the judge's decision and that the Article 8
    issue would therefore have to be reconsidered.

2.   The appellant had applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of ten years' residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The respondent noted the requirements of paragraph 276B of HC  395  and
    in particular the requirement of continuous  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Mr Anwar had entered the United Kingdom on 31 December
    2004 with entry clearance  as  a  student  and  had  remained  lawfully
    thereafter.  4 September 2015 was taken to be the  date  on  which  his
    valid leave in the United Kingdom had expired.  He had left the  United
    Kingdom for Pakistan on 10 January 2012  before  his  leave  to  remain
    expired but did not return until 12 October 2012, 275 days later,  with
    valid entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

3.   Under paragraph 276A(a):

         "'Continuous residence' means residence in the United  Kingdom  for
         an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall  not  be
         considered to have been broken where an applicant  is  absent  from
         the United Kingdom for a period of six months or less  at  any  one
         time ..."

    The respondent noted that his period of absence from the United Kingdom
    had exceeded the maximum amount allowed on any one occasion in order to
    meet the long residence  requirements  and  as  a  consequence  he  was
    considered to have  broken  his  continuous  residence  and  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B(i)(a).

4.   He had asked that discretion be exercised in  his  case  on  the  basis
    that he had remained in Pakistan longer than he had planned in order to
    look after his brother who was bedridden and required constant  looking
    after.  He produced medical documents relating to a  Ghulam  Abbas  but
    the decision maker considered there was no evidence to show that Ghulam
    Abbas was his brother, and it was noted that in any event the  accident
    which caused Mr Abbas's injuries occurred in 2008 but the appellant had
    returned to Pakistan in 2012.  He said he had had to stay to look after
    his brother as his mother and siblings  were  unable  to,  but  it  was
    considered that the family  could  have  continued  to  do  so  and  no
    exceptional evidence had been provided that he was required  to  remain
    in Pakistan in order to care for Mr Abbas.  He had not  shown  evidence
    that Mr Abbas's condition deteriorated since the date of  the  accident
    four years previously and there was  no  evidence  that  the  care  his
    brother required could only have been provided by him or that Mr  Abbas
    was in fact his brother.  It was considered  that  the  points  he  had
    raised were not considered to be sufficiently  compelling  such  as  to
    exercise discretion in his favour.

5.   In relation to this point the judge  had  the  benefits  of  statements
    from the appellant and his sister and an affidavit from the appellant's
    father.  He accepted that Ghulam Abbas  was  the  appellant's  brother.
    The sister and the father confirmed that the appellant went to see  his
    family and was asked to stay for longer to  care  for  his  brother  as
    there were no other male siblings and their father was elderly.   There
    was also a letter from a consultant  neurologist,  dated  28  September
    2017, which confirmed that he was asked to attend on Ghulam  Abbas  due
    to  his  aggressive  behaviour.   He  confirmed  that   he   was   non-
    communicative, restless, irritable and aggressive  and  that  he  could
    follow  one-step  commands  but  remained  fully  dependent   for   all
    activities of daily life.  The judge  concluded  that  on  the  medical
    evidence before him, when the  appellant  went  to  Pakistan  in  2012,
    Ghulam Abbas was incapable of managing his own personal functioning and
    required 24-hour care.

6.   The judge noted the respondent's guidance in cases  of  long  residence
    which said that for single absences over  180  days  consideration  was
    required to be given to how much of the absence was due  to  compelling
    or compassionate circumstances and whether the  appellant  returned  to
    the United Kingdom as soon as  possible.   Medical  evidence  confirmed
    that the accident to Mr Abbas occurred in September 2008  and  that  he
    would require full support in his daily activities and daily  care  and
    was fully dependent for all his needs.  A  letter  from  a  neurologist
    dated 11 January 2012 stated that Mr Abbas required nursing support  24
    hours a day and was unable to eat, wash or  manage  his  own  toileting
    needs.

7.   The judge accepted that it was the Secretary of State's  discretion  in
    respect of the policy, but bearing in mind the terms of the policy  and
    the judge's findings of fact, noting that it would not be  unusual  for
    the male line to take over responsibilities in  particular when it came
    to the toileting and bathing needs of a man in his late  30s,  that  it
    would have been appropriate for the respondent to  have  exercised  her
    discretion in line with her own guidance and to have viewed the  period
    as being continuous and lawful.  The judge took into account the public
    interest considerations set  out  in  section  117A  and  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and considered that  there
    were no factors going against the appellant and interference in a  case
    where the Immigration Rules were satisfied was not in  accordance  with
    the law.  It was considered that had the Secretary of  State  exercised
    her discretion lawfully there would have been compliance with the Rules
    and the judge said that in any event as it was a human rights case  the
    factors in the appellant's  favour  weighed  heavily  against  the  one
    negative  factor.   She  concluded  that  the  interference   was   not
    proportionate.

8.   There were  other  issues  relating  to  jurisdiction  which  fell  for
    consideration, but it was my conclusion at the  error  of  law  hearing
    that the judge had erred in law finding that  the  appeal  fell  to  be
    allowed because the respondent should have exercised discretion in  the
    appellant's favour and there would have been compliance with the Rules.
     The question of whether the circumstances were such as  to  amount  to
    compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances  was  a  matter  for  the
    respondent and it was not open to  the  judge  to  substitute  her  own
    consideration of the matter, in particular taking into account in  part
    evidence that was not before the decision maker in  concluding  as  she
    did.  Also, there was a failure to refer to the public  interest  which
    required consideration in an evaluation of Article 8 outside the Rules.



9.   In her submissions Ms Jaquiss relied on and developed  points  made  in
    her skeleton argument.  It was common ground that the judge's  findings
    on the evidence at paragraphs 21 and 22  of  her  decision  stood.   Ms
    Jaquiss observed that, as had been clarified by the  Supreme  Court  in
    Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58, the presumptions  in  the  2002  Act  are  not
    necessarily determinative in  all  cases.   Section  117A  of  the  Act
    required judges  to  have  regard  to  the  statutory  public  interest
    considerations and hence the provisions of section 117B could  not  put
    decision makers in a straightjacket which constrained them to determine
    claims under Article 8 inconsistently with the Article itself.

10.  Under the Home Office guidance there was a discretion  to  grant  leave
    in compelling and compassionate circumstances outside the  Rules.   The
    guidance was a key consideration for any First-tier  Judge,  being  the
    Secretary of State's view as to how the Rules were to  be  interpreted.
    The Rules and the guidance were the Secretary of  State's  view  as  to
    what was compliant with Article 8.  Ms Jaquiss also  referred  to  what
    had been said in SF and Others [2017] UKUT 120 that even in the absence
    of a "not in accordance with the law" ground of  appeal,  the  Tribunal
    ought to take the Secretary of State's  guidance  into  account  if  it
    pointed clearly to a particular outcome in the  instant  case,  as  the
    only way in which consistency could be obtained.  It was also  relevant
    to bear in mind what had been said by the Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon)
    [2017] UKSC 10 setting out guidance as to the relationship between  the
    policy makers and Tribunals as a partnership.  The Tribunal  was  asked
    to find that there were  in  this  case  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances in the appellant's case meaning he could  not  return  to
    the United Kingdom.  His brother  was  very  seriously  ill  and  their
    father was old and the appellant was the only  person  who  could  look
    after him.   The  Tribunal  was  not  invited  to  substitute  its  own
    discretion for that of the Secretary of State, but to look at the terms
    of the policy and if it found compelling circumstances as  to  why  the
    appellant could not return,  that  should  inform  the  proportionality
    assessment and was a key consideration.  It was not for the Tribunal to
    grant or refuse indefinite leave to remain.  That was a matter for  the
    Secretary of State, who might look at the exercise of  discretion  with
    regard to indefinite leave to remain  but  in  circumstances  where  an
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom for ten years lawfully  except
    for the 275 days and now in the guidance the circumstances which  would
    make  refusing  indefinite  leave  to  remain   disproportionate,   the
    conclusion was that under the Rules with the guidance  to  assist,  his
    removal would be disproportionate.

11.  Ms Jaquiss had made further points about proportionality  at  paragraph
    19 of the skeleton including a reference to the financial  independence
    of the appellant and the fact  that  he  was  fully  supported  by  his
    family.  Immigration control was a legitimate aim, but  he  was  not  a
    person with a bad immigration history and had no  criminal  convictions
    and was not a burden on the state.  As had been said  in  UE  (Nigeria)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 975, a person's value to the  community  was  a  factor
    which might legitimately be  considered  in  the  Article  8  balancing
    exercise.

12.  In her submissions Ms Pal relied on the refusal letter  of  22  January
    2016.  This addressed  the  consideration  of  the  compelling  factors
    relied on with regard to the appellant's brother.   The  appellant  had
    not put forward any compelling or compassionate grounds for a grant  of
    leave outside the Rules.  He had been outside the  United  Kingdom  for
    over ten months so there was a break in his  continuity  of  residence.
    His private life should be given little weight as his leave was  always
    precarious and there was no expectation of a grant of indefinite  leave
    to remain, and that was even more so the case given his  long  absence.
    The  Secretary  of  State  had  addressed  the  possibilities  and  the
    circumstances with regard to his return  to  Pakistan.   It  should  be
    found that the decision to remove was proportionate.

13.  By way of reply Ms Jaquiss argued that in fact the period of  275  days
    was nine months rather than over ten.  It had  not  been  argued  today
    that there was relevance to the delay  between  his  knowledge  of  his
    brother's accident and going  to  Pakistan.   In  that  regard  it  was
    relevant to consider what was said in the appellant's cousin's  letter.
    It was not until he had got to Pakistan that he had  realised  how  bad
    the situation was.   It  was  not  clear  what  could  be  said  to  be
    compelling or compassionate grounds if these circumstances in this case
    did not.  His brother was paralysed and had suffered significant  brain
    damage.

14.  I reserved my determination.

15.  The effect of my judgment on the error of law  is  that  the  issue  in
    this case has to be viewed not on the basis of the Tribunal  exercising
    its own discretion as to the existence or otherwise  of  compelling  or
    compassionate circumstances, but  being  fully  entitled  to  take  the
    policy into account when considering the Article 8 claim in this  case.
    As Ms Jaquiss argued, any conclusion I might come to as to  the  nature
    of the circumstances can inform the evaluation  of  proportionality  in
    this case.

16.  I have set out above  in  quotations  from  the  judge's  decision  the
    nature  and  extent  of  the  physical  and  mental  problems  of   the
    appellant's brother.  The appellant explained in his  statement  of  21
    September 2015 why it was that he had to remain for as long as  he  did
    as his brother was bedridden and required constant  looking  after  and
    there was in effect  no-one  else  who  could  do  it.   There  was  no
    assistance from his cousins.  The medical report of Dr Al Baqer  of  14
    September 2008 bears out the nature of Mr Abbas's injuries, as does the
    medical evaluation of Dr Wasti of 3 November 2008 and that of Dr  Ahmed
    of 11 January 2012 and also the statements from family  members  as  to
    the circumstances in Pakistan.

17.  I must of course bear in mind the provisions of  section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act which includes at subparagraph (5) the statement  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when the  person's  immigration  status  is  precarious.   As  was
    clarified by the Supreme Court in Rhuppiah, a person who not being a UK
    citizen is present in the UK and having leave to reside here other than
    to do so indefinitely has  a  precarious  immigration  status  for  the
    purposes of section 117B(5).  It was also however said at paragraph  49
    in Rhuppiah that although the court has defined precarious  immigration
    status in the manner set out  above,  with  a  width  from  which  most
    applicants who rely on their private  life  under  Article  8  will  be
    unable  to  escape,  section  117A(2)(a)  necessarily   enables   their
    applications occasionally to succeed.  The Supreme  Court  quoted  from
    the judgment of Sales LJ in the Court of Appeal at [2016] EWCA Civ 803,
    paragraph 53, saying  that  the  effects  of  section  117B(5)  may  be
    overridden in an exceptional case by particularly  strong  features  of
    the private life in question.

18.  The appellant has, it would appear, led a blameless life while  in  the
    United Kingdom and the only reason why he was unable to succeed in  his
    application under paragraph 276B was on account of the amount  of  time
    he had spent outside the  United  Kingdom.   The  respondent's  policy,
    which is essentially consistent with what  was  said  by  Sales  LJ  in
    Rhuppiah in the Court of Appeal, was that "it  may  be  appropriate  to
    exercise  discretion  over  excessive   absences   in   compelling   or
    compassionate  circumstances,  for  example  where  the  applicant  was
    prevented from returning to the UK through unavoidable  circumstances".
    The decision maker is encouraged to consider how much  of  the  absence
    was due to compelling circumstances, whether the applicant returned  to
    the United Kingdom as soon as they were able to do so and  to  consider
    also the reasons for the absences.

19.  It is clear that I cannot substitute my own view as to what  compelling
    or compassionate circumstances are for that of the Secretary  of  State
    in this case.  But, as noted above, they are a relevant factor to  bear
    in mind in considering the proportionality of  removal.   And  in  that
    regard I also bear in mind the quotation from the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Rhuppiah to which I have referred above.  The door is therefore, albeit
    only slightly, open for a person to succeed where they have  a  private
    life established at a time when their immigration status is precarious.
     It is relevant to  bear  in  mind  that  under  section  117B(1)   the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest,
    and also the point that it is in the public interest  that  people  who
    seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English
    as the appellant can, and that such people are financially independent,
    as the appellant is.

20.  The emphasis in Sales LJ's judgment was on an  exceptional  case,  with
    particularly strong features of the  private  life  in  question.   The
    private life the appellant has in the  United  Kingdom  is  essentially
    that of a person who has studied, worked and lived here for a number of
    years.  He has family here, including his sister.  It was argued in the
    skeleton that his sister's son's best interests are in the  status  quo
    being preserved in the family unit they maintain.   That  is  certainly
    not an irrelevant factor but it is not a strong factor bearing in  mind
    that the child is the child of his sister and not of the appellant.  In
    my view, though the Sales LJ quotation was aimed at strong features  of
    the private life in question, it can properly be taken, bearing in mind
    that it is a description of the effect of section 117A(2)(a) and it  is
    a case where a Tribunal is required to  determine  whether  a  decision
    under the Immigration Act breaches a  person's  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article 8, to include the whole issue  of
    proportionality.  In that regard, I consider that it is appropriate  to
    bear in mind and  attach  weight  to  the  reasons  why  the  appellant
    remained outside the United Kingdom for as long as he did.  Though I do
    not seek, as I say, in any  sense  to  trespass  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's territory, these appear  to  me  to  be  clearly  compassionate
    circumstances of a significantly compelling nature.  That is a relevant
    matter to take into account in assessing  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision to remove.  In the highly unusual circumstances of this  case,
    I consider that the proportionality balance comes down in favour of the
    appellant and against removal and as a  consequence  his  appeal  under
    Article 8 is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 14 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
