
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/25979/2016
                                                               HU/25981/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision &  Reasons           |
|On 9 April 2018                             |Promulgated                   |
|                                            |On 19 April 2018              |
|                                            |                              |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between
                                 MASTER Y K
                                 MASTER S N
                         (anonymity directionS made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr R Toal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Uganda and  they  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent 12 October 2016  to  refuse  to  grant  them
    leave to enter the United Kingdom pursuant to  paragraph  352D  of  the
    Immigration Rules. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Herlihy  in  a  decision
    dated 23 November 2017  dismissed  the  appellants  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules.



 2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett
    stating that it is arguable that the Judge made an error of  fact  when
    she concluded that the birth certificates did not contain any reference
    to the mother of the appellants, but  the  name  is  included  in  both
    certificates.



 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise. The  respondent  refused  the  appellants  applications  for
    several reasons. The respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellants
    and the sponsor were related as claimed due to doubts  over  the  birth
    certificates which had been submitted. I  have  before  me  DNA  report
    which clearly establishes that  the  sponsor  and  the  appellants  are
    related as  claimed.  However,  I  do  have  concerns  over  the  birth
    certificates which have  been  submitted.  Firstly,  I  note  that  the
    original certificates were not submitted with the application and  only
    photocopies were supplied. In addition,  the  birth  certificates  were
    issued some 12 and 13 years respectively after the appellants were born
    and no evidence was submitted to show what evidence had  been  produced
    to the relevant authorities in Uganda which led them to issue the birth
    certificates so many years after the claim the event.



 4. At the hearing the sponsor produced a  copy  of  his  asylum  interview
    record and I noted that at question 61 the sponsor when asked about his
    children's mother he said that when he was  aged  28  his  parents  had
    forced him to marry a woman. He said that they were married  for  three
    years and then went on to say that they had separated after  two  years
    prior to the end of the third year and  that  the  marriage  had  ended
    because he had been forced into it and he didn't have any feelings  for
    his wife and he agreed to hide the reality of what he actually  was  so
    they had stayed together and had children.



 5. In considering the totality of the evidence I am not satisfied that the
    appellants have established that they were part of the sponsor's family
    unit prior to his leaving Uganda. I find it more  likely  that  if  the
    marriage had ended and that the children would have remained with their
    mother.



 6. I would have expected there to  have  been  a  considerable  volume  of
    evidence presented by the sponsor to show that from 2003-2014, a period
    of 11 years, that the children  had  lived  with  him.  He  could  have
    submitted evidence from the children school, who would confirm that  he
    was the main point of contact for the  school  and  possibly  paid  any
    relevant school fees and attended any  meetings  with  the  school  and
    accompanied them to school. He could have also  presented  evidence  in
    respect of the children's health records and evidence from  any  number
    of witnesses who could have attested to the fact that the  sponsor  was
    bringing up the children on his own.  I  find  that  the  lack  of  any
    reference to the mother and the birth certificate to be troubling.



 7. Further, the only evidence that the appellants have  produced  are  two
    photographs and the statement from [KS]. There was no evidence to prove
    that the statement had comes from him or  who  he  his.  There  was  no
    address given in the statement and no  evidence  of  his  identity.  In
    addition, there was no evidence from father Samson. In addition, I note
    that the sponsor was inconsistent about questions that were put to  him
    as to whether his children were in contact with their mother  initially
    saying he did not know and then changing his account to see  that  they
    had told him that there weren't.



 8. Although I accept that the sponsor is the father of the appellants I am
    not satisfied that the appellants have established that they were  part
    of the sponsor's family prior to his leaving Uganda and claiming asylum
    in the  United  Kingdom.  There  are  too  many  discrepancies  in  the
    sponsor's account and there were  no  statements  from  the  appellants
    themselves setting out their history, who they lived with,  where  they
    lived and who cared for them from 2003 or identifying which school they
    attended which is reasonable for them to have provided.



 9. The appellants allege that the  respondent's  decision  violates  their
    rights protected by Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. Under this article I must decide if there is a family  life  in
    the United Kingdom, if there is  an  interference  with  the  right  to
    private and family life, whether such interference in  accordance  with
    the law and whether it is proportionate.



10. As directed by the case law of the Upper Tribunal I note that the first
    question to be addressed is whether Article 8 is engaged at all.  I  am
    not satisfied that the appellants and the sponsor enjoy a  genuine  and
    subsisting family relationship due to the paucity of evidence that  the
    appellants were in the care of the sponsor for over 11 years and I find
    it likely that the appellants were in the care of  someone  other  than
    the sponsor from 2003. Having considered all the evidence in the  round
    I find that the discretion is proportionate.



11. The Judge dismissed both appellants appeals under the immigration rules
    and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.



12. The grounds of appeal  argue  the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
    appellants mother was named in the appellant's birth certificates.  The
    Judge made a mistake of fact  amounting  to  an  error  of  law  and/or
    unreasonably took account of an  a  relevant  consideration,  i.e.  her
    mistaken belief that the mother was not named in the birth certificate.
    This error of the Judge demonstrates manifests her failure to give  the
    requisite anxious scrutiny to the appeal concerned with human rights in
    the best  interests  of  the  two  children  appellants  rendering  her
    decision as a whole unlawful.



13. The Judge also found against the appellants that the sponsor had  given
    inconsistent evidence as to the ages of his children, having said  that
    when he claimed asylum they were a year older than they were  shown  to
    be by their  birth  certificates.  That  inconsistency  was  reasonably
    relied upon by the Entry Clearance Officer to find that the sponsor and
    the appellants were not related as claimed. However, the  DNA  evidence
    which  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  they  were  related  as  claimed.
    Nevertheless, the Judge treated the discrepancy as to  their  dates  of
    birth as a reason for making a negative  credibility  assessment.  This
    was not relevant in determining the issue whether the sponsor  and  the
    appellants lived as a family unit before he fled Uganda to seek  asylum
    in the United Kingdom.



14. In paragraph 6.6, the Judge gave another reason  for  disbelieving  the
    sponsor's evidence that the appellants lived with  him  until  he  left
    Uganda. The Judge was wrong to require the  sponsor  to  have  provided
    evidence from the appellants school, health records and  evidence  from
    witnesses who could have attested to the  fact  that  the  sponsor  was
    bringing up the children on his own since he  left  in  2003.  Fairness
    required that the sponsor should have specifically  asked  why  he  had
    failed to provide such evidence if it's absence was  to  be  relied  on
    against the child appellants. Fairness required  that  the  sponsor  be
    asked about these matters because the circumstances of the sponsor  and
    the appellants which  potentially  affected  the  capacity  to  collect
    evidence of the kind identified by the Judge in her decision. The Judge
    failed to take into account the traumatic circumstances  in  which  the
    sponsor had left his home. The traumatic circumstances in which he fled
    Uganda as he  escaped  from  police  custody  having  been  beaten  and
    tortured and his partner who was detained with him having died  because
    of similar ill-treatment. She also failed to consider the pariah status
    conferred on the sponsor by his community and  relatives  who  attacked
    him once his sexuality was discovered. The appellants stopped going  to
    school following the sponsor's flight from Uganda. The sponsor and  the
    appellants have little education and came from a rural community  where
    he spent his days looking after cattle.



15. The Judge failed to consider  whether  the  sponsor  should  have  been
    treated as a vulnerable witness and whether  putative  deficiencies  in
    his evidence might have been accounted for by that vulnerability rather
    than by want of credibility. The Judge did not take  into  account  the
    sponsors answer to a question put to him whether  he  has  any  medical
    conditions when he said in court "I have got severe headache from being
    beaten on the head and it causes memory loss". The appellant said  that
    he had not received  treatment  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  he  was
    registered with the General Practitioner his friend having taken him to
    the doctor. The appellant was granted asylum based on his  evidence  of
    being tortured in Uganda and the Judge at least should have  considered
    the possibility that he was a vulnerable  witness  and  that  was  what
    accounted for those shortcomings in the sponsor's evidence.



16. The  respondent's  rule  24  response  states  the  following  which  I
    summarise. While it is accepted that the Judge at paragraph 6.4  states
    that the birth certificates contained no reference to the mother's name
    when it appears that there is a reference to the mothers name albeit on
    the respondent's copy it is hard to read. It is submitted that this  is
    the only of many reasons given why the Judge  has  rejected  the  claim
    that the appellants formed part of the appellant's household  prior  to
    his departure to claim asylum.



17. The Judge's factual error in the circumstances  is  not  material.  The
    Judge outlines the factual discrepancy as part of the assessment of all
    the evidence provided by the sponsor and this is not directly linked to
    whether the children form part of the household as at time in question.
    The Judge found that no evidence had been produced  to  show  that  the
    children resided with the sponsor as he claims between  2003-2014.  The
    Judge in assessing what evidence there is to show  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the two appellants were residing  with  the  sponsor
    prior to his departure from Uganda. This is an obvious  point  and  one
    that the Judge must be satisfied with. The  Judge  clearly  found  that
    there was insufficient evidence provided to show paragraph 350 2D  (iv)
    was satisfied.



18. At paragraph 6.8 the Judge gave reasons for  refusing  the  appeal  and
    found that the appellant has not satisfied their burden of  proof  that
    the appellants were part of the  family  unit  at  the  time  that  the
    appellant left the country of habitual residence.  The  Judges  reasons
    include the many discrepancies in the sponsor's evidence and  the  lack
    of evidence including from the appellants  themselves  revealing  their
    history, who they lived with, where they lived and who cared  for  them
    from 2003 or identifying which schools they  had  attended.  The  Judge
    gives full reasons for rejecting the evidence of [KS]. The  grounds  of
    appeal seek to make excuses for the appellant not to have provided  any
    evidence. The Judge was entitled to find for  reasons  given  that  she
    found the evidence inadequate.



19. The sponsor was represented before the First-tier Tribunal and  it  was
    not submitted at the hearing that the sponsor should be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable  witness.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  sponsor   was
    undergoing any medical treatment or therapy or had any ill effects from
    his persecution in Uganda.


Findings as to whether there is an error of law in the decision

20. The Judge found that the appellants had not demonstrated that they were
    part of their sponsor's household before he fled Uganda and came to the
    United Kingdom where he was granted asylum on the basis that  he  is  a
    homosexual.



21. The Judge who had misgivings about the birth certificates  provided  by
    the appellants  however  accepted  that  the  two  appellants  are  the
    biological children of the sponsor. Therefore, the  grounds  of  appeal
    pertaining to the birth certificates has  no  merit  because  once  the
    Judge has accepted that the appellants are the biological children, any
    discrepancies in respect of the birth certificates are immaterial.  The
    Judge relied on the  DNA  report  to  find  that  the  sponsor  is  the
    appellants father.



22. The issue that the Judge determined against  the  appellants  was  that
    they had not demonstrated that they were part of  their  sponsors  pre-
    flight family and habitual residence as  required  by  the  immigration
    rules. The Judge found that there are too  many  discrepancies  in  the
    sponsor's account and the appellants applications are not supported  by
    evidence  which  he  found  reasonable  for  the  appellants  to   have
    submitted.



23. The burden of proof is on the appellants and it  is  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities. Therefore, the Judge was entitled to find it was for the
    appellants to provide evidence to show that they meet the  requirements
    of the immigration rules pertaining to their applications. The  grounds
    of appeal state that the  sponsor  could  not  have  been  expected  to
    provide evidence before  he  left  the  country  because  he  had  been
    tortured. However, the appellant has been in this  country  since  2003
    and therefore the Judge was entitled to find  that  evidence  from  the
    appellants at the very least  could  have  been  provided.  This  is  a
    perfectly legitimate enquiry for the  Judge  to  have  made  given  the
    sponsor's evidence that he has been looking  after  the  children  from
    2003 onwards while he lived in the United Kingdom.



24. The Judge also took into account the evidence that the  appellant  gave
    at his asylum interview which is inconsistent with were to say that his
    asylum interview. That was that his marriage broke down two years after
    the wedding and when what it was in  its  third  year.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to find in the circumstances that the  appellants  lived  with
    their mother and not the sponsor given that the mother  was  living  in
    Nigeria and the appellant was in the United Kingdom.



25. The Judge rejected the evidence of [KS] who claimed in a letter that it
    was him who looked after the appellants  after  the  sponsor  fled  the
    country. The Judge found that there was no  evidence  as  to  who  this
    person is and where he comes from. The Judge also found  there  was  no
    address given in his letter and no evidence of  his  identity.  In  the
    circumstances the Judge was entitled to reject this evidence.



26. The Judge also found that there was an inconsistency  in  the  evidence
    given by the sponsor when he was asked whether  his  children  were  in
    contact with their mother, initially saying he  didn't  know  and  then
    changing his account to say that his children had told  him  that  they
    were not. The Judge was entitled  to  find  that  it  would  have  been
    expected if the appellant was looking after  the  appellants  from  the
    United Kingdom would have known whether there are in contact with their
    mother and this is not something he would be inconsistent about.



27. I find that there is no material error in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge. The Judge gave legally sustainable reasons for his
    finding that the appellants have not demonstrated that they  were  part
    of their sponsor's household in Uganda  before  he  fled  the  country.
    There is no perversity in his reasoning and his conclusion and I uphold
    the decision. I find that no  differently  constituted  Tribunal  would
    come to different conclusion on the facts of this case.

Decision


Appeals dismissed for both appellants


Signed by


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs                                 S                                  Chana
    This 17th day of April 2018



