
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25251/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2020                   |On 10 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   MR M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal came before  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  case  management
    hearing following a somewhat lengthy history.

 2. In a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  15  June  2018  the  Upper
    Tribunal found an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, who had purported to allow the Appellant's appeal on the very
    narrow basis that he should be permitted to remain pending the  outcome
    of contact proceedings in relation to his son in the Family Court.  The
    hearing to re-make the decision in the Upper Tribunal was  then  listed
    on 11 March 2019, but was adjourned due to the fact that  Family  Court
    proceedings remained ongoing.  Correspondence  was  received  from  the
    Appellant's solicitors on a number of occasions but on 15 October  2019
    they wrote to the Upper Tribunal stating  the  Appellant's  family  law
    matter was due to be heard on 28 and 29 November and to ask for time to
    receive the order before  listing  the  appeal.   A  request  was  made
    subsequently on 5 December 2019, asking for the appeal not to be listed
    earlier than 24 January 2020 due to the Christmas holidays.

 3. At the Case Management hearing there was no appearance by or on  behalf
    of the Appellant.   A  telephone  call  was  made  to  the  Appellant's
    representatives, Malik & Malik, who stated that they remained on record
    but had unfortunately overlooked the hearing notice in relation to  the
    hearing and requested to have a telephone case management  hearing,  to
    which request, given the passage of time, I acceded.

    Hearing

 4. It was established that all parties had had sight of the order  of  the
    Family Court Order of Recorder Verdan QC following a final  hearing  on
    28 November 2019 whereby the court ordered inter alia:

         "7.  There shall be no direct contact between the  father  and  the
             child.

         8.   The order dated 27th  March  2017  for  weekly  Skype  contact
             between the father and the child is discharged.

         Indirect contact

         9.   The father may have indirect contact with the child by sending
             letters, cards, small gifts and/or occasional photos  no  more
             than once a month.  The mother shall once  a  month  show  the
             child any letters, cards, small gifts and/or occasional photos
             that the father sends".

 5. There were then further directions as to the manner in  which  indirect
    contact might take place via a PO Box  and  a  prohibited  steps  order
    preventing the Appellant from removing the child from the jurisdiction,
    with a penal notice attached.

 6. At [13] of the Order it is made clear  that  personal  service  of  the
    order was given to the  Appellant  as  he  was  present  in  court  and
    represented by Counsel.  He confirmed he understood the  terms  of  the
    order.

 7. The Appellant's solicitors confirmed that they had  had  sight  of  the
    order and acceded to the Upper  Tribunal's  proposal  that  the  appeal
    proceed to be  finally  determined  without  the  need  for  a  further
    hearing, given that the sole issue was the level of contact between the
    Appellant and his minor son.

    Decision

 8. In light of the final Order of  the  Family  Court  ruling  that  there
    should be indirect contact only, there was no further basis upon  which
    the Appellant could seek to remain in the  UK  based  on  the  need  to
    participate in the Family Court proceedings.

 9. For these reasons, with the consent of both representatives, I  re-make
    the decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 5 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 5 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

