
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2019                    |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                             mr MD SHAMSUZZAMAN
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Bisson (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr C. Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge JP Groom) (FtT)  promulgated
    on 22.3.2019 in which the appellant's human rights claim was dismissed.






Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh.  He  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student in 2010 and thereafter married his wife, a British Citizen,  on
    8.5.2016 according to Islamic law.  He applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of family life.


Grounds of appeal

3.   In grounds of appeal  the  appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to provide adequate reasons in support of the decision  and  by
    placing too much significance on the finding made that the marriage was
    not genuine, in light of the fact that the appellant's wife was unaware
    of his status until after the marriage had taken place [13].   The  FTT
    failed to properly consider Ex 1.

4.   The second ground of appeal argued that  the  FtT  failed  to  properly
    apply the proportionality test with regard to the appellant's marriage,
    his wife's ethnicity, the lack of family support  and  community  ties,
    and likely destitution on return.


Permission to appeal

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    Simpson on 14.5. 2019.  In granting permission the FTJ considered  that
    overall there was an inadequacy of reasoning and that both grounds were
    arguable.


Submissions

6.   At the hearing before me Mr Bisson representing the appellant  expanded
    on the grounds of appeal and submitted that the  FtT  decision  was  in
    effect tainted by the finding made as to  the  marriage  based  on  the
    wife's lack of awareness of the appellant's immigration  status.  There
    was no substantiation of the refusal in respect of Appendix FM, EX 1  &
    2.  The FtT failed to properly consider the relevant  issues  supported
    in the background material as to the treatment of ethnic minorities  in
    Bangladesh.  The FtT cited two Tribunal decisions  that  were  historic
    and  it  was  unclear  as  to  their  relevance.  The   proportionality
    assessment was flawed.

7.   In response Mr Tarlow submitted that he could not support the  decision
    and reasons, which contained material errors in law.


Discussion and conclusion

8.   I find that there were material errors in law and that both grounds  of
    appeal  were  made  out.   The  FtT  failed  to  place  weight  on  the
    considerable evidence supporting the claim  that  there  was  a  lawful
    marriage that was genuine and subsisting. The FtT decision and  reasons
    failed to make clear findings of fact on material issues including  the
    claim that the appellant's wife would be subject to  discrimination  in
    Bangladesh because of her ethnicity.  The evidence as to discrimination
    in Bangladesh was not properly considered nor reasoned. Further the FtT
    place too much weight and significance on the finding that the marriage
    was not genuine and subsisting.  In the refusal letter it was  accepted
    that the relationship requirements were met.  The FtT  failed  to  give
    reasons why it concluded that EX 1 was not met [13].

9.   In considering Article 8 outside the rules the FtT correctly cited  the
    decision of Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR  349  as  to  the  step  by  step
    approach,  but  somewhat  oddly  and  indeed  erroneously  referred  to
    historic case law of Nhundu and Chiwera  and  Bosanago  [17].   It  was
    unclear as to the relevance of such citations  and  which  in  my  view
    indicated a misdirection on the law on the part of the FtT.

10.  Having regard to all of the above I am satisfied that the decision  and
    reasons was inadequately considered and reasoned and the FtT failed  to
    properly determine the relevant issues.

11.  There is a material error of law disclosed in the decision which  shall
    be set aside.


Decision

12.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  or
    Hatton Cross (excluding FTJ Groom).


                               Signed                     Date 17.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 17.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




