
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: HU/25115/2018     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 February 2020               |On 16 March 2020                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                              tanuja krisnajee
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, instructed by Calices Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Mauritian national who was born on 11 February 1981.
     She appeals against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Lucas  on  15  July  2019,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of her human rights claim.



Background

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 9 November  2007.   She  held  entry
    clearance as a student.  The leave to enter which  was  duly  conferred
    was valid until 31 October 2008.  On 28  October  2008,  the  appellant
    attempted  to  make  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  but  that
    application was rejected  because  the  declaration  was  unsigned.   A
    further, completed application was presented to  the  respondent  on  8
    December 2009.  That application was successful and the  appellant  was
    granted leave to remain from 26 February 2009 to 31 October 2009.

 3. The appellant made a further application for  leave  to  remain  on  30
    October 2009.  That application was rejected on 2 December 2009 because
    the photographs provided were non-compliant.  On 31 December 2009,  the
    appellant  made  a  further  application  for  leave  to  remain.  That
    application was refused on 25 February 2010 with no  right  of  appeal.
    On 30 March 2010, the appellant applied  again  for  leave  to  remain.
    That application was granted on 18 May 2010 and the leave to remain was
    valid until 30 October 2010.

 4. The appellant left the United Kingdom on 30 October 2010.  She returned
    on 29 June 2011, holding entry clearance which had been granted  on  29
    March 2011 and was valid until 29 March 2013.  On 26  March  2013,  she
    applied for further leave to remain.  That application was  refused  on
    24 May 2013 and  the  appellant  lodged  an  appeal.   The  appeal  was
    subsequently withdrawn on 25 November 2013.

 5. On 10 October 2013, the appellant applied for further leave to  remain.
    That application  was  refused  on  2  December  2013.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, but the appeal was dismissed on 25
    September 2014.  Permission to appeal was refused by the  FtT  and  the
    appellant discontinued her subsequent  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  She became appeal rights exhausted on 19
    December 2014.

 6. During the course of her ongoing  appeal,  on  22  November  2014,  the
    appellant applied for further leave to remain.  The respondent  refused
    to entertain that application, since the appellant's leave was  already
    extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration  Act  1971.  On  29
    December 2014, following the withdrawal of her  appeal,  the  appellant
    applied again, and was this time successful.  She was granted leave  to
    remain from 3 February 2015 to 15 December 2019.  On  27  August  2017,
    the appellant's leave was curtailed so as to expire on 4 May 2018.   On
    2 May 2018, she applied for Indefinite Leave to  Remain  on  the  basis
    that she had ten years of continuous lawful residence  in  the  UK  and
    that she satisfied paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules accordingly.





The Respondent's Decision

 7. The respondent reached the decision under appeal on  5  December  2018.
    She  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  the  supporting
    evidence and the relevant requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   She
    then refused the application for the following reasons:

         "As can be seen from your immigration history you have not had  any
         lawful leave in the United Kingdom between these periods:  31.10.08
         and until your next leave,  which  was  granted  on  29.02.09;  and
         31.10.09 and until your next leave, which was granted on 18.05.010.



         It is noted that you have spent more than six months outside the UK
         during the period 30.10.10 when you left  the  UK  and  until  your
         return on 29.06.11 (241 days outside the UK).  You have provided  a
         letter from your psychiatrist dated  26.12.17  stating  you  suffer
         from depression.  We are unable to exercise discretion in this case
         as regards to being outside the UK for more than  the  allowed  180
         days, as neither were you hospitalised or  considered  unreasonable
         [sic] to expect you to travel back to the UK where there are a wide
         range of medical help/facilities available for your condition.   As
         a consequence, you have not acquired the 10 years continuous lawful
         residence in the UK."

 8. The remainder of the letter  considered  whether  the  appellant  could
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, the material part of
    which required her to establish that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to her re-integration to Mauritius,  and  whether  there  was
    otherwise a claim that the appellant's removal would breach  Article  8
    ECHR.  The respondent concluded that the appellant could not succeed on
    either basis.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant gave notice of her appeal on 14 December  2018.   In  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, it was submitted that the
    respondent had erred in refusing to exercise her discretion in  respect
    of the period spent outside the UK and that the  decision  was  in  any
    event contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

10. The appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas
    (hereafter "the judge")  on  26  June  2019.   The  appellant  was  not
    represented by Mr Malik but  by  experienced  counsel  specialising  in
    immigration law.  The respondent was  unrepresented.   At  [2]  of  his
    decision, the judge recorded  counsel  as  having  made  the  following
    concession:

         "At the commencement of this appeal, [counsel]  conceded  that  the
         appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules  with  regard  to
         Long Residence because of the "accepted" gaps in her  residence  in
         the UK.  The appeal therefore proceeded on the basis of the Article
         8 claim."



11. The judge undertook a review of the evidence in the appeal at [6]-[13].
     Amongst other documentary evidence to which he  referred,  there  were
    statements from the appellant and her sister (with whom  she  lives  in
    the  UK)  and  medical  evidence  confirming  that  the  appellant  has
    depression with a possible comorbid presentation of PTSD.  At [13], the
    judge recorded that the appellant and  her  sister  had  adopted  their
    statements.  (There being no Presenting Officer, there were no  further
    questions.) At [14], the judge recorded the submissions made by counsel
    in the following way:

         "Submitting to the Tribunal, [counsel] repeated that the  appellant
         could not satisfy the rules with  regard  to  Long  Residence.   He
         relied upon the family and private life of the appellant within the
         UK.  He noted that she lived in the UK with her  sister,  has  been
         educated here and was now in employment with  a  solicitor's  firm.
         He relied upon her medical condition and the  opinion  of  Dr  Sham
         that her overall condition would deteriorate if she was required to
         leave  the  UK.   He  believed  therefore  that  there  were   very
         significant  obstacles  to  return  and  that  the  appeal   should
         therefore be allowed under  paragraph  276ADE(i)(6)  [sic]  of  the
         rules."

12. At [16]-[24], the judge set out his reasons for dismissing the  appeal.
    He noted that the appellant's condition was neither  severe  nor  life-
    threatening and that she had supportive parents in Mauritius,  who  had
    assisted her recovery from her last period  of  depression:  [19].   He
    noted that she was a graduate and that she  would  be  able  to  access
    medical treatment in Mauritius, as she had before: [21].   He  did  not
    accept that there were very significant obstacles to her re-integration
    to the country of her nationality and he did not accept that  her  ties
    to the UK, including the time she had spent studying here, rendered  it
    disproportionate to return her to Mauritius: [22].  He considered there
    to be no other exceptional circumstances: [23]

13.  The  appellant's  solicitors  sought  permission  to   appeal.    That
    application was refused by a  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A
    renewed application was made,  supported  by  grounds  which  had  been
    settled by Mr Malik.  There are no fewer than eight grounds of  appeal,
    which may be summarised as follows:

      a) The appeal hearing had been short and  procedurally  unfair,  since
         the appellant had not had an opportunity to address the issues.

      b) The judge erred in law in  his  consideration  of  the  appellant's
         contention that she satisfied paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.

      c) The judge had failed to  make  adequate  findings  in  relation  to
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

      d) The judge had left material matters out of account  in  considering
         the proportionality of the appellant's removal.

      e) The judge omitted material matters from his  consideration  of  the
         scope of the appellant's private life in the UK.

      f) The judge's consideration of the appellant's  medical  claim  under
         Article 8 ECHR was legally inadequate.

      g) The judge had erred in his approach to section  117B  of  the  2002
         Act.

      h) The reasons given by the  judge  for  dismissing  the  appeal  were
         legally inadequate when considered as a whole.

14. In his oral submissions, Mr  Malik  condensed  his  argument  into  the
    following  three  points.   Firstly,  he  submitted  that  the  judge's
    dismissal  of  the  appellant's  Article   8   ECHR   claim   displayed
    insufficient consideration of the medical evidence before  him.   There
    was a detailed report  by  Dr  Shirin  Shams  at  pages  15-33  of  the
    appellant's trial bundle but the judge had failed to make a finding  as
    to whether or not the appellant suffered from PTSD.  There was  a  lack
    of engagement with that report, whether  as  regards  the  question  of
    whether there were very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  re-
    integration or in relation to Article 8 ECHR  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

15. Secondly, Mr Malik submitted that the judge had failed to consider  the
    appellant's claim under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.   Even
    if the appellant's counsel had conceded that the  appellant  could  not
    meet those Rules, it was incumbent on the judge to consider the reasons
    for the gaps in the appellant's residence.  In the event that the judge
    had turned his mind to the guidance, he could have found that the  gaps
    were addressed in a manner which was acceptable under the  respondent's
    guidance.  In those circumstances, the appeal would have  been  allowed
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  At our request, Mr Malik clarified that the
    period during which he contended that the appellant  had  acquired  ten
    years continuous lawful residence was between July 2009 and July  2019.
    He submitted that insofar  as  the  appellant  had  not  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK during that period, the gaps were permitted  by  the
    respondent's Long Residence guidance.

16. Thirdly, Mr Malik submitted  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's side of the Article 8 ECHR balance  sheet  was  inadequate.
    There was, he submitted, evidence of dependency between  the  appellant
    and her sister.  The threshold in Kugathas [2003] INLR 170 was arguably
    crossed on the facts of this case and the judge had erred in failing to
    consider whether there was a family life between them.  It  was  to  be
    recalled, in that connection,  that  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    individual with a diagnosis of mental health problems including PTSD.

17. Mr Malik did not seek to develop the first ground of appeal,  by  which
    it was contended that the hearing had  been  procedurally  unfair.   In
    respect of the fourth ground, he submitted that the judge had erred  in
    law in failing  to  consider  the  benefit  to  the  community  of  the
    appellant remaining in the UK.  She works at a law firm, he  submitted,
    which showed that she was an asset to the United Kingdom.

18. In reply, Ms Cunha submitted that the judge's decision  was  adequately
    reasoned and that the conclusions he had reached were open to him as  a
    matter of law.  The judge  could  not  be  criticised  for  failing  to
    consider the respondent's policy, given the way in which the  case  had
    been argued before him.  Whether or not the appellant engaged the terms
    of the policy was a matter for the respondent but not  for  the  judge.
    The judge had not been  required  to  state  his  reasons  for  finding
    against the appellant under Article 8 ECHR in any greater  detail.   He
    had plainly been aware of the appellant's mental health and it was  not
    clear why he should have set out the conclusions of Dr Shams at greater
    length; he had plainly understood the thrust of that report.  There was
    obviously no way in which the judge could  have  concluded  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  re-integration  to
    Mauritius.

19. Little weight was to  be  attached  to  the  appellant's  private  life
    insofar as it consisted of  studying  in  the  UK:  Nasim.   There  was
    nothing arguably exceptional to give rise to an arguable  case  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  The evidence  was  unarguably  insufficient  to
    cross the threshold presented by Kugathas  and  the  later  authorities
    which concerned the existence of a family life between adult  siblings.
    The question  posed  by  Jitendra  Rai  was  whether  there  was  real,
    committed or effective  support  and  there  was  not.   The  appellant
    appeared to be aggrieved by the brevity of the hearing before  the  FtT
    but the reality was that the appellant was  professionally  represented
    and the respondent was unrepresented.  It was quite understandable,  in
    those circumstances, that the hearing had been relatively brief.

20. Mr Malik did not seek to respond to Ms Cunha's submissions.



Discussion

21. Mr Malik was correct not to develop the  first  ground  of  appeal,  by
    which it was submitted that the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    had been procedurally unfair.  It certainly seems that the hearing  was
    comparatively brief but there is no reason whatsoever to think that  it
    was unfair.  The standard directions  are  for  witness  statements  to
    stand as evidence in chief.  There was no Presenting  Officer,  so  the
    two witnesses (the appellant and her sister) were  not  cross-examined.
    Since they both speak English, and since the judge had no questions  of
    his own for them, the time it took for them to give oral evidence would
    have amounted to nothing more than the adoption  of  their  statements.
    There were then succinct submissions from counsel.  It is estimated  in
    the grounds that the hearing took no more than fifteen  minutes.   That
    is probably correct but that  is  no  basis  for  concluding  that  the
    hearing was procedurally unfair.  The appellant was represented  by  an
    experienced member of the immigration Bar and there is no evidence from
    him, whether by witness statement or otherwise, to suggest  that  there
    was anything of concern about the judge's conduct of the hearing.

22. Mr Malik did submit that the  judge's  consideration  of  the  question
    posed by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules  was  legally
    inadequate.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  had   given   inadequate
    consideration to the report of Dr Shams, and that  this  report  should
    have  been  of  significance  to   the   assessment   under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and  to  the  assessment  outside  the  Rules.   In  this
    respect, we agree with Ms Cunha.  The judge was plainly  aware  of  the
    report and took it into account.  He summarised the key conclusions and
    he explained, by a concise and precise process of reasoning, why he did
    not consider that the appellant's depression and  possible  PTSD  would
    give rise to  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  re-integration  to
    Mauritius.  He concluded that the appellant's condition was  not  life-
    threatening; that her parents would support her; and that she would  be
    able to access medical treatment as she had in  the  past.   Given  the
    threshold presented by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) (see Parveen [2018] EWCA
    Civ 932, at [8]-[9]), we consider that  the  judge  engaged  adequately
    with the medical evidence, and with the evidence as  a  whole,  in  his
    consideration of the obstacles which  there  were  to  the  appellant's
    return to Mauritius.

23. Mr Malik's second submission  founders  at  the  outset.   As  we  have
    recorded, counsel who represented the appellant before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal expressly accepted at the start of  the  hearing  and  at  the
    start of his submissions that he was unable to develop an  argument  in
    relation to paragraph 276B.   The  course  that  the  hearing  took  is
    equally clear from the judge's record of counsel's submissions, at [14]
    of the decision.  It was not submitted on the appellant's  behalf  that
    she was able to meet the requirements of this paragraph of the Rules or
    that the respondent had erred in refusing to  exercise  her  discretion
    under the Long Residence policy.  No such arguments having been pursued
    before the judge, it is wholly inappropriate to suggest that the  judge
    erred in law in not dealing with the points.  The ground of appeal must
    fail on that basis.

24. In any event, the submissions  Mr  Malik  sought  to  advance  in  this
    respect were incapable of establishing that any such error on the  part
    of the judge was a material  one.   As  recorded  in  the  respondent's
    decision, there were  three  periods  identified  as  disentitling  the
    appellant to ILR under paragraph 276B.  The first of these  gaps,  from
    31 October 2008 to 29 February 2009, was on account  of  the  appellant
    having failed to sign the declaration on her  application  for  further
    leave to remain.  On receipt of the notification  from  the  respondent
    that the declaration was unsigned, she corrected the error and returned
    the form.  By the time she did so, her leave  to  remain  had  expired.
    She was therefore without leave between 31 October 2008 and 29 February
    2009, when leave was finally granted in  response  to  the  out-of-time
    application.  Mr Malik was unable to take us to any  provision  in  the
    Rules or any part of the  respondent's  guidance  which  even  arguably
    suggested that the respondent should have  overlooked  this  period  of
    overstaying.

25. The appellant's second period of overstaying was even  longer,  between
    31 October 2009 and 18 May 2010.  This period was also accepted to have
    occurred for essentially the reason given  by  the  respondent  in  the
    decision under challenge.  The appellant had presented the  wrong  size
    of photograph with her application for further leave to remain.  By the
    time she had been notified of the error  and  corrected  it  (with  the
    assistance of a firm of solicitors), her leave had  expired.   As  with
    the first period, Mr Malik was unable to take us to a part of the Rules
    or the guidance which even arguably applied to a gap  of  this  nature.
    He submitted at one point that the part of the guidance  which  allowed
    for  'evidence  of  exceptional  circumstances  which   prevented   the
    applicant from applying' would have availed her.  But there was nothing
    which prevented the applicant from making a compliant application;  she
    simply failed on the first occasion to complete the form  properly  and
    failed, on the second occasions, to enclose  the  correct  photographs.
    She does not suggest that the  respondent  erred  in  rejecting  either
    application as invalid.  These were her errors and did not  come  about
    because of circumstances beyond her control.

26. Then there is the period of 241 days during  which  the  appellant  was
    outside the United Kingdom, between 30 October 2010 and 29  June  2011.
    The basis upon which the respondent's discretion  might  ordinarily  be
    exercised in respect of such periods is set  out  at  page  11  of  the
    current guidance.  It states that "it may be  appropriate  to  exercise
    discretion  over  excess  absences  in  compelling   or   compassionate
    circumstances, for example  where  the  applicant  was  prevented  from
    returning to the UK through unavoidable circumstances."

27. That the respondent turned her mind to that policy  guidance  is  clear
    from  the  decision  itself  (as  reproduced  under  [7]  above).   The
    respondent refused to exercise  her  discretion  on  that  basis.   The
    appellant explains in her witness  statement  the  circumstances  which
    occurred when she  travelled  back  to  Mauritius  in  2010.   She  had
    depression and other illnesses and sought assistance, particularly from
    a spiritual healer and a psychiatrist named Dr Ramkoosalsing.  There is
    nothing in the evidence before us which begins to provide a  basis  for
    taking a different view than the respondent's.  Whilst we  accept  that
    the appellant experienced  these  problems,  there  was  nothing  which
    actually prevented her from returning to the UK.  The threshold in  the
    policy, which is evidently intended to be an elevated one, is not  even
    arguably crossed on the evidence presented in  the  witness  statements
    and supporting exhibits.  Had the judge been invited to  consider  this
    point - which he plainly was not - he would have  resolved  it  against
    the appellant.

28. In summary, the fundamental difficulty with the second point pursued by
    Mr Malik is that it was abandoned before the FtT.  Even  if  that  were
    not the case, however, we consider that it could  not  have  succeeded,
    for the reasons above.

29. Mr Malik's third submission represented a consolidation of his original
    grounds (d)-(h).  The  overarching  submission  was  that  the  judge's
    assessment of Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules was legally deficient in
    that material matters had been left out of account on both sides of the
    balance sheet.  On the appellant's side of the balance sheet, Mr  Malik
    submitted that the judge had failed to consider whether the appellant's
    relationship with her sister engaged Article 8 ECHR in its family  life
    aspect.

30. We explored with Mr Malik the evidential foundation upon which  it  was
    submitted that there existed more  than  normal  emotional  ties[1]  or
    real, effective and committed support[2] between the appellant and  her
    sister.  He reminded us that the appellant suffers  from  a  degree  of
    mental ill health and that she lives with  her  sister.   Beyond  that,
    there was  nothing.   There  is  evidently  no  arguable  basis  for  a
    submission that there was a protected family life.  The appellant works
    in a firm of solicitors and there is no  proper  basis  for  concluding
    that there is what Sedley LJ described in Kugathas as the  "irreducible
    minimum of what family life implies"  between  the  appellant  and  her
    sister.  The concept of family life under Article 8 ECHR has  been  the
    subject of extensive consideration by the Court  of  Appeal  in  recent
    years and it is clearly not wide enough  to  encompass  a  relationship
    such as this.

31. Mr Malik also submitted, with reference to UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ
    975; [2012] 1 WLR 127 that the judge had failed to turn his mind to the
    benefit to the community which would be brought about if the  appellant
    were permitted to remain.  As the President explained in Thakrar [2018]
    UKUT 336 (IAC); [2019] Imm AR 143,  however,  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control is only likely to  be  diluted  by  a  contribution
    which is very significant.  We do not wish to minimise the  appellant's
    achievements in this country with  what  follows.   She  passed  a  law
    degree in this country and has worked at a firm of solicitors for  some
    years.  These are significant achievements but they plainly do not fall
    into the category of  case  in  which  an  individual's  value  to  the
    community might properly reduce the weight which is otherwise  accorded
    to immigration control, as underlined in Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

32. Mr Malik did not develop orally the remaining points  he  had  made  in
    writing in relation to the judge's assessment of Article  8  ECHR.   He
    was right not to do so.  There were general submissions that the  judge
    had failed to consider the nature of the appellant's  private  life  in
    the UK but that is plainly not correct.  The  judge  was  clearly  well
    aware of the fact that the appellant had been in the UK for a number of
    years, that she worked in a solicitor's firm,  that  she  had  invested
    time and money in her career and that she suffered  from  a  degree  of
    mental ill health.

33. There was also a contention, advanced at ground (h) that the judge  had
    failed to apply s117B NIAA 2002 correctly.  In fact, the judge made  no
    reference to the relevant provisions in Part 5A of the Act.  He  simply
    said, at [23], that there were no other  exceptional  circumstances  on
    the facts of the case.  In another case, we might have considered  that
    inadequate as a matter of law but is was clearly adequate in this case.
     As in TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109: the  appellant  accrued  her
    private life in the UK when her status was  precarious;  she  does  not
    qualify for leave  under  the  Immigration  Rules;  and  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances (as defined) which place  her  in  the  small
    class of case in which leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  should  be
    granted so as to avoid contravention of Article 8 ECHR.  Had the  judge
    turned his mind expressly to s117B NIAA 2002, such consideration  could
    only have been to the  appellant's  disadvantage.   Whilst  she  speaks
    English and is financially  independent,  these  are  neutral  matters,
    which do not militate  positively  in  her  favour  in  the  scales  of
    proportionality: Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1 WLR 5536 refers,  at
    [57].  The maintenance of orderly immigration control is in the  public
    interest, however, and her private life accrued  when  her  status  was
    precarious.  Those matters militate against her and there  is  nothing,
    in our judgment, which begins to approach the particularly strong  case
    required to displace  the  normative  presumption  that  little  weight
    should be given to her private life in  the  UK  (Rhuppiah  refers,  at
    [49]).

34. In the circumstances, we do not consider Judge Lucas to have  erred  in
    law in his dismissal of  the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds and this appeal is dismissed.





Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                13 March 2020
                           -----------------------
[1] Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31; [2003] INLR 170
[2] Jitendra Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320

