
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25691/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                            |On 22 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                DINUK LAKMAL KAMBURUGAMUWE LOKU ARACHCHILAGE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, instructed by Liyon Legal Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on  27  May  1976.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 4 October 2009 with leave as a Tier  4
    (General) student valid until 20 January 2012.

 3. On 12 January 2012, the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) student which  was  subsequently  granted,  valid
    until 30 November 2013.

 4. On 12 December 2013, the appellant married  a  British  citizen,  Diane
    Patricia Pfeiffer.

 5. On 29 November 2013, the appellant applied for further leave to  remain
    as the spouse of a British citizen and was granted leave to  remain  on
    that basis from 14 January 2014 to 14 July 2016.

 6. On 14 July 2016, the appellant applied for further leave to  remain  as
    the partner of a British citizen under para R-LTRP of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 7. On 4 November 2016, the Secretary of State refused that application for
    leave  to  remain.   It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  met   the
    'eligibility' requirements of para E-LTRP.   However,  the  appellant's
    application was refused under the 'suitability' requirement in para  R-
    LTRP.1.1.(c)(i) read with para S-LTR.1.6, namely that his presence  was
    not "conducive to the public  good  because  [his]  conduct  (including
    convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paras  E-LTR.1.3  to  1.5.),
    character, association, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow
    [him] to remain in the UK".  The Secretary of State was satisfied  that
    the appellant had previously obtained, and had used in making his  Tier
    4 application  on  12  January  2012,  a  fraudulently  obtained  TOEIC
    certificate which had been cancelled by ETS on the basis  that  he  had
    used a 'proxy test taker' when taking the 'speaking and  writing'  part
    of an English language test at Opal College on 13 December 2011.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His right of appeal
    was limited to human rights grounds, namely  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Judge Davidge allowed the appellant's appeal under Article  8.   First,
    she was not satisfied that the  respondent  had  established  that  the
    appellant had fraudulently  obtained  and  used  the  English  language
    certificate.   Secondly,  as  it  was  accepted  before  her  that  the
    appellant met all other requirements of the 'partner' route in Appendix
    FM,  she  concluded  that  the   appellant's   removal   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his family life and so a  breach  of
    Article 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Frankish) on 28 March 2018  but  on  16  April  2018  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Perkins) granted the Secretary  of  State  permission  to
    appeal.

10. On 11 October 2018, the appellant filed a Rule  24  notice  seeking  to
    uphold Judge Davidge's decision.



The Grounds of Appeal

11. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, upon  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted, contains two challenges to  the  judge's  decision.
    First, the  judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent  had  discharged  the  'evidential  burden'  upon   him   to
    demonstrate that the appellant had practised deception on the basis  of
    the 'Look-Up Tool'  invalidating  the  appellant's  test  result,  read
    together with the generic evidence concerning ETS cases.  Secondly,  in
    any event, even if the deception was not  established,  the  judge  had
    been wrong to allow the appeal under Article 8 as there was nothing  to
    prevent the appellant returning to Sri Lanka  in  order  to  apply  for
    entry clearance.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing, the Secretary of State was represented  by  Mr  Howells
    and the appellant was represented by Mr Sharma.

13. Mr Howells, in his submissions, maintained the first ground of  appeal.
    He submitted that the judge had erred in law by failing  to  find  that
    the Secretary of State had satisfied the 'evidential burden'  upon  him
    on the basis of the invalidation of the appellant's  test  result  read
    with the well-known generic evidence concerning ETS cases.  Mr  Howells
    did not, however, press the second ground  of  appeal  in  relation  to
    Article 8.  He accepted that, if the judge was entitled to find that it
    had not been established that the appellant had practised deception  in
    his previous application, as he met all the other requirements  of  the
    'partner' route in Appendix FM then the judge had been entitled to find
    that his removal would breach Article 8.

14. In relation to the first ground, I drew Mr Howells'  attention  to  the
    judge's factual finding in para 10 of her  determination.   There,  she
    accepted that the appellant  had  put  forward  a  "plausible  innocent
    explanation" that he had attended the test centre and  taken  the  test
    himself.  Indeed, she noted that the (then) Presenting Officer "did not
    pursue a challenge to credibility based on the appellant's  account  of
    attending the centre and taking the test, having fully explored  it  in
    cross-examination".  Mr Howells  acknowledged  that  he  was  in  some
    difficulties on ground 1  given  this  unchallenged  finding  that  the
    appellant  had  established  an  innocent  explanation  even   if   the
    'evidential burden' had passed to the appellant.

15. In response, Mr Sharma in the light  of  Mr  Howells'  submissions  and
    stance, was content to rely upon the Rule 24 notice seeking to maintain
    the judge's decision.

Discussion

16. The background to the so-called ETS cases is well-known and the correct
    judicial approach is settled (see, e.g. SSHD v  Shehzad  and  Chowdhury
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and Majumder and  Qadir  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    1167).  The approach was not in dispute before me and can be summarised
    as follows.

17. The legal burden of establishing on  a  balance  of  probabilities  the
    "deception" (namely that the appellant dishonestly used  a  proxy  test
    taker) is upon the Secretary of State.  However, the combined effect of
    the 'Look-Up Tool' evidence  (that  the  test  had  been  cancelled  as
    "invalid" by ETS  following  interrogation  by  the  voice  recognition
    software) together with the generic evidence as  to  that  process,  is
    sufficient to discharge the evidential burden  upon  the  Secretary  of
    State, shifting to the appellant an evidential burden to demonstrate an
    'innocent explanation'.  In the absence of the latter, it would be open
    to a judge to find that the Secretary of State had discharged the legal
    burden of establishing deception on a balance of probabilities.

18. That framework, however, is dependent upon the reliability of the 'Look-
    Up Tool' evidence.  That evidence would be worthless,  as  regards  any
    particular individual, unless it is established that it relates to that
    individual.  In this case, Judge Davidge was  not  satisfied  that  the
    'Look-Up Tool' evidence was reliable, namely that  it  was  established
    that it related to the appellant.  The basis for this is  set  out,  in
    some detail, at paras 9-14 of her determination.  At the  core  of  her
    reasoning is that fact that, inexplicably, the 'Look-Up Tool'  evidence
    referred to two 'writing and speaking' tests taken by the appellant  on
    16 November 2011 and 13 December 2011.  It  was  the  appellant's  case
    throughout that he had taken the 'speaking  and  writing'  test  on  13
    December 2011 and that the result in respect of 16  November  2011  did
    not relate to him.  Having  set  out  the  evidence  and  the  parties'
    respective submissions in relation  to  this,  the  judge  reached  the
    following conclusion at paras 13-14 of her determination:

         "13. The respondent relies on the test taken on 13 December 2011 in
             the reasons for refusal.  The evidence of the 16 November test
             is not dealt with at all.  I repeatedly took Mr Baker  to  the
             ETS evidence showing that the 16 November and the 13  December
             were both for speaking asking for an  explanation  as  to  why
             there were two tests for speaking, both  apparently  resulting
             in high marks, and both allegedly with a proxy.  He was simply
             unable to help me with the evidence  and  did  not  offer  any
             coherent explanation for two speaking  tests  in  the  Look-Up
             Tool results.  Instead in submissions Mr Baker restricted  his
             discussion to that of 13 December 2011.

         14.  The problem with Mr Baker's submission is  that  the  evidence
             relied on is not clear.  ETS have  the  appellant  taking  the
             speaking test twice once on 16 November 2011 and again  on  13
             December 2011.  The appellant says that he only took the  test
             once, on 13 December 2011.  There was no cross-examination  on
             that point.  The only certificate is the one produced  by  the
             appellant, and that has the 13 December as the test date.  The
             notes at "J" of the respondent's  bundle  only  refer  to  the
             speaking test of the 13 December.  If  the  test  is  not  the
             appellant's whose is it and why is it in the Look-Up Tool  for
             this appellant.  The evidence raises real issues of  identity.
             In short, the 16 November test results in the ETS Look-Up Tool
             are entirely  unexplained,  a  complete  mystery.   There  are
             obvious questions including why only one test is relied on  in
             the reasons for refusal letter,  why  would  someone  who  has
             passed a speaking test with a  proxy  take  another  one  only
             weeks later, could they in any event obtain such test dates in
             close  succession.   These  and  other  questions   serve   to
             illustrate the uncertainty of the evidence.  The Look-Up  Tool
             shows both tests have been concluded to be  invalid  i.e.  ETS
             are clearly satisfied that they were taken by  a  proxy.   The
             unexplained  position  of  the  16  November  undermines   the
             respondent's evidence.  The confusion about  the  16  November
             position infects the  13  December  position.   It  is  not  a
             sufficient answer to  simply  say  that  the  respondent  only
             relies on the December position."

19. Whilst the judge does not spell it out in explicit terms, it  is  clear
    that she concluded that the 'evidential burden' was not discharged by a
    combination of the 'Look-Up Tool' evidence and generic evidence.   That
    was because the former was  simply  "unreliable"  given  the  "entirely
    unexplained" and "complete mystery" of the respondent's evidence  being
    that the appellant took a test on 16 November 2011 - which was not part
    of his case - and which the judge clearly accepted he  had  not  taken.
    That called into question the reliability  of  the  "identity"  of  the
    person to whom the test result on 13 December 2011 related.

20. The integrity of the judge's reasoning which led her to this conclusion
    is not challenged in the grounds of appeal.   Indeed,  the  grounds  of
    appeal simply do not engage with her reasoning but simply assert  -  as
    if this were the usual kind of ETS  case  -  that  the  'Look-Up  Tool'
    evidence taken with the generic  evidence  suffices  to  discharge  the
    evidential burden.   It was, in fact, not  a  'usual'  case.   For  the
    reasons I have given, the judge was  fully  entitled  to  find,  in  my
    judgment, that that  evidence  was  not  sufficient  to  discharge  the
    evidential burden upon the Secretary of State.

21. In any event, the judge accepted the appellant's "innocent explanation"
    and that, in fact, he had attended  and  taken  the  relevant  test  in
    person on 13 December 2011.  It  would  appear  from  para  10  of  her
    determination, and Mr Howells did not draw anything to my attention  to
    counter this, that  the  Presenting  Officer  had  not  challenged  the
    credibility of the appellant's account.  In accepting  the  appellant's
    'innocent explanation', the judge was properly entitled, in  accordance
    with the accepted legal position, to find that even if the  'evidential
    burden' had been discharged that in the face of an  accepted  'innocent
    explanation' the respondent had failed to discharge the legal burden of
    establishing deception on a balance of  probabilities.   That  was  the
    judge's finding in para 15 (read with para 10).

22. The respondent has failed, in my judgment, to establish that the  judge
    was wrong to  find  that  he  had  not  established  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities  that  the  appellant  used  deception  by  submitting  a
    fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate.

23. As I have already indicated, Mr Howells placed  no  reliance  upon  the
    second ground of appeal.  He accepted that the judge  was  entitled  to
    find,  if  her  finding  in  respect  of  deception  stood,  that   the
    appellant's removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
    family life in the UK.  Indeed, it is clear from para 16 of the judge's
    determination that the Presenting Officer did not seek to argue to  the
    contrary.  The appellant met all the requirements under  the  'partner'
    route, including the genuineness of his relationship and the  financial
    eligibility requirements.  Absent deception, it was  properly  open  to
    the judge rationally to conclude that to require the appellant to leave
    the UK to seek entry clearance was pointless and disproportionate (see,
    e.g. Tikka v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 642 at [22]).

24. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.



Decision

25. Accordingly, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision stands.

26. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             6 November 2018


Respondent's name corrected pursuant to rule 42 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           20, November 2018

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Davidge made a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid  or
may be payable.  That decision also stands.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             6 November 2018
