
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/25337/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th February 2019                    |On 19th March 2019                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    A U K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Gill Q.C, instructed by Connaughts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Zambia born  in  June  1968.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis, dated 8  August
    2017,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  deportation  on  human  rights
    grounds. The Appellant is married to a British citizen and they have  a
    son, A, who is 13 years old.

2.   The  Appellant  appealed  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  made  the
    following errors of law:
    (i)  Failed to take into account material evidence and  properly  apply
         section 117C;
    (ii) Failed to follow Devaseelan;
    (iii)    Reached a  conclusion  which  was  not  open  to  him  on  the
         evidence, namely that the  Appellant's  wife  had  a  choice  about
         accompanying him to Zambia;
    (iv)  Failed  to  properly  apply  Zambrano  and  other   relevant   EU
         provisions; and
    (v)  Misdirected himself in finding that  the  Appellant  represents  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  society  and
         failed to give adequate reasons for this conclusion.


3.   Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  on  the  ground
    that the Zambrano issue was just arguable. She gave permission  on  all
    grounds.


The Appellant's immigration history

4.   The Appellant arrived in the UK on 11 April 1983 for  the  purposes  of
    adoption. His leave expired on 21 September 1988. His  application  for
    leave to remain made in April 1992 was refused with no right of appeal.
    On 22 May 1998 he was advised that that he was liable  to  deportation,
    but no action was taken as  the  Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  a
    deportation order had been made. On 3 June  2008  he  was  served  with
    notice of liability to deportation and a decision to deport was made on
    3 February 2010.  His  appeal  was  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    Respondent was required to make a decision  under  the  UK  Border  Act
    2007. In 2012 the Appellant was  diagnosed  with  a  cancerous  stomach
    tumour. A new decision to deport was made on 12 March 2013. His  appeal
    was allowed on 21 August 2013 and he was granted  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds until 15 April 2016.

5.   On 23 April 2014, the Appellant was convicted of  the  five  counts  of
    conspiracy to defraud and sentenced  to  six  years  imprisonment.  The
    offences were committed in 2007. A further decision to deport was  made
    on 1 November 2016, the subject of this appeal.


The Appellant's previous convictions

6.   The Appellant was convicted of the following offences:
    (1)  19 August 1995: Taking a conveyance without authority. Conditional
         discharge.
    (2)  7 May 1987: Obtaining property by  deception  and  two  counts  of
         attempting to obtain property by deception. Sentenced to 12  months
         imprisonment suspended for two years.
    (3)  13 July 1990: Obtaining property by deception and theft. Sentenced
         to 24 months imprisonment.
    (4)  17 February 1992: Obtaining property by  deception  and  handling.
         Sentenced to 24 months imprisonment. Warned of  deportation  on  25
         September 1992.
    (5)  28 October 1996: Two counts of theft and one count of theft  of  a
         vehicle. Sentenced to 36 months imprisonment (consecutive sentences
         of 21 months and 15 months).
    (6)  3 April 2008: Making false representations to gain  and  obtain  a
         money transfer by deception. Sentenced to  18  months  imprisonment
         (time served from March 2008 to January 2009 including  immigration
         detention).
    (7)  10 January 2013: Driving  whilst  disqualified.  Sentenced  to  12
         months community order.
    (8)  23  April  2014:  Five  counts  of  conspiracy  to  defraud  (�3.5
         million). Sentenced to six years  imprisonment  (time  served  from
         April 2014 to April 2017).

7.   The judge made the following remarks when sentencing the Appellant:
         "A K , I have had the advantage of seeing you give evidence over  a
         very long period of time, you struck me as a  thoroughly  dishonest
         man, you enjoyed an expensive lifestyle at  the  expense  of  other
         people, you stayed in the most  expensive  hotels  in  London,  you
         lived, for a substantial period of months, in an expensive hotel in
         Birmingham,  you  required  a  chauffeur  driven  limousine  to  be
         available to take you wherever you wished throughout  the  country,
         incurring substantial bills with the hirer and yet seemed  to  have
         little interest in repaying it.  You  acquired  a  number  of  very
         expensive houses and apartments, both  in  London  and  in  Greater
         Manchester. When giving evidence, it was clear to me (and  it  must
         have been to the jury) that you were deliberately trying  to  avoid
         answering questions, you displayed the most unattractive  arrogance
         and condescension, this may be exemplified by noting that,  on  one
         occasion during your evidence, you admitted that you would  not  be
         volunteering information and would only give it if directly  asked,
         on a number of occasions, I exhorted you  to  answer  questions  in
         your own interest, you declined to do so.
         Your role was to curry  favour  with  people  and  facilitate  MJ's
         actions  in  seeking  to  obtain  loans,  the  frequency  of  false
         documentation, which related to properties you had owned,  or  were
         connected with and your constant contact with lawyers  involved  in
         affecting the  securities,  lead  me  to  conclude  that  you  were
         substantially responsible for the organisation  of  this  fraud.  I
         bear in mind your criminal  record  demonstrates  a  propensity  to
         dishonesty, but I say in this case  I  do  not  attach  significant
         weight to it as an aggravating factor. I have  read  carefully  the
         medical reports, which have been submitted on your behalf and it is
         good to  read  that  the  serious  medical  conditions,  which  you
         suffered from, have been dealt with, with considerable  success.  I
         bear in mind that these offences were committed in  2007  and  2008
         and that it was over five years before they came to trial,  on  the
         other hand, you did little to expedite matters."

Relevant law

8.   Section 117C Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

         Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
    criminals
         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.
         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal.
         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.
         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-
             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,
             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
         Kingdom, and
             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.
         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.
         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2.
         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

9.   The following  cases  were  relied  on  in  submissions.  The  relevant
    paragraphs are as follows:
         Heshim Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 at 52, 53, 77, 80, 94, 89
         MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at 39
         NA Pakistan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at 19, 20, 28, 30
         KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 at 21 to 23, 33 to 36
         Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50
         Uner v Netherlands (2007) 45 EHRR 14
         Chavez-Vilchez (Case C-133/15) at 71
         Rendon Marin (Case C 165/14) at held (3) of headnote
         Nilay Patel v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2028 at 70 to 72, 75, 79
         VM Jamaica v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 255 at 54 to 60

Appellant's submissions

10.  Mr Gill relied on his amended grounds and submitted that the judge  had
    misdirected himself in treating the Immigration  Rules  as  a  complete
    code and in applying a threshold test which was too high; exceptionally
    compelling rather than very compelling. Further, the judge adopted  the
    wrong approach in his assessment of Article 8, viewing it  through  the
    lens of the public interest rather than applying the approach advocated
    in Heshim Ali. Mr Gill relied specifically on paragraphs  52,  53,  77,
    80, 89, and 94. Although the Rules did not mirror Strasbourg case  law,
    they had to be  interpreted  consistently  with  it:  MF  (Nigeria)  at
    paragraph 39.

11.  Mr Gill submitted that the judge failed to make  any  findings  on  the
    exceptions in section 117C following NA (Pakistan). He  submitted  that
    'over and above' did not mean  'extra'  because  circumstances  falling
    within the exceptions could succeed if the case was strong  enough.  He
    relied on paragraphs 19, 20, 28 and 30 and  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to look at the factors in the exceptions.

12.  Following Boultif, the  Appellant's  deportation  was  plainly  'unduly
    harsh' on his wife and his son, A. They had never been  to  Zambia  and
    knew nothing of the country. The judge failed to address 'unduly harsh'
    or consider the best interests of A in accordance with paragraphs 21 to
    23 of KO (Nigeria). This was a really strong  case  under  Exception  2
    such that there were  very  compelling  circumstances,  but  the  judge
    failed to deal with this point. The  judge  failed  to  appreciate  the
    seriousness of the Appellant's medical condition.

13.  Mr Gill submitted that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    medical report and the psychological assessment. The circumstances  did
    not need to be unusual or exceptional (Heshim Ali at paragraph 77). The
    judge failed to  evaluate  the  hardship  of  the  dilemma  facing  the
    Appellant's wife. She did not have a choice. The Appellant's  case  was
    strong enough to succeed following Strasbourg case law  and  the  judge
    erred in law in failing to look at Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

14.  In relation the Zambrano issue, Mr Gill submitted  that  there  was  no
    reference to 'choice' in EU law and the mother's realistic  choice  did
    not determine the child's EU rights. In  Chavez-Vilchez  (at  paragraph
    71) the court must also consider whether there was such a  relationship
    of dependency, with the third country national, that the child would be
    compelled to leave the EU. In this case, the Appellant's wife  was  not
    willing or able to remain in the UK because the  Appellant  needed  her
    care and there was no one to provide it in Zambia. There  was  evidence
    of A's dependence on the Appellant in  the  psychologist's  report.  Mr
    Gill relied on Rendon Marin and submitted that A would  be  obliged  in
    practice to leave the EU, thereby denying him the genuine enjoyment  of
    the substance of his rights as a British  citizen.  He  submitted  that
    deterrence and retribution were  not  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality in EU law. Rehabilitation was  also  marginal.  On  the
    evidence, the Appellant  did  not  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious treat to  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.
15.  Mr Gill submitted that in Nilay Patel, at  paragraph  75  and  79,  the
    mother had a choice, but that there was no mention of  choice  in  CJEU
    case law. He submitted that CJEU case law referred  to  whether  an  EU
    citizen was compelled 'in practice' to leave the EU, not as a matter of
    law. There was no question of choice in this case  because  looking  at
    all the evidence the Appellant's wife did not have a choice. The  judge
    had misapplied CJEU case law. The Appellant's child would be  compelled
    to leave the UK and EU and, taking into account all  relevant  factors,
    the Appellant's deportation was disproportionate.

Respondent's submissions

16.  Mr Lindsay relied on the Rule 24 response and VM Jamaica at  paragraphs
    54 to 60. He submitted that the issues in this  case  were  narrow  and
    there were essentially two grounds: Article 8 and Zambrano.

17.   Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that,   in   demonstrating   very   compelling
    circumstances over and  above  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  Appellant
    relied on the unduly harsh effect on the Appellant's wife and  son  and
    the Appellant's medical issues.  The  failure  to  make  a  finding  on
    'unduly harsh' was not material  to  the  decision  because  there  was
    nothing over and above the typical effects of deportation in this case.
    The psychological report was not capable of demonstrating that it would
    be unduly harsh if the Appellant's wife and  son  remained  in  the  UK
    without the Appellant. The matters referred to in the report did not go
    beyond what happens in every deportation case. There was  nothing  over
    and above the harsh effect of the separation  of  the  family.  On  the
    evidence, the Appellant had failed to establish that it would be unduly
    harsh for the Appellant's wife and son to remain in the UK without  the
    Appellant.

18.  Mr Lindsey submitted that the Appellant's  medical  condition  did  not
    give rise to very compelling circumstances. There was  no  evidence  to
    show that the Appellant could not obtain treatment in Zambia. Professor
    Lingham's opinion was speculative on  this  point.  The  Appellant  had
    failed to show very compelling circumstances. In the Appellant's  case,
    there was nothing capable of amounting to very compelling circumstances
    and his Article 8 claim  could  not  succeed  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

19.  For the Appellant to succeed on the Zambrano issue he had to show  that
    his British citizen child would be compelled to leave the EU. The Court
    of Appeal decisions of VM (Jamaica) and Nilay Patel were  binding.  The
    EU ground must fail. The Appellant's wife was  able  to  look  after  A
    while the Appellant was in prison and she did not need to go to  Zambia
    to care for the Appellant. There was no compulsion. It was a  difficult
    choice.

20.  In VM (Jamaica) at paragraph 54,  the  court  considered  all  relevant
    CJEU authorities and the factual matrix was  the  same.  There  was  no
    breach of EU law (paragraph 60). This case could be distinguished  from
    Chavez-Vilchez because A was not dependent on the Appellant and  A  was
    not compelled to leave the UK in practice (Nilay Patel at paragraphs 70
    to 72).

21.  In any event, the Appellant's criminal record  was  appalling  and  his
    personal  conduct,  escalating  criminal  behaviour,   lengthy   prison
    sentences, risk of re-offending and sentencing judge's remark  that  he
    was a thoroughly  dishonest  man  were  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    Appellant was a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.

22.  The judge applied the correct test and took into account  all  relevant
    matters. Taking the Appellant's case at its highest, it was not  unduly
    harsh for the Appellant's wife and child to remain in  the  UK  without
    him  (KO  (Nigeria)  at  paragraphs  33-36).  The   evidence   in   the
    psychological report did not show that it  was  unduly  harsh  and  the
    Appellant's  medical  condition  did  not  amount  to  very  compelling
    circumstances. There was nothing over and above the separation  of  the
    family. The Appellant's medical condition taken with the  effect  on  A
    could  not  amount  to  very  compelling  circumstances.  The   judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant's deportation was proportionate was  open
    to him on the evidence before him.


Appellant's response

23.  Mr Gill submitted that the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  very
    compelling circumstances because there was  no  assessment  of  'unduly
    harsh'. A wide range of factors had not been considered. On  the  facts
    and consistent Boultif and Uner, this was a compelling case. The  judge
    had misunderstood the seriousness of the Appellant's medical  condition
    and there was no consideration of the psychological report, save for  a
    limited analysis at [48] of the decision. The judge  failed  to  assess
    this in conjunction with the report of Professor Lingham  and  look  at
    the effect on the family. The judge failed to properly carry out a fact
    finding exercise.

24.  In EU law, the test was one of compulsion.  The  Appellant's  wife  did
    not have a choice. She was not willing to stay in the UK  and  intended
    to go to Zambia with the Appellant. He was not able to care for himself
    and there was no evidence that he could  obtain  care  in  Zambia.  The
    practical impact on A was that he was compelled to leave  the  UK.  The
    judge failed to consider the impact on the family unit.


The Appellant's medical condition

25.  In 2012 the Appellant was diagnosed with  a  cancerous  stomach  tumour
    and had to have the majority of this stomach removed. As a  result,  he
    suffers from significant multiple health problems  including  recurrent
    severe  vomiting  and  uncontrollable  diarrhoea,  leading  to   severe
    physical  exhaustion  and  sleep  deficiency.  His  diet  is   severely
    restricted and he is able only to eat very small portions of food at  a
    time. He suffers pain and discomfort and wears incontinence  pads  when
    going out. He is unable to walk long distances owing  to  weakness  and
    dizziness and he passes out intermittently without  warning.  When  his
    health permits, the Appellant is able to  take  his  son  to  and  from
    school. He suffers from a moderately severe level of depression related
    symptomology, but this does not prevent him from performing tasks  that
    he would normally carry out on a daily basis.

26.  The medical report of Dr Lingham dated 17 July  2017  stated  that  the
    Appellant's tumour was large  so  during  the  operation  part  of  the
    stomach was removed. In  addition,  the  vagus  nerve  was  permanently
    damaged causing dumping syndrome. There was a stricture of the  stomach
    which, coupled with the small stomach, has resulted  in  severe  reflux
    and reverse  peristalsis.  The  Appellant  was  to  undergo  a  further
    operation to address this complication in August 2017. It was  expected
    that reflux would get better. At the date of examination, the Appellant
    was physically and mentally weak and clinically  depressed  because  of
    stress. Mr Lingham stated that he would  assess  his  needs  after  the
    operation in August.  The  Appellant  would  need  medical  and  social
    support for at least six months. He doubted whether doctors  in  Zambia
    could easily manage these complex medical problems.


Evidence relevant to the best interests of A

27.  The psychological assessment report stated that  A  has  a  very  close
    bond with his father and worried about his future. He worried  and  was
    sad about his father's illness and experienced sleep  related  problems
    when his father was in pain or distress. It would cause a great deal of
    emotional upset if A had to uproot to live  in  Zambia.  He  had  close
    relationships with his immediate and extended family in the  UK  and  a
    very  extensive  social  support  network.  It  would   be   incredibly
    disruptive for him at a crucial time in his transformation into a young
    man. His ambitious plans for the future would have to be cancelled  and
    his future development, educationally, personally and emotionally would
    be place in jeopardy. His best interests were to remain in the UK  with
    his mother and father.

28.  The social worker's report dated 8 April 2018 was not before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The independent social worker stated that the  Appellant
    supervised the care of A in the evenings when  his  wife  was  working.
    There was a strong father and son bond. Although A's basic needs  would
    be met in Zambia,  his  need  for  stability,  security,  family  life,
    friends, emotional well being and  education  would  not  be  met.  The
    Appellant was close to his grandmother and had many friends in the  UK.
    His parents could not afford to educate him privately  in  Zambia.  His
    mother would be a single working parent if she and A remained in the UK
    and, given  his  current  level  of  anxiety,  A's  future  development
    emotionally and personally would  be  in  jeopardy  if  separation  was
    enforced. It was in A's best interests to remain in the UK.

Discussion and Conclusions

29.  I am not persuaded by Mr Gill's argument that the judge misapplied  the
    law in treating the rules as a complete code and applying  too  high  a
    threshold. The judge's application of the  immigration  rules  and  the
    test of very compelling circumstances were consistent  with  paragraphs
    36 to 38 of Heshim Ali.

30.  I am not persuaded by  the  submission  that  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition gives rise to very compelling circumstances. The Appellant is
    able to look after his son, A, when his wife is at work and he is  able
    to take him to school. The medical evidence does not support a  finding
    that the Appellant could not live independently in any meaningful  way.
    The report of Professor Lingham does not state that  the  Appellant  is
    unable to cope independently with day to day activities.

31.  There was insufficient evidence before the judge  to  show  that  there
    would be very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.  There  was  no
    challenge to the judge's finding that the Appellant had failed to  show
    that he would be unable to obtain treatment in Zambia. It was  accepted
    that it would not be the same as in the UK, but the Appellant's medical
    condition did not prevent his integration nor did the fact that he  had
    no ties to Zambia and he came to the UK when he was 14 years  old.  The
    Appellant could not satisfy Exception 1 on the facts.

32.  I am not persuaded that this is a strong Exception 2 case such that  it
    could amount to very compelling circumstances. The judge considered the
    best interests of A, which were to remain in the  UK,  and  his  strong
    bond with the Appellant. The judge fully appreciated the seriousness of
    the Appellant's medical condition and his lengthy residence in  the  UK
    [92 to 93].

33.  The judge considered the medical evidence at [34, 41 and  79]  and  the
    psychological report at [48]. I was initially concerned that the effect
    on A had not been fully considered, but on reviewing those reports (and
    all the evidence available) I am satisfied that  all  relevant  matters
    were taken into account. There was nothing  in  those  documents  which
    were capable of leading to a different conclusion.

34.  The Appellant's medical condition was not such that he could  not  live
    in Zambia without his wife and A. The Appellant was  supported  by  his
    wife, but her care  was  not  essential  to  enable  the  Appellant  to
    function on a  daily  basis.  His  illness  was  extremely  unpleasant,
    painful and difficult,  but  he  would  not  be  incapacitated  if  she
    remained in the UK.

35.  Any error in the structure or form of the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was not material because this case could not  succeed  on  its
    facts. Had the judge asked the questions relied on in the  grounds,  he
    would have come to the same decision. On the evidence before the judge,
    the Appellant had failed to show  very  compelling  circumstances.  His
    Article 8 claim could not succeed because the weight to be attached  to
    the public interest was substantial and the impact  of  deportation  on
    his family and private life could  not,  on  the  evidence  before  the
    judge, outweigh it. This case was not one of those rare cases in  which
    an applicant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules, but could succeed
    under Article 8. There was no material error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    conclusion at [94] that, having rejected the  Appellant's  claim  under
    the Rules, his Article 8 claim failed.

36.  I have read A's witness statement dated 9  April  2018  and  understand
    that it would be unthinkable for A to live in the UK without his father
    and relocation to Zambia would be very distressing  and  disruptive  to
    A's  education  and  relationships  with  his   family   and   friends.
    Unfortunately, these are the usual  consequences  of  deportation.  The
    failure to make a finding on whether it  was  unduly  harsh  for  A  to
    remain in the UK without his father was not material because there  was
    insufficient evidence before the judge to support such a  finding  and,
    in any event, there were no additional circumstances which  would  make
    deportation even harsher. The circumstances were  not  very  compelling
    over and above those usually associated with separation or  relocation.
    Parliament has set a very high threshold in section 117C  and  applying
    it to the facts of the Appellant's case,  his  deportation  is  in  the
    public interest.

37.  An assessment of Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules  would  not
    lead to a different conclusion. The weight to be attached to the public
    interest in this case is significant. The Appellant  has  an  appalling
    criminal record and was sentenced to six years  imprisonment  in  2014.
    The sentencing judge found him to be  a  thoroughly  dishonest  person.
    Although the Appellant has a strong family and private life and  it  is
    in the best interests of A to remain in the UK, this  was  insufficient
    to outweigh the strong public interest in this case.

38.  The Appellant's son, A, would not be compelled, in practice,  to  leave
    the UK. Although A has a strong bond with  the  Appellant,  A  was  not
    dependant on him. A could remain in the UK with his mother.  The  level
    of dependency was not such that the Appellant's deportation compelled A
    to leave the UK. On the facts, the Appellant's wife was not  compelled,
    in practice, to relocate to Zambia  to  care  for  the  Appellant.  The
    Appellant's deportation did not engage EU law.

39.  Even if it  did,  the  Appellant  represented  a  genuine  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society. His personal conduct and criminal behaviour were sufficient to
    establish this.

40.  I find that there was no error of law in the decision  dated  8  August
    2017 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 15 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 15 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
