
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/25354/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13 November 2017                   |On 21 December 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Ejiro [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr N Aborisade, Solicitor, O A Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  to  allow  the  appeal  of   the
    respondent Miss [O], against refusal to revoke a deportation order made
    against her by virtue of Section 5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   For the sake of convenience Miss [O] will from now on  be  referred  to
    as the applicant.

3.   The applicant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24  December  1979.   She
    entered the UK on 26 February 2008 although there does not appear to be
    any record of her actual entry into the UK.  On 27  February  2008  she
    was arrested at Gatwick Airport when she attempted to board a flight to
    Canada using a British passport, to which she was not entitled.  On  13
    March 2008 the  applicant  was  convicted  at  Lewes  Crown  Court  for
    possession and use of a false instrument.  She was sentenced to  twelve
    months' imprisonment and recommended for deportation.

4.   On 15  April  2008  a  liability  to  deportation  was  issued  to  the
    applicant together with a questionnaire  for  her  completion.   On  22
    April 2018 representations were received from the  applicant.   Further
    representations were received on 25 July 2008.

5.   On 28 February 2008 the applicant had claimed asylum in the  UK.   This
    was refused by the respondent by letter  dated  26  August  2008.   The
    applicant lodged an appeal against the refusal  to  grant  her  asylum.
    She abandoned the asylum appeal at the hearing before the judge.

6.   On 19 December  2008,  a  deportation  order  was  signed  against  the
    applicant.

7.   The applicant has  three  children  who  were  born  in  the  UK.   Her
    daughter PI was born on [ ] 2008, a second daughter CI was born on [  ]
    2009 and her son DI was born on [ ] 2012.  The children have  the  same
    father.  He is a British national.  The applicant's three children  are
    all British nationals.

8.   The judge said at paragraph 12 that notwithstanding the fact  that  the
    children are British citizens and being British is not a trump card for
    the applicant, she still has to show that it would be  unreasonable  to
    ask her to leave the UK and to return to  Nigeria  with  the  children,
    notwithstanding that they are British children.  The judge  found  that
    she was not telling the truth when she said she did not know where  the
    father of the children lived as it was obvious he  was  around  in  the
    children's lives but that he was not their carer and  appreciated  that
    the father could not look after them.

9.   The judge said at paragraph 13 that  the  children  go  to  school.   A
    letter from the family's GP dated 13 October 2014  confirmed  that  the
    applicant was their patient and that according  to  their  records  the
    children resided with the applicant mother.  The  judge  also  noted  a
    letter from the children's father dated  6  August  2014  in  which  he
    stated that he was the father of all  three  children.   He  was  in  a
    relationship with their mother,  the  applicant,  who  lives  with  the
    children and has sole care of them.  He said he was responsible for his
    children financially and took care of all their needs without  recourse
    to public funds.   The  judge  noted  that  there  were  various  bills
    addressed to both the applicant and her partner.

10.  The judge noted at paragraph 16 that  the  nature  of  the  applicant's
    Article 8 claim is that she has claimed that it would place the  UK  in
    breach of its obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR to deport her  to
    Nigeria because of her relationship with the  three  British  children.
    The judge went on to say that the applicant's deportation is  conducive
    to the public good and in the public interest insofar as the respondent
    is concerned because she has been convicted of an offence for which she
    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment for less than four years
    but at least twelve months.  The judge stated that in  accordance  with
    paragraphs 398 of the Immigration Rules the  public  interest  required
    the applicant's deportation unless an exception to deportation applies.
     The exceptions he said are set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

11.  The judge at paragraph 18  cited  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, namely a foreign criminal under  this  paragraph,  must  have  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age
    of 18 who is in the UK and the child is a British citizen ..... and  it
    would be unduly harsh for the child to live in a country to  which  the
    person is to be deported and it would be unduly harsh for the child  to
    remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

12.  The judge at paragraph 17 stated that he has considered Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the best interest
    principle.  He  has  also  taken  into  account  the  interest  of  the
    applicant's children  and  that  their  best  interest  is  as  primary
    consideration in the making of his decision.  He noted  that  the  best
    interest of the children is not the only or prior amount consideration,
    although they are a primary one and that they must be balanced  against
    other relevant factors  including  the  public  interest  in  deporting
    foreign criminals to determine whether the applicant's  deportation  is
    proportionate or not.  He also noted that paragraphs 398 and 399 of the
    Immigration Rules take into account the best  interest  as  capable  of
    outweighing the public interest and sets out in what circumstances that
    would be the case.

13.  With those principles in mind the judge made findings as  follows.   He
    accepted that the children are all under the age of 18.  They  are  all
    British citizens.  The judge held  at paragraph 19:

         "... Unless there are other matters that the  SSHD  can  show  that
         make deportation still conclusive to the public good, it  seems  to
         me that the factors herein  Plus  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
         former partner who is not a carer for the children but who finances
         them and sees them from time to time, and taking into  account  the
         best interest of the children 2of whom are at  least  7  years  and
         above  years  of  age,  these  matters  should  indicate  that  the
         deportation order should be revoked and that the  appellant  should
         be given leave to remain in the Uk so that she can  case  [sic]  of
         her British children as there is no one  else  to  care  for  them.
         Their father by seeing them twice a month and providing  them  with
         maintenance from time to time does not become their main  carer  or
         sole carer.  It is the appellant mother who is  their  sole  carer,
         and if she had to leave the UK then the British Children would have
         to leave too and they would be going to a country outside  the  EU.
         These matters would suggest to me that it would be unreasonable for
         the mother appellants to leave with the children accordingly.   See
         the case of Zambrano."

14.  The judge at paragraph 20 said he believed the father of  the  children
    did see the children from time to time and also  had  some  rights  and
    that taking the children to Nigeria would deprive  him  (he  works  and
    studies) of seeing the children twice a month as at present  (see  case
    of Beoku-Betts).

15.  The judge at paragraph 21 accepted the evidence  of  Dale  Gavin  Matil
    that the applicant and her three children live with him at the property
    which he owns.  The judge also accepted  letters  from  the  children's
    schools to find  that  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her children.

16.  The judge then went on to consider whether it would be unduly harsh  to
    send the children and the applicant back to Nigeria.  He noted that the
    Secretary of State did not accept that it would be unduly harsh for the
    children to live with the applicant in Nigeria.  The judge  found  that
    the children have never been to Nigeria and do not know the culture and
    customs or language.  He accepted that they are  British  citizens  who
    cannot be compelled to leave the UK.  He noted that the respondent  had
    said their father could chose to relocate to Nigeria on the applicant's
    removal but found that there was no evidence that he would  be  willing
    to do so.  The judge found that their  father  and  the  applicant  are
    separated and he cannot care for the children on a 24  hour  basis  and
    has voluntary contact with them twice a month.  On the totality of  the
    evidence he did not consider that the father of the children would have
    an intention to leave the UK to migrate with the family to Nigeria.  He
    works here and also studies here.

17.  At paragraph 24 the judge considered the issue  of  reasonableness.  He
    considered whether there was anyone in the UK who could  actually  care
    for the children.  On the evidence he found this would not appear to be
    the case because whereas their father is prepared  to  give  money  and
    help them, there was nothing to indicate to him that the  father  would
    be able to take the responsibility of looking after  the  children  and
    for them to remain  with  him  in  his  care  and  control  whilst  the
    applicant left the UK to serve out her deportation term.

18.  The judge found that returning the children to Nigeria  would  cause  a
    huge strain on the relationship between the applicant and the children.
     They would have to go to a country they have never  seen  which  could
    affect their education and insofar as medical assistance  is  concerned
    they are entitled to the NHS services in the UK but this would  not  be
    possible if they were removed.  Furthermore,  the  applicant  said  the
    children could not sleep without her and she is the one they live  with
    and they are used to being with her.  Although  the  Home  Office  have
    said that there are  available  educational  and  local  facilities  in
    Nigeria, the  judge  believed  that  there  would  be  substantial  and
    reasonable disruption for the older two to adapt to such a  system  and
    it would not be reasonable for the two elder ones to be separated  from
    the 6 year old.

19.  The judge said at paragraph 28 that there was one question left,  which
    was whether it is reasonable  in  all  the  circumstances  for  British
    children to be forced to leave the UK and out of the territory  of  the
    Union as the mother who has no right to remain in the UK and is under a
    deportation order?"  The judge found that the children are  minors  and
    need to be looked after by a parent or guardian, and so they would have
    to leave with the applicant.  As British children, they  would  not  be
    able to enjoy what they are enjoying now in terms of healthcare,  their
    peers and other activities and education.

20.  The judge then looked at the applicant's own immigration  history.   He
    found that she has never been granted any form of leave  to  remain  in
    the UK and therefore has never been residing lawfully in  the  UK.   He
    found that she is not culturally or socially integrated in the  UK  and
    it is not accepted that she is financially independent as she does  not
    work.  She is dependent on her ex-partner  Precious  Izobo  to  support
    her.  Therefore, she is not contributing to the economic  wellbeing  of
    the UK.

21.  The judge found that the applicant's blatant disregard to the  laws  of
    the UK further demonstrated that she was not fully  integrated  in  the
    UK.  He did not accept that there would be very  significant  obstacles
    in the applicant's integration into Nigeria where she spent  her  youth
    and formative years from when she was born in 1979 until her arrival in
    the UK in 2008.

22.  The judge then went on to hold as follows:

         "32.  As  the  exceptions  to  deportation  do  not  apply  in  the
             appellants case, consideration has been given  as  to  whether
             there  are  compelling  circumstances.    On   13.3.2008   the
             appellant was convicted at Lewes Crown Court of possession and
             or use of false instruction.  She was sentenced to  12  months
             imprisonment and recommended for deportation.  On 15.4.2008  a
             liability to deportation was issued to the appellant  together
             with a questionnaire for her completion.  In order to outweigh
             the  very  significant  public  interests  in  deporting   the
             appellant she would need to provide evidence of a very  strong
             Article 8 claim, over and above the circumstances described in
             exceptions to deportation, I take a particularly serious  view
             against people  who  are  convicted  of  particularly  serious
             offences,  particularly  offences  which  involve   falsifying
             documents such as passports due to  the  harm  that  this  can
             cause to the integrity of the border and immigration system of
             the UK and the damage that  using  such  false  documents  can
             cause to the confidence of the  British  public,  particularly
             those groups who rely on these documents  such  as  banks,  to
             conduct their business, in the light of this  it  is  evidence
             that the appellant is a person of questionable  character  and
             that her deportation from the UK is conducive  to  the  public
             good  and  in  the  public  interest,  and  it  is   therefore
             considered that on this basis , it is not disproportionate  to
             deport the appellant from the  UK.


         33.   I have given full consideration in this matter as to  whether
             the appellant would meet any exception to deportation  on  the
             basis of her relationship with her British  children,  and  on
             this ground alone I  consider that the  appellant  would  meet
             the exception to deportation on this basis that there are very
             compelling  circumstances  that  the  appellants  case  should
             succeed on the evidence before me. I believe all that I  have
             said about the children in this decision, show that there  are
             compelling circumstances before me  that  would  outweigh  the
             presumption for deportation on  the  basis  of  the  appellant
             serious criminal convictions in the  UK.    Therefore,  having
             considered the facts of the appellants  case  I   accept  that
             there are very compelling  circumstances  which  outweigh  the
             public interest in seeing the appellant deported.


         34.  Article 8.  Having considered all the available evidence about
             the appellant circumstances including the best interest of the
             children, I consider that  the  appellants  deportation  would
             breach the UK's obligations under ECHR Article 8  because  the
             public interest  in  deporting  her   does  not  outweigh  her
             Article 8 rights to family life.  Consideration has also  been
             given as to  whether  it  would  be  appropriate  in  all  the
             circumstances to revoke the deportation order made against the
             appellant.  Part  13  of  the  immigration  rules  provides  a
             framework for considering whether a deportation  order  should
             be revoked where a person is in the UK.   Paragraph  390  says
             that an application for revocation of a deportation order will
             be considered in the light of all the circumstances  including
             the light in which the order  was  made,  any  representations
             made report, the  interest  of  the  community  including  the
             maintenance of effective immigration control, the interest  of
             the applicant including any compassionate circumstances.


         35.  The appellant's further submissions have been fully considered
             and I have concluded for the reasons set out  above  that  she
             does through her Brutish children as their primary  carer  and
             indeed their sole carer qualify for leave to remain in the UK.
              I have considered all  her  evidence,  have  noted  that  she
             tendered her unreserved  apology  to  this  tribunal  for  her
             conviction for possession of a false instrument, and  I  noted
             that she said that her children could not relocate to  Nigeria
             as it would not be in their best interest, she said  that  her
             former partner cannot take care of them in the UK,  and having
             considered  this  part  of  her  evidence,  more  particularly
             elaborated in this decision above, I believe this part of  her
             evidence to be credible.


         36.  The burden of proof is on the respondent to show on the  civil
             standard of proof that deportation is conducive to the  public
             good and on the appellant to rebut  that  presumption  on  the
             same civil standard.  The appellant has successfully  rebutted
             the presumption in  favour  of  deportation  to  satisfy  this
             tribunal that she should  be  allowed  remain  in  the  UK.  I
             believe she has discharged the burden of proof incumbent  upon
             her."

23.  Permission was granted to the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  following
    terms:

    (a)  it is arguable that the judge has erred in law (by failing to give
         adequate reasons as to whether the father of the appellant's  three
         British children would take responsibility for the children  should
         the appellant be deported;


    (b)  by failing to give clear reasons as to why the  appellant  is  the
         sole  carer  for  the  children  given  the   biological   father's
         involvement in their lives when he sees them and provides financial
         assistance;


    (c)  by failing to adopt the correct approach in paragraphs 24  and  26
         of the decision and reasons when the judge considered the  question
         of reasonableness as opposed to whether it would  be  unduly  harsh
         for the children to accompany their mother; and


    (d)  by failing to adequately take into account the public interest  in
         failing to apply the statutory provision  of  Section  117  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at all.

24.  Mr Clarke relied on the grounds upon which permission was granted.   He
    submitted that from paragraphs 14 onwards the judge considered  Article
    8, paragraphs 399 and 399A.  At paragraph 18 the judge correctly  cited
    399A and the test to be satisfied which is whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh for the British children to live in  the  country  to  which  the
    person is to be deported and it would be unduly harsh for the child  to
    remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.  However  at
    paragraph 32 the judge found that the  exceptions  did  not  apply  and
    therefore meant that the threshold for unduly harsh was not  met.   But
    then oddly at paragraph  33  found  that  there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances which outweighed the public interest in  the  applicant's
    deportation.  He said that the judge in reaching his conclusion  relied
    on the same reasons upon which he found that the exceptions in relation
    to consideration of the unduly harsh test did not  apply.   If  he  was
    right, then the issues regarding whether the children stay or return to
    Nigeria with the applicant have been judged on a high threshold.

25.  Mr Clarke further that there was no consideration  of  Section  117  of
    the 2014 Act by the judge.  He said that the judge looked at the  crime
    committed by the applicant and the public interest  but  did  not  take
    into account Section 117C.  He was silent as to how he constructed  the
    proportionality assessment in terms of the public interest.

26.  Mr Clarke said that the judge found at paragraph 27 that the father  of
    the children will not be able to look after the children.  He  referred
    me to paragraph 60 of VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255 where the  Court
    of Appeal held


         "As this court held in FZ (China) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 550, following Dereci and  the  decision
         in O, S and L (at paragraphs [42 to 44] of the  advocate  general's
         opinion and para. (56) of the judgment), 'the critical question  is
         whether there is an entire dependency of the relevant child on  the
         person who is refused a residence permit or who is being  deported'
         ... ."


27.  Mr Clarke submitted that in the instant  appeal  the  judge  approached
    this issue as a matter of choice.   Mr  Clarke  said  that  the  father
    provides maintenance.  However, the judge found at  paragraph  20  that
    the deportation of the applicant and should the children go to  Nigeria
    with her would interfere with their relationship with their father.  He
    said that VM requires a proper assessment of dependency on  the  father
    and a consideration as to whether the child would be required to  leave
    if the applicant is deported.

28.  Mr Clarke submitted that there was no evidence that  the  father  would
    not be able to care for the children.  The  judge  found  that  he  was
    financially supportive of the children and  visited  them.   The  judge
    found that he would not be able to care for  the  children  because  he
    works and is a student.  He said the judge should be  looking  at  what
    level of dependence the father can offer.  He said there is lacking any
    reasoning as to the level of care the father can give the children.

29.  Mr Clarke said that the  judge  erred  in  law  when  he  repeated  the
    reasonableness test when he looked at the unduly harsh issue.  He  said
    this was a confused determination.

30.  Mr Aborisade submitted that the judge considered  the  letter  dated  6
    August 2014 from the father to the court and drew an inference that the
    father would not have the time to care for the  children.   There  were
    letters from the children's schools and  the  GP  and  the  applicant's
    landlord all confirming that the applicant was the  one  looking  after
    the children.  He submitted that the judge's decision was based  on  MA
    Pakistan.   The  judge  used  the  word  compelling  to  describe   the
    circumstances of the children because they are British  nationals.   He
    submitted that the judge considered Section 117 at paragraphs 29 to  32
    although he did not specifically mention Section 117.

31.  Mr Aborisade  submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  judge  does  not
    disclose an error of law.  The judge considered  all  the  issues  that
    were before him, made findings of fact  and  reached  conclusions  that
    disclosed no error of law.

Findings

32.  The judge at paragraphs 14 and 15 correctly set out  the  human  rights
    laws, the Immigration Rules, namely paragraph A362 and paragraph 398 to
    399D.  He said Parliament's view of what the public interests  requires
    for the purpose of article 8(2) is set out at Section 117A to  117G  in
    part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as inserted
    by the Immigration Act 2014.  He correctly set out at paragraph 16 that
    the applicant has been convicted of an offence for which she  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at
    least twelve months.  Therefore, in accordance with  paragraph  398  of
    the Immigration Rules, the public  interest  required  the  appellant's
    deportation unless an exception to deportation applies. The judge  said
    the said the exceptions are set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules as exceptions.  I note  that  these  exceptions  have
    been  inserted  at  Section  117C(4)  and  (5)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

33.  I note that the only findings of fact challenged by  the  Secretary  of
    State  concern  the  ability  of  the   children's   father   to   take
    responsibility for them; and their mother being their  sole  carer.   I
    find on the evidence that was before judge, that he made findings  that
    were open to him. This means that all the findings of fact made by  the
    judge shall stand.

34.  I do not accept Mr.  Clarke's  submission  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider Section 117 of the 2014 Act.  Whilst I  find  that  the  judge
    failed to specifically mention Section 117, I  accept  Mr.  Aborisade's
    submission that the judge's findings at paragraphs 29 to 31 in  respect
    of  the  applicant's  immigration  history  indicated  that  the  judge
    considered Section 117B (1)-(5).  It was apparent from  those  findings
    that the applicant could not meet the requirements to  exception  1  at
    Section 117(C)(4).

35.  I found the judge's findings at paragraph 32 rather  problematic.   The
    judge  said  "as  the  exceptions  to  deportation  to  not  apply  the
    appellant's case, consideration has been given as to whether there  are
    very compelling circumstances."  The use of the phrase "very compelling
    circumstances" appear at Section 117C(6).  It is a requirement that has
    to be established by a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of at least four years.  That is  not  the  case  here  as  this
    applicant was sentenced to a period of 12 months. The same phrase "very
    compelling  circumstances"  also  appear  at  paragraph  398   of   the
    immigration rules subject to whether the exceptions at  paragraphs  399
    or 399A apply.  I note that these  exceptions  have  been  inserted  at
    section 117C (4) - Exception 1 and at section 117(C) (5) - Exception 2.
    As stated at paragraph 32 above,  it  was  apparent  from  the  judge's
    findings at paragraphs 29 to 31 that exception 1 did not apply.  I find
    that the judge failed to  identify  exception  2  and  failed  to  give
    reasons as to why this exception did not apply. I find that the rest of
    paragraph 32 concerned the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
    applicant.

36.  The judge's findings at paragraphs 23 to 28 suggested  to  me  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to send the children and the  applicant  back  to
    Nigeria. I would have thought that these findings would have led  to  a
    conclusion that exception 2 at 117C(5) and  the  similar  exception  at
    paragraph 399 did apply; that the applicant had met the requirements of
    that  exception,  namely,  that  she  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with three qualifying British children and that the effect
    of her deportation on  the  children  would  be  unduly  harsh.   I  am
    therefore surprised that the judge made the  finding  at  32  that  the
    exceptions to deportation did not apply in this case.

37.  In any event, having found that  the  exceptions  did  not  apply,  the
    judge  at  paragraph  33  found  that  there   were   very   compelling
    circumstances which outweighed the public interest in  the  applicant's
    deportation.  I accept Mr. Clarke's submission that  in  reaching  this
    conclusion the judge relied on the same reasons  upon  which  he  found
    that the exceptions in relation to consideration of  the  unduly  harsh
    test did not apply. By so doing I find that the judge  applied  a  high
    threshold in his consideration of  the  issues  regarding  whether  the
    children stay or accompany the applicant to Nigeria.   I find that this
    was the only route  available  to  the  judge  having  found  that  the
    exceptions did not apply.  I find that any errors made by the judge are
    consequently not material.

38.  In the light of the strong findings made by the  judge  in  respect  of
    the children, I uphold his decision  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances which outweigh the public interest in the deportation  of
    the applicant.

339. The judge's decision allowing the applicant's appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date: 20 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
























