
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/25723/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th June 2018 and 24th September 2018     |On 12th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LANE. PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            MR Paul Anthony smith
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Haywood (Counsel), Owens Stevens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Monson, promulgated on 5th January 2018, following the hearing at
    Taylor House on 11th December 2017.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matters comes before us.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Jamaica, who  was  born  on  28th
    December 1965.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 7th November 2016 to deport  him  to  Jamaica.
    The Appellant has had three cautions and convictions between 2nd August
    2003 and 26th November 2008. His criminality, it was  suggested,  meant
    that his removal from the UK was conductive to the  public  good  under
    Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is the  father  of  two
    minor children.  These are "J", "Q" and  "L".   In  relation  to  these
    children, "Q" currently lives with his mother in Jamaica.  As  for  "J"
    and "L", they are both British citizens.  For  "J"  the  Appellant  has
    indirect contact, pursuant to a Family Court  decision,  as  "J"  lived
    with his mother.  The remaining child, "L", also  lived  with  his  own
    mother, at a distance of some two hours away, and the Appellant claimed
    that he saw him at weekends.  The  Appellant  maintained  that  he  was
    seeking to continue having such contact, but his mother disputed  this,
    in her communication with Social Services.  Indeed, it is a feature  of
    this case that the Home Office had been in contact with Social Services
    with respect to "J" and "Q" and had been informed that  these  children
    were currently on  a  Child  Protection  Plan  under  the  category  of
    neglect, and the Appellant had not been named on the  children's  birth
    certificates.  These matters were referred to expressly by Judge Monson
    when giving his decision (paragraph 40).

 4. The Appellant's human rights claim was also based upon his relationship
    with a [MJ], whom he had met, some two months before the hearing before
    Judge Monson, in September 2017.  In relation to  this  aspect  of  the
    claim, Judge Monson observed that, with respect  to  his  relationships
    with his alleged partners, "[MJ] was not here today to support  him  as
    she had a 6 month old baby by  another  father"  and  that  a  previous
    partner, "[M] was not here to support him, as she had to  go  to  work.
    He was not in a relationship with L's mother.  She had a  partner  with
    whom she and "L" lived, together with another son  and  two  daughters"
    (paragraph 69).

 5. The Appellant's human rights claim was  also  based  upon  his  private
    life, given that he had arrived in the UK in October 2002  on  a  visit
    visa, and subsequently been granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  the
    following year in 2003. This arose as a result of  his  marriage  to  a
    Jamaican national who was present and settled in the  UK.   Thereafter,
    his attempt to apply for naturalisation in 2007 was frustrated  by  the
    fact that he had a string of offences which led the Secretary of  State
    to regard him as a person of bad  character,  and  in  consequence  his
    request for naturalisation was refused.   These  offences  ranged  from
    possession of cannabis, to an assault on  his  daughter,  to  theft  of
    clothing, and to driving without insurance.

The Judge's Determination

 6. In a comprehensive and carefully compiled determination, Judge  Monson,
    after setting out the background, concluded that the Appellant's appeal
    against deportation fell to  be  dismissed.  The  Appellant  had  three
    convictions for five offences and three cautions for  a  further  three
    offences.  The oral evidence received at the hearing  from  PC  Lindsay
    Barnes confirmed no less than 36 police encounters with  the  Appellant
    (see paragraphs 3 to 4). The Metropolitan Police had  also  provided  a
    witness statement detailing the  Appellant's  "previous  non-conviction
    encounters", which included seven alleged  offences  against  a  person
    between 2006 and 2014 - namely, one sexual offence in 2013; one offence
    against property in 2014; two thefts and kindred offences between  2006
    and 2014; one drugs offence in 2014;  and  two  miscellaneous  offences
    between 2010 and 2014 (see paragraph 52).  The Metropolitan Police also
    included details of "not guilty charges" (paragraph 53).

 7. In his determination, Judge Monson ruled that the  Secretary  of  State
    was not precluded from relying on  "non-conviction"  evidence  for  the
    purposes of a deportation decision, so long  as  the  allegations  were
    proved against the Appellant, and in this the Judge was guided  by  Bah
    (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport) [2012] UKUT 00196 (IAC).  Moreover,
    consideration was also given by him to Farquharson (Removal - proof  of
    conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146, which established that if the  material  is
    such that it is open  to  more  than  one  interpretation,  an  adverse
    interpretation should only be drawn, if on a balance of  probabilities,
    there is no other reasonable explanation on  the  material  before  the
    Tribunal (see paragraph 74 of the determination).

The Findings of the Judge

 8. In coming to  his  conclusions,  the  judge  apprised  himself  of  the
    situation before him, as set out in the refusal letter.  This was  that
    the Appellant's human rights claims had been rejected in  the  face  of
    the deportation order on grounds  that  the  convictions  and  cautions
    between  2003  and  2008.  These  were  coupled  with  the  Appellant's
    "character, conduct and associations" as revealed  by  the  information
    provided by the Metropolitan Police, in relation to his previous  "non-
    conviction" encounters between  2006  and  2014.   Cumulatively,  these
    suggested that it was beyond doubt that the Appellant had been involved
    in serious criminality in the UK (see paragraph 75).   PC  Barnes,  who
    gave oral evidence, summarised the  information  in  the  CRIS  Reports
    about each of the previous non-conviction encounters (paragraph 76).

 9. For his part, Mr Haywood had a detailed analysis of the underlying CRIS
    material prepared, and he endeavoured before the Tribunal to  draw  out
    the exculpatory elements within many of the encounters.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant was probably innocent in many of the cases  and  the
    information by the complainant was unreliable (paragraph 77). To  this,
    the Judge pointed out what was established in Farquharson, namely, that
    the Secretary of State has to  substantiate  the  conduct  relied  upon
    (paragraph  78)  if  reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  'non-conviction'
    evidence.  The judge then moved  on  to  a  consideration  of  the  two
    offences of actual bodily  harm  (ABH)  which  he  considered  in  this
    respect to have been proved against the Appellant.

10. First, there was ON36, which arose from an incident on 1st  June  2017,
    and concerned a complaint against the Appellant for assaulting his  ex-
    partner 'Florence'. The allegation was that he had punched her  in  the
    face causing her to cut her lip and had damaged her mobile phone.   The
    Appellant  had  a  pre-prepared  statement.   In  this  he  said   that
    Florence's allegations were false and malicious.   When  questioned  he
    had answered, "no  comment."  Although  Florence  had  later  signed  a
    withdrawal statement, the police had then provided the CPS with a "body
    worn camera evidence" and this is said to have  clearly  portrayed  the
    victim's injuries and distress (paragraph 79).  The judge concluded  on
    this basis that "it is likely that Florence was telling the truth  when
    she complained to the  police  that  she  had  been  assaulted  by  the
    Appellant at her place of work." This meant that the allegation of  ABH
    was borne out (see paragraph 80).

11. Second, there was ON20, which concerned an incident two years later  on
    16th May 2009, when  the  Appellant  and  his  then  partner,  who  was
    referred to as 'DN', were together at his flat. "DN"  made  allegations
    of rape and false imprisonment against  the  Appellant,  and  when  the
    police had arrived at the Appellant's flat, he had delayed  in  opening
    the door to the police.  When asked for an explanation by them  he  had
    said he had locked the door with 'DN' inside  the  flat  because  of  a
    recent burglary.  The  judge  did  not  find  this  explanation  to  be
    credible. However, the judge,  did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  have
    committed the offences of rape and false imprisonment.  He did, on  the
    other hand, find the Appellant to have been guilty of  ABH.   He  based
    this finding having rejected the suggestion that this was  an  accident
    with the explanation that, "I consider that his account of accidentally
    headbutting her is incredible, given the surrounding circumstances.  So
    I find that the offence of ABH is made out, which is  the  offence  for
    which he was originally arrested" (paragraph 81).

12. The judge's determination of the facts exhibits a nuanced  and  careful
    approach to the allegations made against  the  Appellant.  He  rejected
    some of the most  serious  charges  levied  at  the  Appellant  by  the
    complainants (such as rape and false  imprisonment  at  paragraph  82).
    However, he proceeded to find both the allegations contained in  ON  36
    and ON 20 to be proven against the Appellant:

         "Although  there  are  reasonable  grounds  to  suspect  that   the
         Appellant has been in a series of abusive relationships,  and  that
         his convictions for assault in a domestic context are just the  tip
         of the iceberg, I am unable to find that the Respondent has brought
         forward sufficiently cogent evidence to prove  that  the  Appellant
         was guilty of any of the offences alleged against  him  by  various
         female complainants over the years save to the ABH offences alleged
         in ON20 and ON36" (paragraph 83).

13. The judge did not find the existence of the Appellant's children in the
    UK to be such as could assist him in remaining in this  country.   This
    was because of the finding of the Family Court.  This referred  to  the
    Appellant's misuse of controlled drugs.  This led the judge to conclude
    that the Appellant's children would be put at risk  (paragraph  85)  on
    account of the Appellant being in contact with  criminal  drug  dealers
    and associates. Given what had been said in Bah by the Upper  Tribunal,
    (see paragraphs 88 to 89) the judge came to the  firm  conclusion  that
    "viewed as a whole, the conduct,  character  and  associations  of  the
    Appellant reached such a level of seriousness as to justify a  decision
    to deport" (paragraph 89).

14. The judge justified his findings in the following way. First, that  the
    Secretary of State in accordance with the strictures of BAH,  had  been
    able to show  that  the  Appellant  had  been  violent  towards  woman.
    Second, that she had been able to show that he was a habitual abuser of
    controlled drugs bringing  himself  into  contact  with  criminal  drug
    dealers and associates.  Third, the Appellant himself had not been able
    to show that he was a reformed character who was unlikely to  reoffence
    again in the future.   Fourth,  on  the  contrary,  he  had  sought  to
    minimise his proven offending, by effectively protesting his  innocence
    and putting all the blame on others.  Fifth, there was no evidence that
    the Appellant had stopped abusing controlled drugs.

15. On the question of whether the Appellant was  a  "persistent  offender"
    however, the judge  found  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  because  the
    decision in Chege [2016]  UKUT  00187  confirmed  that  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State can only rely upon convictions and cautions  if  the
    intent is to prove that the Appellant is a persistent  offender  within
    the meaning of the Rules or the statute. In this  case,  however,  "the
    Respondent has fallen far short of proving  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    persistent offender" (paragraph 95). This is because after a series  of
    offences which were committed between 2003 and 2009, "there was a  long
    hiatus before the next proven offence in 2014 (for which the police did
    not bother to prosecute the Appellant),  and  then  a  significant  gap
    before the encounters in June 2017, which  are  featured  in  ON35  and
    ON36" (paragraph 96).

16. That aside, however the Appellant's human rights claim failed,  on  the
    basis of Judge Monson's  findings,  because  the  Appellant  could  not
    demonstrate that he had family life as a partner  of  [MJ].  The  judge
    concluded that "there is no satisfactory evidence to  demonstrate  that
    she has the status of  a  partner,  as  opposed  to  being  merely  the
    Appellant's latest girlfriend" (paragraph 98). The Appellant failed  to
    show he enjoyed family life as a parent, because "Q" was already living
    with his mother in Jamaica, and the child's  best  interests  would  be
    promoted if the Appellant returned to  Jamaica  himself,  so  that  the
    child could have access to both parents.  "J" and "L" were both British
    nationals, born of different mothers, but only with respect to "J"  was
    the Appellant permitted to  have  indirect  contact,  so  that  if  the
    Appellant was removed to  Jamaica,  he  could  maintain  this  indirect
    contact from there.  Indeed, the fact that the Family  Court  had  only
    granted the  Appellant  indirect  contact  confirmed  that  "J's"  best
    interests were not to have direct contact with the Appellant (paragraph
    99).

17. As for "L", the judge did not accept  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with him because  "the  Appellant  had
    not brought forward any independent evidence to show that he  has  been
    having contact with L on a weekly basis".  In fact, a startling feature
    of this part of the claim is that Appellant  himself  "has  volunteered
    that L's mother is now objecting to him having continuing contact  with
    L, following intervention by Social Services" and "L" lives in a family
    unit comprising his  mother,  stepfather  and  stepsiblings  (paragraph
    100).  Therefore, even though that the Appellant  was  the  "biological
    father" of "L," the judge was not  persuaded  that  his  removal  would
    significantly impact upon the welfare and wellbeing of "L."

18. On the contrary, "the evidence falls very far short of showing that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to  remain  in  the  UK  without
    their biological father" (paragraph 100).  The judge was emboldened  in
    this conclusion by the fact that,

         "Given his  record,  and  the  outcome  of  previous  Family  Court
         proceedings, there does not appear to be a  realistic  prospect  of
         the Appellant being granted direct contact with his children in the
         UK as a result of  a  further  application  to  the  Family  Court"
         (paragraph 100).

19. As for the Appellant's private life,  the  judge  concluded  that  "the
    Appellant has not been lawfully resident in the  UK  for  most  of  his
    life" and that, "it  has  also  not  shown  that  he  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the  UK".   That  said,  the  judge  did  give
    express regard to "the credit side" of the  Appellant,  observing  that
    "there is documentary evidence pointing towards the Appellant beginning
    to improve his prospects to studying at university and  obtaining  some
    qualifications,  and  there  is  also  some  limited  evidence  of  the
    Appellant participating in  gainful  economic  activity  in  the  past"
    (paragraph 101).

20. On the other hand, the Appellant had only operated  within  a  Jamaican
    diaspora in the UK "and there  is  little  evidence  of  the  Appellant
    establishing positive integrated links in the UK".  In  fact,  "he  has
    made himself known  to  the  police  on  numerous  occasions,  and  his
    habitual abuse  of  controlled  drugs  brings  him  into  contact  with
    criminal drug dealers and  associates",  (paragraph  102).   The  judge
    concluded that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration into life and society in  Jamaica  "where  he
    grew up and where he has lived for most of his life" (paragraph 103).

21. Finally, that left the issue of "freestanding Article 8 proportionality
    assessment" and the judge gave detailed consideration to this aspect of
    the claim as well.  He concluded that, given the  Appellant  failed  to
    meet the requirements of  the  deportation  Rules  "by  a  considerable
    margin", then "in  normal  circumstances,  he  would  need  to  provide
    evidence  of  a  very  strong  Article  8  claim  over  and  above  the
    circumstances described in the exceptions to deportation in  order  for
    the public interest in this deportation to  be  outweighed"  (paragraph
    104).  There is no suggestion that this direction given by the judge to
    himself is not correct.  In fact, the judge held  that  "the  Appellant
    can potentially succeed in a freestanding  proportionality  assessment,
    although his Article 8 claim is much weaker than the  exceptions  given
    in the deportation Rules" (paragraph 105).

22. Turning to the Appellant's claim on this basis,  therefore,  the  judge
    held that questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test would be answered in the
    Appellant's favour, but that questions 3 to 4 of the Razgar  test  went
    in favour of the Respondent.  On the issue  of  proportionality,  which
    was question 5, the Appellant's ability to speak  English  was  in  his
    favour. Although the Appellant was not financially independent, he  had
    the capacity to  obtain  gainful  employment.  Although  the  Appellant
    enjoyed indefinite leave to remain, until  the  deportation  order  was
    served on him, " his status was nevertheless at all  material  times  a
    precarious one" (paragraph  106).   The  Appellant,  according  to  the
    judge, had not established a private life "of a special and  compelling
    character such that the normative guidance contained  in  Section  117B
    should not apply to him", which was to the effect  that  little  weight
    would be attached to a private life that was built up during  the  time
    when a person's status here was precarious.  In conclusion,  the  judge
    held that although the public interest in the  Appellant's  deportation
    was less than if the  Appellant  was  a  foreign  criminal  within  the
    meaning of the statute, "it is still significant" and that the decision
    to deport on conducive grounds "strikes a fair balance between, on  the
    one hand, the  Appellant's  rights  and  interests  and  those  of  his
    children in the UK, and, on the other  hand,  the  wider  interests  of
    society" (paragraph 107).

23. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

24. The grounds of application state that the judge embarked upon a  flawed
    analysis of whether the case for deportation had been  established.  He
    had held that the Appellant was guilty of ABH but the Appellant had not
    been cross-examined about the incident.  The evidence of  the  injuries
    had not been produced by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  photographs,
    according to the CRIS Report, "do not show a particular clear  injury".
    Moreover, the Appellant's ex-partner had been arrested by the police in
    November 2017 for assaulting him.  The victim herself had withdrawn her
    statement.  The Appellant's ex-partner  had  said  that  she  had  been
    assaulted and not allowed to leave the flat for over three  hours,  but
    had then herself left the flat, and then curiously returned back to  it
    as well.  The police scene examiner confirmed that the key  was  inside
    the lock, such that the Appellant  would  not  have  been  locked  from
    outside, and when the police sought to  retain  the  telephone  of  the
    alleged victim in order to investigate the cause  and  to  recover  the
    voicemails, offering to contact her mobile phone company on her behalf,
    the Appellant had instead asked for the return of the phone, so that no
    further enquiries could be made.  As for  the  alleged  drug  use,  the
    Appellant only had a history of personal drug use, and  any  suggestion
    that he  was  dealing  with  drug  dealers  and  their  associates  was
    unfounded.  He had been a long-term lawful resident  in  this  country.
    He had  admitted  to  drug  use  (cannabis  and  crack  cocaine)  at  a
    particular low point in his life.  He was not using drugs now and  this
    was his oral evidence, such that the judge's finding that there was  no
    evidence that he had stopped using controlled drugs was unwarranted.

25. Second, in relation to the Appellant's Article 8  claim,  although  the
    judge had found that the Appellant was not a persistent  offender,  and
    that the Appellant did not need to provide evidence of  a  very  strong
    Article 8 claim over and  above  the  circumstances  described  in  the
    exceptions to deportation, he was wrong to have then  gone  on  to  say
    that there had to be "independent evidence" that he  saw  his  son  "L"
    every weekend (at paragraph 100).  The  Appellant's  own  evidence,  if
    accepted, would have been enough to establish  that  credible  evidence
    existed  which  required  no  corroboration.   As  to  the  Appellant's
    relationship with [MJ], the Appellant's partner was now  pregnant  with
    their child.  The judge also erred in concluding that  the  Appellant's
    status was at all material times a precarious one, because he had  been
    in the UK with leave in 2002, requiring indefinite leave to  remain  in
    2003, and only in 2014 was he served with a deportation decision.   The
    judge's analysis of how the "freestanding balance" failed to be  struck
    is not reasonably in detail on the facts.

26. On 30th January 2018, permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Baker
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

27. A Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent Secretary of State  on
    15th June 2018.  A response to the Secretary of State's Rule 24 notice,
    together with a skeleton argument, was thereafter entered by Mr Haywood
    on 17th June 2018.

Submissions

28. At the hearing before us on 19th June 2018, Mr  Haywood,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, took  us  carefully  through  his  grounds  of
    application.  The defendant, he submitted, was not a foreign  criminal,
    so as to be subject to paragraphs  398A  and  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge had not been satisfied that the  Appellant  had  been
    guilty of rape and false imprisonment.  He was not satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was a persistent offender under the Rules.  He had only  been
    satisfied that the Appellant had been guilty of ABH.  The Appellant had
    taken drugs for his personal use more than  eighteen  months  ago,  but
    there had been no evidence to show that he had  been  in  contact  with
    drug  dealers  and  their  associates.   His  status   had   not   been
    "precarious" throughout his time here because he had acquired ILR  from
    2003 onwards, having entered lawfully, and it was only in 2014  that  a
    deportation decision had deprived him of that status.

29. It was, he submitted, against this background that  the  relevant  case
    law had to be applied.  Bah made it  quite  clear  that,  although  the
    Secretary of State was not precluded from relying  on  "non-conviction"
    evidence, nevertheless the onus was on the Secretary of State to  prove
    these allegations, on the basis of evidence, the reliability  of  which
    had to be carefully assessed, in compliance with the minimum  standards
    of fairness (see BAH at paragraph 55).  Farquharson [2013]  UKUT  00146
    made it clear that, "if the material renders  itself  capable  of  more
    than one  interpretation  we  should  only  draw  one  adverse  to  the
    Appellant if  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  there  is  no  other
    reasonable explanation on the material before us" (see paragraph 27  of
    Farquharson).  This was a case where the complainant, who alleged  ABH,
    on the basis that she had her face slapped and her mobile phone broken,
    had been unwilling to proceed.

30. In fact, the CRIS  evidence  showed  that  her  witness  statement  had
    contained assertions which put the prosecution in some difficulty, that
    it proved impracticable for the prosecution  to  proceed  any  further.
    For example, the "Details of investigation" as  set  down  by  PC  K  A
    Butler, for 16th May 2009 (at 6.55  hours)  discloses  how,  after  the
    victim claimed to have been punched in her face by the  Appellant,  she
    ran across the road and telephoned her mother.  She asked her mother to
    call her and leave her an answer phone message, telling  her  that  she
    needed her phone immediately.  Her mother then did this.  This was at a
    time when the Appellant  had  left  the  flat  momentarily.   When  the
    Appellant returned back to the flat the victim followed him  back  into
    it.  Mr Haywood pointed out that the notes of K A Butler make it  clear
    that the victim recognised that "she admits that this is strange having
    just been raped and punched however said that she had just  got  it  in
    her head that she had to find a  legitimate  reason  to  leave  and  go
    home".

31. Mr Haywood submitted that this was "curious behaviour" and a  different
    interpretation of the facts may have been open to  make  here  for  the
    prosecution.  The document by K A Butler appears at  page  828  of  the
    main bundle.

32. In the same way, the account by PC L M Coghlan  (at  page  840  of  the
    bundle) explains in the "Details of Investigation" (on 16th May 2009 at
    22.28 hours) that when the police arrived and banged on the  door,  the
    Appellant took some time to open the door, after the  victim  had  been
    hit and kicked about thirty times.  The police finally broke  the  door
    down and the Appellant was arrested.  The victim "was asked  if  I  had
    been raped and I said nothing because the word rape sounds awful to me.
     I was scared".  She goes on to say that, "had I been able to leave his
    house after he had sex with me, then I probably would not have reported
    the rape to police.  I feel that it all  has  to  come  out  now".   Mr
    Haywood submitted that this account too was ambiguous and open to  more
    than one interpretation.

33. Such ambiguities, submitted Mr Haywood, have to be read in the  context
    of the Appellant's own account of the events.  This is related to by PC
    J M Mills in his "Details of Investigation" (on 17th May 2009 at  16.41
    hours) who records that the Appellant "denied assaulting in any way; he
    did not punch or kick her.  The only time he touched her was  when  his
    head accidentally struck her  on  the  face.   He  denied  deliberately
    locking her in his flat and refusing to let her leave.  At no point did
    she ask to leave" (page 246).  PC J M Mills also goes on to record that
    the Appellant said that "he did not  punch  her  in  the  nose  in  the
    bathroom" (page 248).  The victim had not been locked inside the  flat.
    The police evidence, such as from DSM Tyler (on 29th July 2009 at 15.39
    hours) states  in  the  "details  of  investigation"  that  the  "scene
    examiner" had provided a statement relating to his examination  of  the
    scene "in which he records seeing a key inserted in  the  lock  of  the
    door on the inside" (see pages 265 to 266).

34. In fact, submitted Mr. Haywood, nothing  more  amply  demonstrates  the
    ambiguities in the evidence then the decision not to  prosecute.   This
    is related to by PC J M Mills in the  "details  of  investigation"  (on
    22nd September 2009 at 8.25 hours) who records that

         "Yesterday afternoon  I  attended  the  case  conference  with  the
         prosecution Counsel and CPS prosecutor.  It was  decided  that  the
         CPS would discontinue this matter and there would be no trial,  due
         to the victim being unwilling to substantiate  the  allegation  and
         the comments made in her withdrawal statement" (page 869).

35. Thereafter, on 29th September 2009 PC J M  Mills  explains  that  "this
    morning I attended court 10 at Snaresbrook Crown Court for a mention in
    this matter  before  a  judge.   The  prosecution  Counsel  offered  no
    evidence and the case was closed" (page 869).  That left, submitted  Mr
    Haywood, the question of the Appellant's drug dealing.  However,  there
    was no allegation at all  of  the  Appellant's  actually  dealing  with
    drugs.  There was no evidence to this effect.  Therefore,  the  "public
    interest" balance  had  to  fall  away  because  it  had  been  wrongly
    undertaken.  This was a person who had entered the UK  with  leave  and
    subsequently acquired ILR.  During this time his presence in the UK was
    not "precarious" (with Mr Haywood referring to paragraph  8(c)  of  his
    skeleton argument).  In fact, the Appellant had a family  life  in  the
    UK.  He had resided with his children.  He had a wife.  He had produced
    credible evidence that required no cooperation of his contact with  his
    children.

36. For his part, Mr Jarvis submitted that it was true that  the  Appellant
    was not a "persistent offender." However, on the basis of the  Tribunal
    decision in Chege [2016] UKUT 00187, which has determined that this was
    a question of mixed fact and  law,  and  fell  to  be  decided  by  the
    Tribunal at the date of the  hearing,  the  judge  was  right  to  have
    concluded in the manner that he did in other  respects.   In  this,  he
    drew our attention to the Secretary of State's Rule 24 response.

37. First, Mr Jarvis submitted that to criticise the judge's  determination
    in this case was to effectively hold him to a higher standard of proof,
    which was not  supported  by  the  developing  legal  jurisprudence  on
    judicial decision making.  The Court of Appeal in  AM  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 had referred to Lord
    Hoffmann's dicta in Piglowska v Piglowska [1999] 1WLR 1360.   This  was
    to the effect (at page 1372) that:

         "The exigencies of daily court room life are such that reasons  for
         judgment will always be capable of having  been  better  expressed.
         This is particularly true of an unreserved  judgment  such  as  the
         judge gave in this case but also of a reserved judgment based  upon
         notes, such as were given by the  District  Judge.   These  reasons
         should be read on the assumption that, unless he  has  demonstrated
         the contrary, the judge knew how he should  perform  his  functions
         and  which  matters  he  should  take  into   account.    This   is
         particularly true when the matters in question  are  so  well-known
         ....  An appellate court should resist the  temptation  to  subvert
         the principle that they should not substitute their own  discretion
         for that of the judge by a narrow textual  analysis  which  enables
         them to claim that he misdirected himself".

38. The Court of Appeal in AM continued (at paragraph  54)  to  state  that
    Baroness Hale in AH (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] UKHL 49, had  also  said  (at
    paragraph 30) that:

         ".... This is an  expert  Tribunal  charged  with  administering  a
         complex area of law in challenging circumstances.  To paraphrase  a
         view I have  expressed  about  such  expert  Tribunals  in  another
         context, the ordinary courts should approach appeals from them with
         an  appropriate  degree  of  caution;  it  is  probable   that   in
         understanding and applying the law in their specialised  field  the
         Tribunal will have got it right ....   Their  decisions  should  be
         respected unless it is  quite  clear  that  they  have  misdirected
         themselves in law.  The Appellate Court should  not  rush  to  find
         such  misdirections  simply  because  they  might  have  reached  a
         different  conclusion  or  the  facts   will   express   themselves
         differently".

39. Mr Jarvis went on to make good his point by stating that the  judge  in
    this case gave proper regard to the legal approach established  in  BAH
    [2017] UKUT 00330 and in Farquharson [2013] UKUT 00146 and applied  the
    guidance given in those cases at paragraph  89  of  the  determination.
    There could be no criticism that the judge had misdirected himself.

40. Second, insofar as there was a challenge to the judge's findings,  with
    respect to the claim that the Appellant had  punched  Florence  in  the
    face causing her to cut her lip and damage her mobile phone (ON36), the
    findings were lawful and were made in the context of the correct  legal
    framework.  Insofar as there is a criticism that the Appellant was  not
    cross-examined about the incident, this was irrelevant, given that  the
    discrepancy in the evidence was one which had already  been  identified
    in the CRIS material, and was part of the  Secretary  of  State's  case
    against the Appellant.  It did not prevent the Appellant  himself  from
    addressing the issue in his evidence-in-chief.  The fact was  that  the
    Secretary of State's conclusion in this respect remained unaffected for
    two reasons.  First, in order to meet the  relevant  burden  of  proof,
    what the Secretary of State had  to  do  was  to  provide  all  of  the
    evidence relevant to the allegation, which  had  been  amassed  by  the
    police, and which included photographs of the injury, as  well  as  the
    nature of  the  injury  that  was  explicitly  described  in  the  CRIS
    material).  Second, insofar as the Appellant himself  alleges  that  in
    November 2017 Florence assaulted the Appellant himself,  this  was  not
    relevant to the particular issue at hand, namely, that on 1st June 2017
    the allegation was that it was the  Appellant  who  had  assaulted  the
    victim.  Nothing that  the  Appellant  had  himself  said  in  evidence
    prevented the judge from taking a view on the matter that he did.

41. Third, insofar as the allegations of rape and false  imprisonment  were
    concerned (ON20) on 16th March 2007, against  someone  referred  to  as
    "DN", the criticism levied overlooks the fact that the judge  did  find
    the Appellant  not  to  have  committed  offences  of  rape  and  false
    imprisonment, but did find the Appellant to have been  guilty  of  ABH.
    The judge was entitled to conclude that, "I consider that  his  account
    of accidentally headbutting her is incredible,  given  the  surrounding
    circumstances.  So I find that the offence of ABH is made out, which is
    the offence for which she was originally arrested" (paragraph 81).  The
    suggestion that there was no cross-examination was again untenable  for
    two reasons.  First, the Appellant himself had the opportunity to rebut
    the allegation as described in  the  police  evidence  itself  and  any
    "failure"  to  cross-examine  the  Appellant  did  not   identify   any
    unfairness that was actually caused to the  Appellant.   It  was  still
    entirely proper for the judge to have come to the  conclusion  that  he
    did.  The finding was open to him.  There was no inconsistency with Bah
    or  any  other  authority.   Second,  whereas  it  was  true  that  the
    withdrawal  statement  had  not  been  produced,  the  absence  of  the
    withdrawal statement did not mean that the judge  could  not  make  the
    findings that he did, these being based upon the weight of  the  police
    evidence.  In fact, submitted Mr Jarvis, what this was case was  about,
    was a lack  of  detailed  evidence  by  way  of  a  rebuttal  from  the
    Appellant.  Nowhere is this more clear than in the Appellant's  witness
    statement of 19th June 2018 (at pages 6 to 7) where he  deals  with  no
    less than five specific allegations against him in just over one  page,
    by way of little more than simply a rebuttal.

42. Mr Jarvis then took us to the weight of the  evidence  amassed  by  the
    police.  He took us to the internal reference to the  CRIS  Report  (at
    page 28), where the victim's daughter called the police.  PC Richardson
    records, on 2nd June 2017, that the  victim  had  swollen  lips  and  a
    swollen right  cheek.   She  was  unwilling  to  provide  any  explicit
    statement but she did state that the Appellant had  assaulted  her  (at
    page 29).  The children explained that this had happened on "countless"
    occasions before.  The victim did state that the damage  to  her  phone
    was caused by the Appellant and, "it has been captured  on  DMV".   The
    children claimed that the victim had been assaulted  by  the  Appellant
    (page 30).  PC Richardson on 2nd June 2017 records that, "after viewing
    the body worn footage it appears that you cannot hear VIW1's answer  to
    the questions asked as they are too quiet.  Most of her answers however
    have been repeated by the attending officers" (page  33).   There  was,
    submitted Mr Jarvis, no ambiguity in relation to  the  answers  because
    they had been confirmed by the officers.

43. Furthermore,  the  victim's  daughter  had  taken  photographs  of  the
    injuries.  All that the Appellant  had  to  say  in  relation  to  this
    detailed evidence was that, "I denied the allegations made against  me"
    (see page 39). The OIC update by PC Talat on 22nd June 2017 was to  the
    effect that, "I am now  in  possession  of  photos  which  show  VIW1's
    injuries. The photos do not show a particularly  clear  injury.   There
    are two photos." Yet, there was no doubt that there were injuries.  The
    existence of the injuries was clear.  In fact, the Appellant was  given
    a proper opportunity to rebut the injuries.  He did not call them  into
    question.  When he was asked (page 40) on 3rd June 2017 by  DC  Brodie,
    "did [victim] have any injuries when you saw  her?"  he  answered,  "no
    comment".  When he was asked "did  you  see  her  mobile  phone?".   He
    answered, "no comment".  When he was asked "did you see  her  drop  her
    mobile phone".  He answered, "no comment".   When  he  was  asked  "was
    there anyone else there when you went to her workplace?"  He  answered,
    "no comment".  Indeed, where it was  expressly  put  to  him  "can  you
    account for how [victim] got a  cut  to  her  lip?"  he  answered,  "no
    comment" (see page 41).

44. The strength of the evidence, submitted Mr Jarvis, in relation  to  the
    offence of ABH, (ON20), was also considerable.  A  graphic  account  is
    given of the sexual assault in PC Coghlan's account on 16th  May  2009.
    Yet, the judge, for reasons that were open to him,  rejects  that  rape
    had been proven.   Mr  Haywood  had  submitted  that  it  was  "curious
    behaviour" for the victim to have  left  the  flat  and  then  to  have
    returned to it, but it is clear that a full explanation  is  given  for
    this behaviour by the victim, as detailed by PC Coghlan (at page  838).
    The victim herself states "she admits this is strange".   However,  she
    wanted her mother to call her to give a legitimate reason for  leaving.
    Nevertheless, when PC Coghlan took the  victim  to  Whitechapel  Haven,
    where she was examined by a doctor, the summary of  the  findings  were
    that there were bruises to face, neck, arms, legs, and thighs, as  well
    as abrasions to the right hand, right forearm, back and buttocks.   All
    of these were in the form of "extragenital findings".  There were also,
    however, abrasions to the posterior fourchette, which were described as
    "genital/perianal findings" (see page 833).

45.  The  complainant  subsequently  made  a  statement   withdrawing   the
    complaint, as PC J M Mills explains (at page 869),

         "Yesterday afternoon I attended the case conference and prosecution
         Counsel and CPS prosecutor.  It  was  decided  that  the  CPS  will
         discontinue this matter and there would be no  trial,  due  to  the
         victim being unwilling  to  substantiate  the  allegation  and  the
         comments made in her withdrawal statement".

    However, the background to this is set out by J M  Mills  on  3rd  June
    2009 when the  victim  was  offered,  by  the  police  themselves,  the
    opportunity to contact her mobile network provider, O2, on her  behalf,
    as well as suggesting that she purchase a  pay  as  you  go  phone  for
    temporary measures. What is said, however, is that "unfortunately,  she
    was adamant that she has the original phone returned to her.   She  has
    concerns that without a phone she would not be in a  position  to  ring
    the police in the event she  encounters  a  suspect."  This,  added  Mr
    Jarvis, amply demonstrated the predicament in which the victim  claimed
    to find herself.  She asked for her phone back only because she  needed
    protection from the police as she was so fearful of the suspect.

46. Finally, Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge  did  not  err  in  law  in
    stating that the  Appellant's  claim  of  being  in  contact  with  his
    children was unsupported by even the mother of  the  children,  if  the
    established case law was clear.  In TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 the
    Court of Appeal made it quite clear, "how important it is in  cases  of
    this kind for independent supporting evidence to be provided  where  it
    would  ordinarily  be  available;  and  where  there  is  no   credible
    explanation for the  failure  to  produce  that  supporting  evidence",
    because this "can be a very strong pointer that the account being given
    is not credible" (paragraph 20).

47. It was also made clear that "independent supporting evidence  which  is
    available  from  persons  subject  to  this  jurisdiction  be  provided
    wherever possible and the need for an  Immigration  Judge  to  adopt  a
    cautious approach to the evidence of  an  Appellant  where  independent
    supporting evidence, as it was  in  this  case,  is  readily  available
    within this jurisdiction, but not provided" (paragraph 21).  Mr  Jarvis
    submitted that in this case this supporting evidence from  the  child's
    mother was readily available but it  was  not  provided.   It  was  not
    provided without any justification being put forward.

48. The judge was entitled, accordingly, to  conclude  that  there  was  no
    general and subsisting parental relationship with "L."   In  fact,  the
    determination goes further.  The judge observes that "the Appellant has
    volunteered that L's mother is now objecting to him  having  continuing
    contact with L" (paragraph 100).

49. In his reply, Mr Haywood submitted that the fundamental issue here  was
    one of fairness, and the judge had failed to apply  the  strictures  in
    Farquharson, given that more than one interpretation was  open  on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal, and other  reasonable  explanations  were
    available.

50. First, with respect to ON36, and the allegation that the Appellant  had
    slapped the victim, cut her lip, and damaged her phone, given  that  in
    November 2017 Florence had herself assaulted the Appellant, as  claimed
    by him, he would say  that  this  was  simply  a  malicious  allegation
    against him.

51. Second, with respect to ON20, and the allegation of ABH, it  ought  not
    to be forgotten that  the  victim  had  also  alleged  rape  and  false
    imprisonment, and yet she had returned back to the very premises  where
    she alleged she had been violated.  Furthermore, the judge, in deciding
    where the balance of considerations fell, in relation to the Article  8
    claim,  had  fundamentally  erred  in  law  by  concluding   that   the
    Appellant's status had been precarious.  He had been here on the  basis
    of indefinite leave to remain.

52. At the end of the hearing, we decided de bene esse that we should  have
    sight of the withdrawal statement and that this should be disclosed  to
    us before we make our decision.  Mr Jarvis took instructions  from  the
    police.  He returned to say that disclosure would take place within  21
    days of  this  hearing.  In  the  event,  the  former  complainant  was
    unwilling for her statement to be adduced in the current proceedings.

53. At the reconvened hearing on 24th September 2018, Mr  Haywood  reminded
    the Tribunal of the Appellant's family  situation.  The  Appellant  had
    three sons.  These were "J" (aged 10 years); "Q" (aged 10  years);  and
    "L" (aged 4 years).   He  also  had  a  grown-up  daughter  and  had  a
    granddaughter.  "Q," he explained, was living in Jamaica and his  other
    two sons live in this country.  He had indirect contact  with  "J"  and
    saw  "L"  every  weekend.   He  sees  his  adult   daughter   and   the
    granddaughter. The Appellant wants to maintain regular contact with all
    of his children.  He is now in a new relationship and  his  partner  is
    expecting their child.  Moreover, he has worked throughout his time  in
    the UK, setting up a  catering  business  in  2012.   He  is  currently
    studying international business at Anglia Ruskin University,  a  course
    which he will complete when his degree is awarded in 2020.

54. A significant feature of this appeal is that the decision to deport the
    Appellant arose as a result of "Operation Nexus", which  was  based  on
    "non-conviction" evidence from the Metropolitan Police.  The  Secretary
    of  State's  decision  letter  explains  that  the  evidence   of   the
    Metropolitan  Police  is  relied  upon  together   with   the   claimed
    justification  that  the  Appellant  has  been  involved  in   "serious
    criminality" in the UK, on the basis  of  "non-conviction  encounters".
    It was true that the Appellant had a number of  convictions.   However,
    these were between August 2003 and November 2008, which meant that they
    occurred nine years ago, and they  had  resulted  in  cautions,  fines,
    community directives, or a period  of  disqualification  from  driving.
    None of the offences met the normal twelve months' threshold to trigger
    automatic deportation.  In fact, the convictions did not  lead  to  the
    imposition of custodial sentences.  As  a  result,  the  Appellant  has
    never served a term of imprisonment in the UK or in Jamaica.

55. A  "non-conviction  deportation",  if  it  can  be  put  that  way,  is
    therefore, in the  Appellant's  case,  different  from  the  "automatic
    deportation" provisions in Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Here
    the threshold requirement (in relation to conviction for  a  designated
    offence, with the imposition of a custodial sentence of twelve  months'
    custody) would  be  met.   That  being  so,  the  deportation  of  that
    individual would be deemed to be conducive to  the  public  good.   The
    Secretary of State must  in  those  circumstances  make  a  deportation
    order.

56. In other cases, however, whether an individual  should  be  treated  as
    being  liable  to  deportation,  and   deported,   is   a   matter   of
    "discretionary judgment".  This  is  clear  from  Bah  (EO  (Turkey)  -
    liability to deport) [2012] UKUT 00196.  There is a power to review the
    Secretary of State's decision to decide that deportation  is  conducive
    to the public good and to deport (see Bah at paragraph 30).   If  there
    is an appeal, the Tribunal has to decide  for  itself  whether  on  the
    facts as found, deportation is conducive to the public good,  and  that
    in reaching its decision, the Tribunal is not bound by the Secretary of
    State's view of the  seriousness  of  the  offences  in  question  (see
    paragraph 30 of Bah).

57. Where any assertion of  fact  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  which  is
    material to the assessment of whether deportation is conducive  to  the
    public good becomes in dispute, it must be established by the Secretary
    of State, on the balance of probabilities,  that  this  indeed  is  the
    case.  Bah also indicates that the Secretary of State is not  precluded
    from relying on "non-conviction"  evidence.   However,  any  allegation
    must be proved by the Secretary of State.  This is clear from Bah where
    it was held that,

         "Any specific acts that have already occurred in the past  must  be
         proven by the Secretary of State, and proven to the civil  standard
         of a balance  of  probability.   The  civil  standard  is  flexible
         according to the nature of the allegations ... and a Tribunal judge
         should be astute to ensure that  proof  of  a  proposition  is  not
         degraded into speculation  of  the  possibility  of  its  accuracy"
         (paragraph 63).

58. It is also clear from Bah that,

         "The only criteria for admissibility or otherwise  is  whether  the
         evidence is relevant and has been made available to  both  parties.
         The question is whether an individual's deportation is conducive to
         the public good.  The Tribunal is entitled to have regard  to  such
         evidence before it as is relevant to  that  question,  giving  such
         weight as it considers appropriate bearing in mind the  quality  of
         the evidence and the  difficulty  in  challenging  it  when  it  is
         hearsay evidence or from anonymous sources.  We do not accept  that
         the admission of such evidence  would  deny  an  Appellant  a  fair
         hearing" (paragraph 55).

59. These principles were clarified further  in  the  case  of  Farquharson
    (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146, where the Tribunal gave
    further guidance and stated that,

         "We are astute to the need to avoid speculation.  If  the  material
         renders itself capable of more than one  interpretation  we  should
         only draw one adverse  to  the  Appellant  if  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities there is  no  other  reasonable  explanation  on  the
         material before us" (see paragraph 27).

60. On this basis, the submissions  that  were  made  by  Mr  Haywood  were
    fourfold.  First, that the Secretary of State had failed  to  prove  by
    sufficiently cogent evidence that the Appellant was guilty  of  any  of
    the offences alleged by him save for the two ABH  offences,  which  are
    labelled in the  evidence  as  ON20  and  ON26  (see  determination  at
    paragraph 83).  Second, the Appellant's misuse of drugs, it  was  said,
    had brought him into contact with criminal dealers, thereby placing his
    partners and family at risk (see determination at  paragraph  85),  but
    there had been no allegation that he had ever dealt in controlled drugs
    because he had only  used  them  for  his  own  purposes.   Third,  the
    Secretary of State  had  shown,  when  viewed  as  a  whole,  that  the
    Appellant's conduct, character and associations reached such a level of
    seriousness as to justify a decision to deport, according to the judge.
     It was held that the Appellant had been shown to have a propensity  to
    reoffend, and he had been violent to women, and was a habitual user  of
    controlled drugs, and there was no evidence that he had  stopped  using
    controlled drugs.  This was also unsustainable because it  is  contrary
    to the Appellant's own evidence.  It was not true that he had sought to
    minimise his "proven" offending (as was stated at paragraph 89  of  the
    determination).  Fourth, and finally, the judge had accepted  that  the
    Secretary of State had not shown that the Appellant was  a  "persistent
    offender", so that the framework in the Rules (at  paragraphs  399  and
    399A) did not apply (see paragraph  97  of  the  determination).   Yet,
    curiously enough, despite this finding, the  judge  then  proceeded  to
    analyse the Appellant's position within  the  framework  of  the  Rules
    themselves (at paragraphs 98 to 103) before turning to a "freestanding"
    assessment of the Appellant's position under Article 8, under which the
    judge found that the Appellant's deportation was indeed justified  (see
    paragraphs 104 to 107).

61.  At  the  reconvened  Hearing,  on  24th  September  2018,  Mr  Haywood
    repeatedly emphasised his basic submission that, given  what  had  been
    decided in Bah and Farquaharson, the evidence behind what was contended
    for by the Secretary of State,  must  be  provided.   The  evidence  in
    question was therefore relevant.  This is because it  raised  questions
    as to precisely what the victim's position was, and  if  that  evidence
    cannot be provided,  then  the  allegation  must  fall  away.   If  one
    considered the witness statement  of  the  victim,  the  allegation  in
    questions was disputed.  In fact, a different  version  of  events  was
    suggested by the Appellant himself.  Mr Haywood submitted that  he  had
    provided an extract from the CRIS Report  (see  "Police  evidence  from
    CRIS Report") which was sufficient  to  raise  doubts.  He  accordingly
    submitted that if one looks at the contents of each of the items there,
    it is quite clear that the allegation of ABH against the  Appellant  is
    unsustainable.

62. At this stage Mr Justice Lane put it to Mr  Haywood  that,  given  that
    Judge Monson below, was clearly aware that the witness statement of the
    complainant had been withdrawn, whether he was obliged thereafter, as a
    matter of law, to find that ON20 had not been proved.  Or, was  it  the
    case, asked Mr Justice Lane, whether the judge  had  simply  failed  to
    give sufficient weight to the fact of the withdrawal  of  that  witness
    statement?  Mr Haywood replied that the latter was  clearly  the  case.
    The judge had to demonstrate what weight he had given the withdrawal of
    the statement, together with the commentary that went with it.

63. Mr Haywood moreover submitted that in his Grounds of Appeal, before the
    First-tier Tribunal, dated 17th January 2018, he had made it clear that
    "ON20 concerned an allegation of  ABH,  false  imprisonment  and  rape"
    (paragraphs 81 to 82) arising from an incident on 16th May  2009,  when
    the Appellant and his ex-partner were at his  flat.   The  judge  found
    that the allegation of ABH was made out, but the  allegations  of  rape
    and false imprisonment were not.  However, he argued that Judge  Monson
    (at paragraph 81) had been wrong to reject the Appellant's  account  of
    the victim having  sustained  injuries  on  account  of  an  accidental
    headbutting by him when he had fallen over.  This was particularly  the
    case given that first, the witness statement by  the  victim  had  been
    withdrawn; and second, given that the Appellant  had  not  been  cross-
    examined on his own version of how the  injury  was  sustained  by  the
    victim.

64. Against this background, Mr Haywood  submitted  that  it  must  not  be
    forgotten that the victim had behaved strangely, by her own  admission,
    following the incident.  She had been able to leave the flat of her own
    volition, and then remarkably, to return back to  it,  when  she  could
    have easily fled and either gone to her  mother's  house,  or  to  have
    reported the matter to the police.  It was also extremely  strange  for
    the Appellant to refuse to surrender up her mobile phone, to enable the
    police  authorities  to  check  on  the  calls  that  had  been   made,
    notwithstanding the assurance  given  by  the  police  which  expressly
    addressed her concerns.  The burden was on the Secretary  of  State  to
    prove the allegation.  She had failed to do so.

65. For his part, Mr Jarvis submitted that a judge deciding a case such  as
    this is often faced with the management of large amounts of  evidential
    materials.  Not everything can  be  expressly  referred  to.  Even  so,
    nothing in Bah [2012] UKUT 00196 or in Farquaharson [2013] UKUT  00146,
    actually imposed a burden upon the Secretary of State  to  produce  all
    the evidence, that could possibly be produced.  In fact, all  that  was
    needed was for the Appellant to  "understand  the  gist"  because  "the
    Tribunal  is  not  conducting  a  re-trial"  as  was  made   clear   in
    Farquaharson by Mr Justice Blake.  Of course,  the  more  evidence  the
    Secretary of State can provide, the better it will be all  around,  but
    there is nothing in the cases of Bah and Farquaharson to  suggest  that
    the Secretary of State has to produce all  the  evidence  that  exists.
    Judge Monson below was entitled to consider the CRIS Reports.

66. The police were, after all, obstructed in entering the  premises  where
    the victim was being assaulted and this is clear  from  Judge  Monson's
    decision, where he properly explains how, there had been a delay in the
    Appellant opening the door to the  police,   where  the  allegation  of
    offence ON20, which alleged rape and false  imprisonment  committed  on
    16th May 2009, was raised against the Appellant. When Mr  Staunton  had
    asked the Appellant why he had delayed in opening the door, he had said
    that he was getting dressed, and the judge  observed  "this  is  not  a
    credible explanation in view of the fact that the  Appellant  was  only
    wearing a vest  when  the  police  eventually  forced  their  way  in."
    Furthermore, the Appellant's explanation that  the  flat  had  recently
    been burgled, so that he needed to lock the door,  leaving  his  victim
    inside, was also rejected by the judge because "the police  could  find
    no record of the report of a burglary" (paragraph 21).

67. It is true that the victim then withdrew her witness statement, leading
    the CPS to "discontinue this matter and there would be no trial, due to
    the victim being unwilling to substantiate the  allegation"  (see  J  N
    Mills at page 869), but this did not mean that the offence of ON20  was
    not proved, as far as this jurisdiction was concerned, when the  matter
    was before Judge Monson.  After all, the victim was then  taken  to  Dr
    Haven in Whitechapel, whose "extragenital findings"  included,  bruises
    to face, neck, arms, legs and thighs, as well  as  abrasions  to  right
    hand,  right  forearm,  back  and  buttocks".   His   "genital/perianal
    findings"  included  an   abrasion   to   the   posterior   fourchette.
    Accordingly, the Secretary  of  State's  case  is  laid  out  extremely
    clearly in the CRIS Report, from which these references are drawn.  The
    Appellant's explanation  about  what  he  had  said  happened  is  also
    adequately well explained and recorded  there.   For  that  reason,  it
    cannot be said that it is unfair to the Appellant to base a decision on
    matters that have already been disclosed in  this  way.   There  is  no
    legal error in the decision by Judge Monson.

68. As for the issue of the Appellant not having been cross-examined,  this
    was an extremely heavy evidence-based  appeal,  and  just  because  the
    Presenting Officer did not ask any  questions  did  not  undermine  the
    lawfulness of the decision.  The fact remained  that  even  though  the
    withdrawal statement had not been produced (in circumstances  where  as
    was now clear there were a variety of multiple reasons for why  it  was
    withdrawn) the judge's  detailed  analysis  with  respect  to  ON20  at
    paragraph 81 of the determination, took all of this into  account,  and
    properly explained why the offence of ABH was made out by the Secretary
    of State "which is the offence for which he  was  originally  arrested"
    (paragraph 81), as Judge Monson carefully pointed out.

69. Mr Haywood's skeleton argument had argued that  both  sides  must  have
    sight of the evidence even in  circumstances  where  a  witness  feared
    reprisals. This was based on authority in the decision  by  Mr  Justice
    Blake in R (oao ILPA) v Tribunal Procedure Committee [2016] 1 WLR  3519
    (at paragraph 83). However, that was an observation made in the context
    of  Rule  13(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 (SI  2014/2604),  that  had
    come into force on 20th  October  2014.   Under  this  Rule  13(2)  the
    Tribunal could  give  a  direction  prohibiting  the  disclosure  of  a
    document or information  to  a  person  (including  the  Appellant)  if
    satisfied that such disclosure would be likely to cause that person  or
    some other person serious harm "and the Tribunal  is  satisfied  having
    regard to the interests of justice that it  is  proportionate  to  give
    such a direction".

70. In  that  case,  ILPA,  a  professional  body  of  immigration  lawyers
    established in 1984,  had  challenged  the  legality  of  Rule  13  and
    contended

      i) it is ultra vires as it is beyond the  scope  of  the  rule  making
         power in that it interferes with common law principles of  fairness
         without statutory authority; and

     ii) in the context  of  issues  decided  in  immigration  appeals,  the
         creation of a judicial discretion to  decide  a  case  on  material
         unknown to the Appellant is so unfair that no rational rule  making
         body could have promulgated it.

71. However, Mr Jarvis submitted that the challenge was thrown out  because
    "the Rules do not mandate such a course, even if the judge is satisfied
    that disclosure  would  be  likely  to  cause  a  person  serious  harm
    (physical or mental)" in  that  "the  judge  must  act  judicially,  in
    accordance with the overriding objective to achieve  fairness  and  the
    common law principles" so that "such a direction can only be  given  if
    the judge considers it to  be  proportionate"  (per  Justice  Blake  at
    paragraph 70).

72. Indeed, the High Court in that case had gone on to say that Rule 13 did
    not "give rise to a systemic or inherent lack of  fairness."  This  was
    because it would not be used to make a closed substantive  decision  in
    the manner contended for by ILPA, and that only in "'a rare and unusual
    case, where the competing considerations would have  been  examined  on
    their individual facts' could Rule 13 be used in the  manner  contended
    for by ILPA" (paragraph 84).

73. Finally, as  for  the  recent  Tribunal  decision  in  Andell  (foreign
    criminal - para 398) [2018] UKUT 198, that  decision  is  not  correct.
    The Appellant here is not a foreign criminal.  In  treating  him  in  a
    manner that he was, Mr Jarvis submitted that "Andell  had  changed  the
    legal landscape" by making paragraph 398 of HC 395 applicable,  without
    recognising that it had to be read subject to paragraph A398, making it
    inapplicable to a person who was not a "foreign  criminal"  because  he
    had not been subject to a custodial sentence of at least twelve months.
     A foreign criminal was set out in a statutory  definition  at  Section
    117D(2) of the NIAA 2002.  It was not set out in the Immigration  Rules
    at paragraph 398 of HC 395.  In fact, the very confusion that paragraph
    398 potentially stood to  throw  up,  was  designed  to  be  abated  by
    paragraph A398, by introducing a clarity  to  the  distinction  between
    foreign criminals facing deportation and  other  non-British  nationals
    facing deportation.

74. In reply, Mr Haywood submitted that one thing  that  both  sides  could
    clearly agree upon was that the Appellant was not a "foreign  criminal"
    under the statutory definition of the 2002 Act because he had not  been
    convicted, and it was wholly improper to  seek  to  treat  him  as  one
    purely on the grounds of him being "suspected" of being  one.   Second,
    what stood as an issue between  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State, however, was that of  the  degree  of  clarity  and  specificity
    required in  the  evidence  which  would  go  to  confirming  that  the
    Appellant had indeed been guilty of offence ON20.  Farquaharson made it
    quite clear that the evidence had to be provided.  It  was  not  enough
    here to say that "a sufficient gist of it" had been  disclosed  if  the
    evidence itself was ambiguous.  That then raised the  problem  that  if
    the account itself was unproven, it was quite a leap to then  say  that
    it was implausible for the Appellant to claim that  the  injuries  were
    not caused by him.

Discussion

75. We are satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)) of
    TCEA 2007) such that we should set aside the decision.  Our reasons are
    as follows.  First, it is not the case that the judge is not  cognisant
    of the applicable legal framework.  The decisions in  Bah  [2012]  UKUT
    00196 and in Farquharson [2013]  UKUT  00146,  upon  which  Mr  Haywood
    addressed the judge at the hearing below were fully  addressed  by  the
    judge (at paragraphs 85 to 89 of the decision).  He took  into  account
    the "non-conviction" evidence and found, on  the  facts,  that  it  was
    established, on the basis of the Appellant's  conduct,  character,  and
    associations, that his actions had reached such a level of  seriousness
    as to justify the decision to deport.  He particularly  identified  the
    fact that the Appellant had:

      a) been violent towards women,

      b) been a habitual abuser of controlled drugs, which brought him  into
         contact with criminal drug dealers and associates,

      c) had not shown that he was a reformed character who was unlikely  to
         reoffend in the future,

      d) had sought to minimise his proven offending and even protested  his
         innocence seeking to blame his partner in crime, and

      e) had produced no evidence that he  had  stopped  abusing  controlled
         drugs (paragraph 29).

76. Although the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RLP  (BAH  revisited  -  expeditious
    justice) [2017] UKUT 330 noted the changes to the legal landscape since
    Bah, there is nothing in RLP that assists the Appellant's case. On  the
    contrary, the Upper Tribunal in RLP pointed  out  the  significance  of
    Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  in
    determining  whether  it  would  be  disproportionate  to   remove   an
    individual. The judge in the present case had full and proper regard to
    section 117B.

77. In the same way, the strictures in  Farquharson  were  applied  by  the
    judge, and it is not the case that he erred  in  drawing  a  conclusion
    adverse to the Appellant when, on a balance of  probabilities,  another
    reasonable explanation was open to the judge to reach on  the  material
    before  him.   For  example,  the  fact  that  the  Appellant   himself
    complained about being assaulted by Florence in November 2017,  is  not
    relevant to the Appellant's own assault some five months earlier on 1st
    June 2017.  There could be  no  ambiguity  in  the  evidence  that  the
    victim's daughter called  the  police,  that  the  daughter  had  taken
    photographs of the injury, that the injury actually existed,  and  that
    when the Appellant was asked whether  the  victim  had  an  injury,  he
    replied "no comment".

78. In any event, the thousand pages of police evidence in the CRIS  Report
    was not something upon which the  Appellant  could  comprehensively  be
    cross-examined upon.  The Appellant  knew  what  the  allegations  were
    against him and yet chose to make simple denials with respect  to  them
    in just over one page in his witness statement of 19th June 2018,  when
    it was open to him to deal with them specifically.  We agreed that what
    this appeal is about is a lack of evidence by way of  a  rebuttal  from
    the Appellant which cannot be  laid  at  the  door  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

79. Therefore, with respect to the ON36 offence, of  the  Appellant  having
    slapped the face and caused damage to the telephone of Florence, we are
    satisfied that the judge dealt with this  appropriately  (at  paragraph
    79) referring to the Appellant's interview answer of  "no  comment"  to
    questions specifically on the assault.

80. As for the withdrawal of her statement, there was a perfectly  adequate
    explanation given by the victim, which was that she feared  that,  were
    she to come under attack again from the Appellant, she  would  need  to
    call  the  police  quickly  enough,  and  needed  her  phone  for   her
    protection.

81. With respect to the ON20 offence, the judge was entitled to reject  the
    headbutting  of  the  victim  as  "incredible"  in  that   "given   the
    surrounding circumstances" the judge was satisfied that the offence  of
    ABH was made out, which was the offence for  which  the  Appellant  was
    originally arrested, but rape  and  false  imprisonment  were  rejected
    (paragraph 81 to 82).  He was equally entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant's "convictions for assault in a domestic context are just the
    tip of the iceberg (paragraph 83), although Mr Jarvis did not press  us
    on this point.

82. Any failure on the part of the Secretary of State to cross-examine  the
    Appellant on this particular matter needs to be seen in the context  of
    the extremely  wide-ranging  nature  of  the  evidence  in  this  case.
    Furthermore, the Appellant could have adduced evidence in  his  witness
    statement, and given oral  testimony  in  evidence  in  chief  to  this
    effect, which he signally failed to do.

83.  In all the circumstances,  therefore,  the  absence  of  a  withdrawal
    statement does not vitiate the judge's findings. The evidence had to be
    looked at in the round, across the various incidents. With  respect  to
    ON20,  the  appellant  had  accepted  that  he  headbutted  the  former
    complainant but claimed he did so accidentally. The  judge's  rejection
    of this assertion as incredible does not fall  to  be  impugned  merely
    because (for reasons about which one can merely  speculate)  the  woman
    concerned decided to withdraw the complaint.

84. With respect to the suggestion that the judge had  misdirected  himself
    by referring to the Appellant's drug abuse  in  terms  that  he  was  a
    habitual abuser and brought himself into  contact  with  criminal  drug
    dealers and associates, there was no error of law here either, in terms
    of his application under Article 8, on the basis of his family life  as
    a parent.

85. This is because the Family Court had previously already decided exactly
    this (at paragraph 85), namely, that the children would  be  placed  at
    risk.  He had received criminal convictions in Jamaica in 2007 and been
    convicted in dealing with "ganja" (see paragraph 13).  He had not  been
    named on his children's birth certificates and Social Services had been
    prepared to place the children in  short-term  foster  care  (paragraph
    40).  The judge did not err in concluding that "there does  not  appear
    to be a realistic  prospect  of  the  Appellant  being  granted  direct
    contact with  his  children  in  the  UK  as  a  result  of  a  further
    application to the Family Court" (paragraph 100).

86. With respect to his family life as a partner, criticism has  been  made
    of the judge having referred to the Appellant's immigration  status  as
    "highly precarious". It was, however, manifestly highly precarious when
    he claimed to have met [MJ] in September  2017,  because  by  then  the
    Appellant had for some time been the  subject  of  a  decision  by  the
    respondent that the  Appellant  should  be  deported  from  the  United
    Kingdom. Furthermore, that deportation decision had not been taken  out
    of the blue.  The  Appellant  had,  for  some  time,  been  engaged  in
    opprobrious conduct that eventually led to  the  decision.  His  status
    was, thus, precarious,  notwithstanding  he  had  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

87. The judge was right to find that "the Appellant has not  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his  life"  (paragraph  101).   That  is
    factually correct, given the Appellant's immigration history.

88. Finally, in terms of the judge's analysis of the Appellant's  situation
    outside the Immigration Rules, he studiously applied  the  Razgar  test
    (paragraphs 104 to 107).  The Appellant had not  shown  himself  to  be
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK, although he had  provided
    evidence of studying at university and obtaining  some  qualifications,
    but there was  limited  evidence  of  the  Appellant  participating  in
    gainful economic activity in the past, and the business he  set  up  in
    2012 failed  (paragraph  101).   In  the  circumstances,  applying  the
    Section 117B considerations of the 2002 Act, there could only have been
    one conclusion.

89. The judge's proportionality assessment, beginning at paragraph  104  of
    his decision, was entirely sound.

Decision

90.  There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in   the   original   judge's
    determination.  This appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.

91. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 5th November 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 5th November 2018

