
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/25363/2016
                                                               HU/25353/2016
                                                               HU/25359/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th October 2018                          |On 19th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               (1) MANDEEP [K]
                                  (2) [M S]
                                  (3) [A K]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Khan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Brien, promulgated on 15th March 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Priory Courts on 27 February 2018.   In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants  whereupon  the
    Appellants subsequently applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The First Appellant was born on 25th July 1985.  The  Second  Appellant
    was born on 5th January 2007.  The Third Appellant was  born  on  26th
    December 2011.  All are citizens of India.  The First Appellant is  the
    principal Appellant, as she is the  mother  of  the  Second  and  Third
    Appellants.  They arrived in the United Kingdom as  visitors  with  the
    husband of  the  First  Appellant,  subsequently  the  First  Appellant
    maintained that her husband had left her, and that she would be at risk
    of ill-treatment if she returned to India, and moreover  her  children,
    who she alleges do not  speak  Punjabi,  would  not  find  it  easy  to
    integrate back into Indian life.

The Judge's Findings

 3. In an extensive and well-compiled determination, the judge referred  to
    the case law, and reached clear findings of fact.  He observed how  the
    First Appellant and her husband came to the United Kingdom on 25th June
    2008 as visitors.  They never intended to leave.  They have  not  left.
    The First Appellant's initial evidence was that  her  husband  had  not
    worked.  However, it transpired that  he  had  worked  illegally  as  a
    gardener.  She also had worked illegally as a cook and a cleaner.   She
    had claimed that her family had disowned her because of a  decision  to
    separate from her husband.  However, the decision to separate turns out
    to have been not one that was made by her but by  her  husband.   There
    was also no communication of any disowning at all provided by the First
    Appellant (paragraph 35). The  judge  comprehensively  disbelieved  the
    First Appellant in her evidence.

 4. However, a particular feature of this case related to  the  Second  and
    the Third Appellants  who  were  at  the  time  aged  11  and  9  years
    respectively.  At the date of the application they were 9 years  and  4
    years respectively.  The Second  Appellant  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for just under seven years.  The children, as the judge  found,
    appeared to have been well settled and doing well at school  (paragraph
    38).  There was also, as the judge found, a report from Diana Harris, a
    social worker, dated 25th August 2017.  She had gone  on  to  say  that
    there was no possibility of the family  or  local  community  in  India
    accepting or supporting the children because they would  be  considered
    as outcasts (paragraph 39).

 5. The judge, however, went on to conclude that it would be reasonable  to
    expect the Second Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  There was  no
    evidence that returning to India would compromise his health.  He would
    be returning with his mother,  the  First  Appellant.   There  were  no
    significant  family  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom   (paragraph   40).
    Moreover, the public interest considerations in favour  of  immigration
    control weighed heavily against the First Appellant (see paragraph 41).
     It was reasonable to expect the Second Appellant to leave  the  United
    Kingdom for India with his mother and sister  (paragraph  42)  and  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE did not assist the Appellant and there
    were no exceptional circumstances in the claim (paragraphs 42 - 43).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The Grounds of Application state that the Second Appellant, at the date
    of the decision under review, had been in the United Kingdom  for  more
    than seven years.  He arrived on 25th June 2008.  The  application  was
    made on 9th June 2016.  The judge's findings at paragraphs  40  and  41
    did not properly assess the best interests of the Second Appellant.

 8. On 19th June 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal  on
    the basis that the judge assessed  the  reasonableness  of  the  Second
    Appellant's return to India  (at  paragraph  40)  but  did  not  assess
    whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom which is a relevant criterion in Section 117B of the NIAA 2002.
     There was an arguable error of law.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 29th October 2018, Mr Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, proceeded to say  that  he
    would have to concede that the decision by Judge O'Brien to refuse  the
    appeal was misconceived and fell  into  error.   This  is  because  the
    decision is given as having been promulgated on 15th  March  2018,  but
    the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC
    53, is such that the Appellants would now succeed  and  invited  me  to
    allow the appeal outright.  The Supreme Court had made it  quite  clear
    that "reasonableness" is not a balancing exercise.   The youngest child
    in this case had chosen not to take  Indian  nationality  and  now  had
    British citizenship.  He, as a Third Appellant, was a British  citizen.
    The Second Appellant also had been in the UK for over seven  years  and
    was a British citizen.

10. The judge was wrong, if one considers the latest jurisprudence from the
    Supreme Court, in coming to the conclusion that he did at paragraph 41.
     There he had said, at the end of his determination that,

         "it is appropriate in assessing reasonableness also  to  take  into
         account the immigration history of the First Appellant.   As  noted
         above, I am satisfied that she came to  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
         visit visa with the intention of overstaying for  economic  reasons
         and both she and her husband have worked illegally.  I note in  the
         latter regard that the Second Appellant  told  Ms  Harris  that  he
         wished his mother  'didn't  have  to  work  so  hard'.   The  First
         Appellant was put on notice, if such notice  were  necessary,  that
         she should leave the United Kingdom in 2013, but did not."

11. Mr Mills submitted that the opening statement at paragraph 51 that  "it
    is appropriate in assessing reasonableness also to  take  into  account
    the immigration history of the First Appellant" was no longer viable.

12. For his part, Mr Khan submitted that he would have nothing  further  to
    add.

13. Given that it is conceded that there is error of law,  I  come  to  the
    same conclusion myself.

Error of Law

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside (see Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007).  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Remaking the Decision

15. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.

16. I am allowing this appeal for the  reasons  given  by  Mr  Mills.   The
    decision of KO (Nigeria) means that the Appellants in this appeal  must
    succeed.

Decision

This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may  be
payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018

