
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/25455/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons delivered ex      |
|                                     |tempore at the hearing. Promulgated  |
|On 7 February 2018                   |On 8 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      NQ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Sponsors attended as litigants in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction as  the  appeal  concerns  a  child.  The
    Appellant had applied for entry clearance to join his  parents  in  the
    United Kingdom for settlement under paragraph 301  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that appeal had come for hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colvin, sitting at Taylor House on 27 September 2017.  By way  of
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 11 October  2017  the  Judge  had
    allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8  EHCR  human  rights  grounds.  The
    Appellant is responding to this appeal,  but  to  ease  following  this
    decision I shall continue to refer to him as the Appellant.

2.    The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge C. Andrew, by way of a decision  dated  6  November
    2017 and when she said as follows:-

         "The Grounds complain that  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  a
         presumption.  The Sponsors do not  have  ILR  and  thus  cannot  be
         regarded as settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  and,  as  such,  the
         Immigration Rules cannot be met.  Further, the Judge had no  regard
         to the public interest in the maintenance  of  immigration  control
         when coming to his decision."

3.    The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds  of  appeal  say,  in  part,  as
    follows:-

         "1.      The judge  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  based  on  an
             assumption.  It is asserted that he cannot be certain that the
             Sponsor in this case will be granted either  an  extension  of
             their current  Discretionary  leave  or  Indefinite  Leave  to
             Remain in the UK when they make  any  subsequent  application.
             As such they cannot be said to  be  present  and  settled  and
             therefore it is asserted  that  there  can  be  no  breach  of
             Article 8 in refusing the Appellant entry  clearance  to  join
             them, and to find otherwise is a  misdirection  in  law.   The
             Sponsors to the appeal have chosen to leave the  Appellant  in
             Ghana and have been absent from him for the majority of his 16
             years having left him when he was an infant. ....


         2. It is additionally  submitted  that  the  judge  has  based  his
             conclusion on a misassumption that it  was  the  Secretary  of
             State who created the 10 year window of opportunity  to  allow
             the children of the Sponsors to gain British citizenship. ...


         3. It is finally  submitted  that  in  allowing  the  appeal  under
             Article 8 ECHR despite the Sponsors' lack of  settled  status,
             the  judge  has  simply  used  this  provision  as  a  general
             dispensing power and subsequently failed to adequately  regard
             the public interest in the maintenance  of  a  fair  and  just
             immigration system. ..."

4.    In her submissions before me today Ms Everett said she relied  on  the
    grounds  of  appeal  which  were  lengthy  and  did  not  require  much
    elaboration.  They were strong.  She also submitted that  at  paragraph
    18 of the judge's  decision  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    proportionality exercise sufficiently.  She had applied speculation  as
    to what may happen in respect of a  future  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  There was no consideration of the public interest.   She  also
    said it was not adequate to rely on the  delay  and  in  any  event  it
    appeared that there had been a mistaken fact as far as the delay  issue
    had been concerned.  There were previous applications  which  had  been
    made by the Sponsors, which had not succeeded.

5.    The Sponsors attended the hearing and I  explained  the  procedure  to
    them.  I referred to the grounds of appeal and the  background  to  the
    case and I invited them to make their submissions. They said  that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer was wrong and that the judge was  right,
    that the judge had reached a reasonable  and  fair  assessment  of  the
    whole of the case.  The  judge  had  been  provided  with  all  of  the
    evidence.  The Sponsor explained that he had come to  this  country  in
    2001 and that he had had, as he put it, "a  couple  of  renewals".   In
    2008 he applied for leave to remain as a  highly  skilled  migrant  and
    something went seriously wrong but there was an allegation that he  had
    used a fraudulent certificate but that was incorrect.  He had  reported
    the matter to the Metropolitan Police and ultimately the principals  of
    the college were found guilty, not him.  In short, it  was  being  said
    that the judge had come to a fair decision and that I should uphold the
    judge's conclusions.

6.    I had also invited the Sponsors to deal with paragraphs 15 and  18  of
    the judge's decision and I also invited them  to  assist  me  with  the
    background to their son being in Ghana for so long without his parents.



7.    Ultimately, in my judgment, it is  quite  clear  that  the  judge  did
    materially err in law.  I have some sympathy for the judge because  she
    was hampered in the assessment that she had to undertake because  there
    was no Presenting Officer at the hearing but the position here is  that
    the Sponsors at the time of the hearing  in  September  2017  had  been
    given their first tranche of discretionary leave to remain (30  months)
    and they were to renew that further leave to remain in  around  October
    or November 2017.  That would give them another  30  months'  leave  to
    remain and it was only after that period of time that they  would  then
    be entitled to consider making an application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  Therefore, I do agree that there was  significant  speculation
    on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  as  to  whether  or  not
    indefinite leave to remain would ultimately  be  granted  or  not.   It
    would be one thing if an ILR application had been made and the decision
    "was around the corner", perhaps in a month or two, but it is  entirely
    a different thing when the first discretionary leave to remain had  not
    even concluded and that at least another two and  a  half  years  would
    have to elapse before an ILR application could properly be made.  There
    was just too long a period to wait before the ILR application.

8.    Additionally, I take into  account  the  issues  in  relation  to  the
    alleged delay.  It appears that the judge was not fully apprised of the
    various applications that the Sponsors had made  for  leave  to  remain
    including failures in some applications as well.  It was not  simply  a
    matter of the  Sponsors  having  made  an  application  and  them  then
    waiting. The delays and applications, including refusals were relevant.



9.    Further, this is not a case in which the Sponsors were in a  situation
    where they could not return  to  their  country  of  nationality.   The
    example given to me during submissions today is that this is not a case
    in which the Sponsors had applied for asylum and that thereby they  had
    to wait in this country for a decision on their  asylum  claim  because
    they feared a return to their country of nationality. Quite simply,  in
    reality, there was little stopping  the  Sponsors  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom to be reunited with their son.  These are all relevant  factors
    which, in my judgment, were not adequately or at all taken into account
    by the judge when considering Article 8 and  exceptional  circumstances
    and indeed when considering the public interest which she  was  obliged
    to do.  In the circumstances, although I  have  carefully  listened  to
    what the Sponsors have said to me, in my judgment there is  a  material
    error of law in the  judge's  decision.   I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   None  of  the  current  findings
    shall stand.

10.   Having reflected on the matter, and  having  canvassed  this  with  Ms
    Everett, in my judgment it is appropriate to remit the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and at the First-tier Tribunal the  Appellant  will
    be able to  submit  such  further  oral  and  written  evidence  as  he
    considers appropriate.  I have urged upon the Sponsors today that  they
    should seek legal assistance.

Decision

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
    and is set aside.
There shall be a re-hearing on all issues at the First-tier Tribunal

Anonymity direction made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed: Abid Mahmood                    Date: 7 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
