
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25771/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                           |On 04 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?
     HER HONOUR JUDGE EADY QC (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuocha of Carl Martin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the resumed hearing of the  appeal  in  this  matter.   By  her
    Decision promulgated on 10 September 2018, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Keki?
    found that there had been a material error of law in the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaniker (promulgated 23 January 2018) and
    set aside that decision. Specifically, it was held that the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("the FtT") had failed to give  proper  consideration  to  the
    factors set out by section 117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") and Judge Keki? directed that this task should be
    carried out afresh at the resumed hearing of this  appeal.   In  giving
    her Decision of 10 September 2018, Judge Keki? also made  an  anonymity
    order.

 2. Pursuant to the  case  management  directions  given  for  the  resumed
    hearing, those acting for the appellant had lodged a further bundle  of
    documents, which included up-dated statements from  the  appellant  and
    from his wife (AA) and stepson (J).  AA and J attended to give evidence
    at the resumed hearing and confirmed their statements;  their  evidence
    was not challenged.  In reaching our decision at this hearing, we  have
    had regard to those statements and the additional documentary  evidence
    provided, along with the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  all  the
    previous evidence served in this  matter.   We  have  also  taken  into
    account the submissions made to us today, as summarised below.

The Background

 3. The Appellant is a Nigerian national, born on 11 January 1960 (although
    various other dates of birth  have  also  been  recorded  at  different
    times). He challenges the decision  of  the  Respondent  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order made against him on 8  January  2009,  under
    section  32(5)  UK  Borders  Act  2007  ("the  2007   Act")   and   the
    determination of FtT Judge Swaniker, dated 31 January 2018,  dismissing
    his appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

 4. In setting aside the decision of FtT Judge  Swankier,  UT  Judge  Keki?
    noted that no challenge had been made to a number of findings  made  by
    the FtT, which were duly preserved, as recorded at para 26 of the Upper
    Tribunal Judgment; relevantly:

      i) The appellant has a poor immigration and criminal history.  He  was
         first deported  from  the  UK  on  25  January  2000,  having  been
         convicted of a number of criminal offences in the UK. He re-entered
         the UK illegally on 12 August 2003, was detained  and  served  with
         illegal entry papers and removed from the UK on 18 October 2003. On
         17 May 2008 he was encountered at  Gatwick  airport  with  a  false
         immigration stamp, attempting to re-enter the UK in breach  of  his
         deportation order  and,  on  6  June  2008,  he  was  convicted  of
         "possession of another's false or improperly obtained ID  document"
         and sentenced to a term of 12 months  imprisonment.  On  7  October
         2008, the appellant  made  representations  on  an  application  to
         revoke  a  deportation  order,  having  previously  applied  to  be
         returned to  Nigeria  under  the  provisions  of  the  Home  Office
         Facilitated Returns  Scheme,  which  application  was  rejected.  A
         further deportation order was  made  against  the  appellant  on  8
         January 2009, identifying him as a foreign criminal  under  section
         32(5) of the 2007 Act; his removal from the UK to Nigeria was  then
         made on 11 September 2009, under section 32(4) of the 2007 Act,  as
         conducive to the public good for the purposes of section 3(5)(a) of
         the Immigration Act 1971.

     ii) The appellant married AA in 2010. He has an established family life
         with AA and her son J (the appellant's stepson; born in  2004)  and
         the appellant and J have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,
         with the appellant having been a presence for J from  a  young  age
         and having assumed a parental role in his  life.  Having  initially
         met in the UK, AA and J moved to Nigeria in 2010 to live  with  the
         appellant for some five years. Although AA and J returned to the UK
         in August 2015 (so J could attend secondary school in  the  UK  and
         because AA needed to support her father who was very ill), that did
         not break J's relationship with  the  appellant;  the  family  have
         continued to remain in close contact.

    iii) AA and J are British citizens and, as such, J is entitled to a life
         in  the  UK,  with  the  opportunity  to  enjoy  all  the   rights,
         opportunities  and  privileges  which   attach   to   his   British
         citizenship. He has a parent in the UK who is able to take care  of
         him so he is not required to return to Nigeria.  There is  also  an
         extended family network in the UK that can provide both  J  and  AA
         with additional support. Although there was  evidence  that  J  had
         developed several anxieties, these were not  to  "clinical  levels"
         (see the January 2016  report  of  Dr  Shenoy,  Chartered  Clinical
         Psychologist).  Similarly,  whilst  the  evidence   supported   the
         contention that J missed the appellant  and  was  affected  by  the
         separation, his anxieties were also caused  by  other  factors  and
         there had been some exaggeration of the impact of the separation on
         J. In any event, J was settling down at school  and  his  level  of
         anxiety had decreased. J's best interests  are  served  by  staying
         with his mother and extended family in the UK.

     iv) That said, J had spent some five years living  with  the  appellant
         and AA in Nigeria and there was no credible evidence of unrest  and
         fighting in the appellant's home area  in  Nigeria,  so  no  safety
         issues rose.  In the circumstances, it would  not  be  unreasonable
         for J to leave the UK and move to Nigeria.

      v) As for AA, notwithstanding her family ties in the UK, it would  not
         be unduly harsh for her to live with the appellant in Nigeria.

The Resumed Hearing

 5. At the resumed hearing in this appeal,  we  received  up-dated  witness
    evidence from the appellant, AA and J.  There was no objection taken to
    us taking any of this evidence into account. Moreover, both  AA  and  J
    were in attendance before us to give oral evidence and  both  confirmed
    the content of their witness statements.  Neither was cross-examined.

 6. AA up-dated the position in terms of her family,  explaining  that  her
    father died in September 2017 after suffering from  oesophageal  cancer
    for two  years.   She  has  explained  the  effect  of  her  continuing
    separation from her husband and her concerns  for  his  safety  in  the
    light of present unrest in the area of Nigeria where he is living.  She
    acknowledges that J's best interests are served by his remaining in the
    UK, not least as he has recently badly fractured the bones in his  left
    forearm, requiring surgical intervention -  something  that  would  not
    have been provided for free  in  Nigeria.  AA  has  told  us  that  she
    currently supports the appellant financially from her work in the UK  -
    the economic situation in Nigeria  being  such  that  there  is  little
    investment in building projects which would use the water tank business
    in which the appellant works.  She has explained that  the  appellant's
    age (nearly 60) means that he cannot compete against  young  unemployed
    graduates and she has said that she would  herself  now  find  it  very
    difficult to get work in Nigeria that would enable her to  provide  for
    the family as she currently does.  As for J,  AA  says  it  is  not  an
    option for him to return to live in Nigeria, observing  that,  although
    only 14, he is now six feet tall and would be treated as  an  adult  if
    any emergency situation arose.   As  we  have  already  recorded,  AA's
    evidence was not challenged and we accept what she has told us  as  her
    honest testimony.

 7. Turning to the evidence of J himself, we also accept  his  unchallenged
    testimony.  J has told us that he misses the appellant  ("Dad")  badly.
    The appellant is the father-figure in J's life (all the more  so  since
    the death of his maternal grandfather) and as he gets older he wants to
    able to talk to the appellant in private about  things  that  he  would
    find difficult to discuss with AA or his grandmother. Referring to more
    recent events, he has explained that it was particularly difficult when
    he had to have his arm in plaster for eight weeks this  summer  as  his
    mother had to assist him in his personal care. He has further explained
    missing the appellant's presence in his life as  missing  "the  African
    side of my personality".  In this context we  note  that  AA  is  white
    British and J's natural father was black Ghanaian, albeit that  (as  Dr
    Shenoy reports) during his childhood, growing up with the appellant,  J
    saw himself as Nigerian.

 8. To corroborate the continuing family ties between  AA  and  J  and  the
    appellant, we have also been provided with  copies  of  AA's  telephone
    bills showing calls on a daily basis to Nigeria.

The Issue

 9. The appellant is subject to a deportation order as a foreign  criminal.
    In challenging the Respondent's decision to refuse to revoke that order
    the appellant relies on article 8 ECHR.  In such a case, regard must be
    hard to the considerations listed in section 117C of the 2002 Act  (see
    section 117A (2)(b)). Section 117B of the 2002 Act sets out the  public
    interest considerations applicable in  all  cases;  relevantly,  it  is
    provided that,  where  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK, the public interest does not  require
    removal (section 117B(6)).  In determining this question,  as  the  FtT
    Judge observed, the best  interests  of  a  child  must  be  a  primary
    consideration but are not always the only primary consideration and  do
    not of themselves have the status of the paramount  consideration  (and
    see MA (Pakistan) and ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and Kaur (children's best
    interests/public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC)).


10. Section 117C of the 2002 Act then sets out additional considerations in
    cases involving the deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  providing  as
    follows:


         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


11. The starting point is thus that deportation is in the public  interest,
    and  the  more  serious  the  offence,  the  greater  the  interest  in
    deportation. For sentences of 4 years' imprisonment or less (as  here),
    there are, however, two exceptions to deportation. We are concerned  in
    this  case  with  the  second  of  those  exceptions,   which   applies
    (relevantly)  where  the  applicant  has  a   genuine   or   subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of  deportation  on
    the child would be unduly harsh.

12. It is not disputed that  J  is  a  British  citizen  and  that  he  is,
    therefore, a qualifying child under section 117D(a). The question  that
    the FtT  failed  to  address,  and  which  therefore  falls  to  us  to
    determine, is whether, having regard to the considerations set  out  at
    section 117C, the effect of the appellant's deportation on J is  unduly
    harsh?

13. In answering that question, it is common ground that we  are  bound  to
    apply the guidance provided by the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria)  and
    ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 (LordCarwath  providing  the  lead  Judgment,
    with which the other Justices of the Supreme Court agreed), as follows:



         "22. ... Like exception 1, and like the test of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B, exception 2 appears self-contained.


         23.  On the other hand, the expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),
         that is the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view ... is
         a balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence,
         other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by the section
         itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor ... can it be
         equated with a requirement to show "very compelling reasons". That
         would be in effect to replicate the additional test applied by
         section 117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more.


14. At the heart of the Appellants' argument in KO was the submission that,
    in determining whether the effect of deportation of the parent  on  the
    child would be "unduly harsh", the tribunal is concerned only with  the
    position of the child, not with the immigration history and conduct  of
    the parents, or any wider public interest factors in favour of removal.
     The position of the Secretary of State was that, on the contrary, this
    provision requires a balancing exercise, weighing any adverse impact on
    the child against the public interest in proceeding with deportation of
    the parent.

15. In determining that question, the Supreme Court made  clear  (see  para
    15) that it proceeded on the presumption that the  provision  in  issue
    was intended to be consistent with the general principles  relating  to
    the "best interests" of children, including the principle that "a child
    must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not  responsible,
    such as the conduct of a parent" (Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74,  para
    10 per Lord Hodge).  It did not, however, accept that the provision was
    only concerned  with  the  position  of  the  child;  that  had  to  be
    considered in the context of the  public  interest  identified  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals.

16. Applying the approach thus set out at paragraph  23  (see  above),  the
    Supreme Court considered that the Upper Tribunal Judge in KO  had  been
    wrong to have regard to the particular criminal history of  the  father
    but upheld the decision reached as that had, in fact, not taken account
    of that history.  The test that had actually been applied by the  Upper
    Tribunal in KO had been to assess whether the effect  on  the  children
    had been unduly  harsh  "when  balanced  against  the  powerful  public
    interest considerations in play" (see as recorded at  para  33  of  the
    Supreme Court's Judgment); an approach that  Lord  Carnwath  considered
    entirely consistent with the view it had taken of this  provision  (see
    para 36).  The Supreme Court adopted the same approach to the  test  in
    the joined case of IT - which also  involved  a  refusal  to  revoke  a
    deportation order - albeit finding in that case that the matter  needed
    to be remitted given the inconsistent  reasoning  of  the  FtT  on  the
    facts.





Submissions

The Respondent's Position

17. For the Respondent, we noted that Mr Deller adopted a very  balanced  -
    almost neutral - position in this case.  It was  noted  that  the  only
    matter to be determined at this stage was that provided  under  section
    117C of the 2002 Act. Assistance in carrying out that task was provided
    by the Supreme Court's Judgment in KO, which explained what  was  meant
    by  this  provision  in  deportation  cases  (specifically,   see   its
    consideration of the case of IT).

18. In the present  case,  the  Respondent  had  relied  on  the  atrocious
    immigration history of the appellant; in particular,  on  his  previous
    breaches of deportation orders.  He had been removed from the UK  as  a
    result of a new deportation order in 2009 and it  was  the  refusal  to
    revoke that order that was now under challenge.  Nearly ten  years  had
    passed since then and it was acknowledged that  the  Immigration  Rules
    did point to ten years as being a natural  break  but,  in  any  event,
    since the introduction of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  a  deportation
    order could be challenged if it could be  shown  that  article  8  ECHR
    would be breached by that order remaining in place.

19. Turning then to  the  article  8  considerations  in  this  case.   The
    Tribunal had to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  an
    established family life and a parental relationship with J.  Parliament
    had, however, provided that there was a need to then balance the public
    interest with those private  interests,  as  codified  (relevantly)  by
    section 117C.  That required a balancing exercise (see KO).   This  was
    not a case involving criminal offences attracting the highest levels of
    sanctions and thus, by virtue of section 117C (3) and (5), exception  2
    came into play.  Since 2009, it was accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    grown a protected family life.  He was now older and had not  attempted
    to breach the deportation order since 2009.  The crux of the issue  for
    the Tribunal was the impact on J: would the continuing  effect  of  the
    deportation order be unduly harsh on him?

The Appellant's Position

20. For the appellant it was observed that this was the first time in  this
    appeal process that the question of undue harshness had been considered
    in relation to J. Section 117A did not suggest that the public interest
    remained fixed for the entire period of the deportation order  and,  in
    its earlier decision in this matter, the Upper Tribunal had  previously
    accepted that the weight to be given to the public interest  diminishes
    with the passage  of  time.  The  starting  point  was,  therefore,  to
    identify the weight to be given today to the  public  interest  in  the
    continuation of the deportation order.

21. The relevant conviction in this case dated back to 2008, which was  now
    spent  and  thus,  in  the  eyes  of  the  law,  the  appellant  was  a
    rehabilitated offender. In this context, the public interest  was  very
    weak.

22. Turning then to the other side of the balance and the interests  of  J;
    it was apparent that J was a child who had a  clear  insight  into  all
    that had happened.  He was present at the appellant's  arrest  and  had
    visited the appellant when he was in detention.  He  had  then  visited
    the appellant in Nigeria and he and his mother, AA, had lived with  the
    appellant in Nigeria for five years until they came back to  UK  so  he
    could  complete  his  education  and  spend  time  with  his   maternal
    grandfather, who was terminally ill, and also because of the increasing
    violence in Nigeria.  J thus had insight into these issues and  it  was
    his continued suffering that was now the main issue in the case.

23. As for the guidance of the Supreme Court in KO, it was to be noted that
    it had not determined the case of IT but had remitted the  question  in
    that case to the Upper Tribunal.  It was  also  relevant  that  section
    117C(7) made clear that the focus was on the  particular  offence  that
    had led to the deportation rather than the immigration history.

24. In the present case, the appellant had shown remorse; he was now nearly
    60 and had not re-offended and was unlikely to do so.  He had  remained
    in Nigeria since his deportation and had made no application to  return
    until 2016. There was a family life with AA and  J  that  was  genuine,
    established and very close.   J  had  given  evidence,  expressing  his
    anxieties arising from the continuing separation  from  the  appellant.
    Given the particular circumstances of the case, the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

Findings and Conclusions

25. The starting point for our deliberations is provided by the findings of
    the FtT we have referenced above.  To up-date the position by reference
    to the evidence before us, we further find as follows:

      i) J's relationship with the appellant goes back to when  J  was  very
         young; AA and the appellant having started a  relationship  by  the
         time J was two.  Equally, from a very early time in J's  life,  the
         appellant had taken on the role of a parent, changing J's  nappies,
         encouraging him to speak and assisting in exercises suggested by  a
         speech therapist; generally taking on the role of  his  father  and
         being seen as such by J.

     ii) Since his deportation in 2009, the appellant and  his  family  have
         respected UK immigration laws.  There has been no  further  attempt
         by the appellant to re-enter the  UK,  notwithstanding  periods  of
         separation from his family.  Instead, AA and J went  to  live  with
         the appellant in Nigeria for a number of years,  during  which  J's
         relationship with the appellant further developed and he  built  up
         close connections with the appellant's family.

    iii) Although AA and J returned to the UK, we are satisfied  that  their
         close family bonds with the appellant have continued.  That was the
         finding of the FtT and it is apparent that this continues to be the
         position,  as  demonstrated  by  the  testimony  of   AA   and   J,
         corroborated by the telephone records we have seen.

     iv) As time has gone  by,  we  find  that  the  relationship  with  the
         appellant has become increasingly important for J.  To some  extent
         that is the entirely predictable  desire  that  an  adolescent  boy
         might have to have a father in his life. More than  that,  however,
         we accept J's testimony that he misses the  "African  side  of  his
         personality" - a sense of his racial origin and  his  self-identity
         that we accept is genuine and important to him.

      v) The appellant is now in his late 50s and  there  is  no  suggestion
         that he is likely to re-offend.  The offence to which  his  current
         deportation order relates was the use  of  a  false  or  improperly
         obtained ID document.  The  appellant  has,  however,  demonstrated
         nothing but respect for UK immigration laws since 2009.   While  we
         do not ignore or condone his previous breaches of  those  laws,  we
         acknowledge the change in behaviour that he has  demonstrated  over
         what is nearly ten years.  We infer that this is in large part  due
         to the appellant's relationship with AA and J, and  to  the  family
         life that he wishes to continue.

     vi) Although we have accepted the finding of the FtT that it would  not
         be unduly harsh for AA to return to  live  with  the  appellant  in
         Nigeria, we also accept her evidence before us that, if she were to
         do so, it would be very unlikely that  she  could  find  work  that
         would enable her to support the family as she is currently able  to
         do in the UK.  That would inevitably impact on J and it is a matter
         that we are entitled to take  into  account  when  considering  J's
         options and the question of undue harshness in his case.

26. We turn then to the balancing exercise we  are  required  to  undertake
    under section 117C.  We note that the question for  us  is  not  simply
    whether the continuing effect of the deportation would be harsh for  J;
    we have to determine whether it would be unduly harsh  -  a  test  that
    requires us to consider harshness for J as balanced against the  public
    interest  in  continuing  the  appellant's  deportation  as  a  foreign
    criminal.

27. On the particular facts of this case, we consider the balance falls  in
    favour of granting the appellant's  appeal.   The  public  interest  in
    continuing the appellant's deportation has diminished over  the  years.
    His conviction is now spent and he  has  demonstrated  respect  for  UK
    immigration laws over a period of nearly  ten  years.   The  particular
    facts of this case have a number of unusual features in our experience,
    not least the long history of the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and J, which has included a significant period of J's life being  spent
    with the appellant in Nigeria.  This is a case where, as  we  think  Mr
    Deller fairly acknowledged, the public interest side of the balance  is
    now much diminished.  While, therefore, there is a public  interest  in
    the continuation of the deportation order in general terms and  because
    of the appellant's pre-2009 history, we  consider  that  has  far  less
    weight than would normally be the case. Balancing that interest against
    J's particular circumstances - in particular, his sense  of  separation
    from his "dad", the loss of a father-figure at this time of  his  life,
    the absence from his life of an important part of his  racial  identity
    and the almost certain poverty that J would live in if he was to return
    to live in Nigeria, we find that this is a case where the  continuation
    of the deportation order would have an unduly harsh effect on  J  as  a
    qualifying child.





Decision

28. For the reasons we have provided, we  allow  this  appeal  and  make  a
    finding that the appellant's application for the deportation  order  to
    be revoked should be allowed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human right grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 3 December 2018

HHJ Eady QC (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)


