

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Numbers:
HU/25840/2016

                                               HU/26757/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th June 2019                       |On 25th June 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY SITTING AS A
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                                   mr s i
                                   mrs a t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Shaw of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Aujla promulgated on 22nd  February  2019  in  which  he
    dismissed the two Appellants' human rights appeals.

 2. Permission to appeal in  this  case  has  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 30th April 2019.

 3. At the appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  today  the  Appellants  were
    represented by Miss Shaw of Counsel and  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.  Miss
    Shaw relies upon both the original Grounds of Appeal and  the  expanded
    Grounds of Appeal.  Mr Bramble had  not,  for  some  reason,  seen  the
    expanded Grounds of Appeal until this morning.    I  therefore  ensured
    that he had sufficient time before the appeal  was  heard  to  consider
    those expanded Grounds of Appeal.  Having done  so  he  quite  properly
    conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State that there is a procedural
    error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  In that  regard  he
    concedes that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  this  case  when
    considering the question as  to  whether  or  not  the  health  of  the
    Appellants' daughter, SS, who had just been  discharged  from  hospital
    following a front orbital remodelling to  her  skull  on  1st  February
    2019, just eleven days prior to the hearing on 12th February 2019 was a
    new matter.  It was agreed by both  parties  that  whether  this  issue
    amounted to a new matter not dealt with at the start  of  the  hearing,
    but only in closing submissions.

 4. The judge in his decision considered whether this was a new matter  and
    found that it  was,  but  in  the  alternative  found  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence before him as to how long it would  be  that  the
    child required post-operative care at home and regarding whether  there
    were any problems in respect of the child returning to Bangladesh  with
    her parents.

 5. Mr Bramble conceded that  what  the  judge  should  have  done  was  to
    identify this at the start of the hearing as a new matter and  at  that
    stage if the Secretary of State had not consented to the  matter  being
    dealt with, the judge should not have proceeded to hear evidence on the
    point and make findings. The question as to whether it is a new  matter
    for the purposes of Section 85(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 is a question of jurisdiction and that if this  were  a
    new matter then the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to  consider  it
    in the absence of consent from the Secretary of State.

 6. In that regard both parties referred me to the case of Mahmud  (Section
    85 NIAA 2002 - new matters) [2017] UKUT 00488 wherein at  paragraph  31
    of the decision it was stated:-

         "Conversely, evidence that a couple had a child since the  decision
         is likely to be a new matter as it adds an additional distinct  new
         family relationship (with consequential  requirements  to  consider
         the best interests of the child under Section 55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009) which itself could separately
         raise or establish a ground of appeal under Article 8 that  removal
         would be contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act".

 7. That is exactly the same situation as in this case. At the date of  the
    original decision, the Secretary  of  State  had  considered  only  the
    private lives and family life of the two Appellants.  Since then  there
    had been a new daughter born, SS, and the health of the daughter SS had
    not been considered in the original decision.  The fact that there  was
    a child with health issues was therefore a new matter. This should have
    been  identified  at  the  start  of  the  hearing  rather  than  being
    identified at the end after evidence had been taken on the point.

 8. Had that new issue been identified  at  the  start  then  it  could  be
    clarified specifically as to whether or  not  the  Secretary  of  State
    consented to the Tribunal dealing with it and if so to consider whether
    an adjournment was necessary to allow  further  evidence  on  that  new
    issue.

 9. Both legal representatives agree that the judge procedurally  erred  in
    this matter and that they both therefore agree  that  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla should be  set  aside  and  the  matter
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal hearing for rehearing before a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla.

10. However, in order to progress matters today Mr Bramble  quite  properly
    on behalf of the Secretary of State has  consented  to  the  new  issue
    being dealt with within these proceedings. However, both parties  agree
    further up to date evidence is required regarding  the  health  of  the
    child, SS, and as to whether or not she still needs to be in the UK for
    further medical treatment. It has been agreed by both parties that  the
    Upper Tribunal today should give directions for the filing  of  further
    medical evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
    health of SS and as to whether or not she requires ongoing treatment in
    the UK; whether she is still being cared for  at  home;  what  problems
    there may be in terms if she were to be removed from Bangladesh both in
    terms of the effect of permanent removal upon her and in terms  of  any
    inability/difficulty in obtaining healthcare in Bangladesh.

Notice of Decision

    The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aujla  does  contain  a
    procedural error of law and is set aside.

    The matter is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Aujla.

    The Appellants do have until 4.00 p.m. on 12th August 2019 to file  and
    serve any further evidence relating to the health or treatment of their
    daughter, SS.

    The matter then be relisted for a case management conference before the
    First-tier Tribunal on the first available date  after  23rd  September
    2019.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity is granted as the Appellants do have a minor daughter in the UK.

Unless and until the Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellants
are granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  the  Appellants  or  their  daughter.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   District Judge  McGinty                            Date  23rd  June
2019

District Judge McGinty sitting as a
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
