








Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25181/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 15 October 2018                            |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  arul [a]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizami, solicitor with JD Spicer Zeb solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport him from the United Kingdom as  a  foreign  criminal
    pursuant to Section 32(4) of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and  section
    3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri
    Lanka.

 2. The index offence was that on 3 May 2016, the appellant  was  convicted
    at Harrow Crown Court of one count of wounding or  inflicting  grievous
    bodily harm and one of assault by beating, and sentenced to 18  months'
    imprisonment.  On 10 May 2016, he was issued with notice of a  decision
    to deport.  He had 5 previous convictions between 28 March 2011  and  8
    May 2015, for possessing an offensive weapon in a public  place,  using
    threatening abusive and insulting words or  behaviour  with  intent  to
    cause fear or provocation, failure to comply with  a  community  order,
    theft from his employer, another offence of failure to  comply  with  a
    community order, and assaulting a constable.  The index offence was his
    first custodial sentence.

 3. The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  was  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, nor that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration in Sri Lanka  on  return.
    He lived in the United Kingdom within a close Sri  Lankan  family  unit
    and  would  have  remained  acquainted  with  Sri  Lankan  culture  and
    traditions, and with his mother tongue, the Tamil language.   When  his
    mother made her asylum application in 1999, she said she had  5  aunts,
    ranging then in age from 24 to 38 years old, living in  the  Mullaitivu
    district, where the appellant's  family  originated.   His  mother  and
    sisters had been back more than once to visit Sri Lanka  and  could  be
    presumed to be visiting relatives.

 4. The appellant's case is that he can bring himself within the  Exception
    in Section 33 of the 2007 Act on human rights grounds.  He is a  single
    man, with no dependents or partner and no dependency on his  mother  or
    sisters at the Kugathas level.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Judge found that the evidence advanced by the appellant,
    both his own and that of other family members, lacked  credibility  and
    was in places frankly mendacious.   The  appellant  had  no  child  nor
    partner in the United Kingdom and there was  no  Kugathas  family  life
    between him as an adult and his mother, or his two  sisters,  who  live
    with his mother.  All three of them had made return visits to Sri Lanka
    in recent years, and  the  appellant  still  had  strong  cultural  and
    linguistic ties, and was likely to still have  family  members  in  Sri
    Lanka.  His mother did not speak English: he communicated with  her  in
    Tamil.

 6. The judge found as a fact that the appellant still had extended  family
    members in Sri Lanka and that his United  Kingdom  family  remained  in
    contact with the  appellant's  brother-in-law,  married  to  his  older
    sister.  The Judge concluded that family support would be available  if
    the appellant were to be returned to Sri Lanka.   At  [44],  the  Judge
    noted that the appellant spoke some Tamil, but  no  Sinhalese,  not  an
    uncommon situation in Sri Lanka.  He would return to Sri Lanka with the
    benefit of a British, including a number  of  qualifications  and  work
    experience which he could use there.

 7. At [45], the judge dealt correctly with the  statutory  presumption  in
    Section 117C(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as
    amended) and at [46], with the OASys Report.  The Judge took account of
    the requirement for little weight to be given to private life developed
    while an appellant is in the United Kingdom precariously or  unlawfully
    (section 117B(4) and 117B(5) of the 2002 Act).  The appellant has  been
    in the United Kingdom, precariously and/or unlawfully since  he  was  8
    years old and is now about 27 years old.

 8. At [41] the judge summarised her findings:

         "41. However, I find that he can speak Tamil although I  accept  he
         may not be proficient or capable of writing and  reading  it  to  a
         high level.  It is clear that his mother is unable to speak English
         well and that he communicates with his mother entirely in Tamil.  I
         do not find the appellant is divorced from the culture and norms of
         Sri Lankan life or society as he also lives with one of his sisters
         and her husband both of whom also originate  from  Sri  Lanka.   In
         fact, both his sisters have married Sri Lankan  nationals  and  his
         mother and older sister have returned on a number of  occasions  to
         Sri Lanka."

 9. The OASys Report found that the appellant, who had been  released  from
    detention in November 2016, still presented a medium  risk  of  causing
    harm to others, and a high risk of re-offending.  The severity  of  his
    offending had  been  escalating.   The  OASys  report  noted  that  the
    appellant had on one occasion attempted suicide in prison:

         "Risks In the past he has attempted suicide.  He has tried to  hang
         himself whilst  he  was  in  prison.   He  has  also  overdosed  on
         medication.  He is currently having suicidal thoughts  but  has  no
         active plans.  The suicidal attempts were due to him being deported
         back to Sri Lanka.  His family are British citizens and live in UK.
          He was  convicted  for  GBH  and  serves  eighteen  months  prison
         sentence.  Apparently he is serving nine  months  on  bail  in  the
         community.  He has served nine months in prison in Kent."

10. The First-tier Judge considered the medical evidence of Dr Eldad  Farhy
    BSc. (Hons.) Psych.D AFBPsS R.Psychol.   Dr  Farhy's  report  is  in  a
    curious and not particularly helpful format:  it does  not  purport  to
    have been prepared to the  Istanbul  Protocol  standard.    The  report
    records that Dr Farhy has had regard to  Section  10  of  the  Practice
    Direction and the relevant passages of  MOJ  and  Others  it  does  not
    purport to be made to the standard required by  the  Istanbul  Protocol
    and as a result the precision of assessment to  which  we  have  become
    used in Istanbul protocol compliant reports is notably absent.

11. At 5.1.1 in  his  report,  Dr  Farhy  stated  that  the  appellant  had
    described to him symptoms that would have qualified for a diagnosis  of
    post-traumatic stress disorder, were it not for the fact that no  life-
    threatening event has occurred yet, only that one may occur in  future.
    The doctor expressly did not make a diagnosis of present post-traumatic
    stress  disorder,  merely  one  of  possible  future  PTSD  in  certain
    circumstances.

12. Dr Farhy considered that  the  appellant's  symptoms  might  have  been
    precipitated by his past experiences of seeing others suffering  during
    the Sri Lankan civil war.  At 5.1.2 Dr Farhy noted that  the  appellant
    had reported 'rather significant anxiety  and  depressive  symptoms  as
    well as several labial personality features (borderline)'.  The  report
    notes that the appellant has no  current  suicidal  ideation,  although
    apparently there was a suicide attempt in prison  fortunately  did  not
    succeed, when the appellant learned that he was to  be  removed  which.
    At [51]-[51] the judge said this:

         "51. I am not  satisfied  that  the  evidence  discloses  that  the
         appellant is receiving any current treatment for his mental  health
         condition and there is no diagnosis of PTSD although the  appellant
         did  attempt  suicide  in  October  2016.   I  am  satisfied   that
         psychiatric treatment would be available to the  appellant  in  Sri
         Lanka and his condition does  not  meet  the  very  high  threshold
         required to breach Article 3.  There was no evidence of any current
         suicidal ideation and the respondent will in any event be  able  to
         put measures in place to ensure that removal is effected safely  as
         submitted by the appellant's representative.

         52.  In considering all the evidence in the round  I  do  not  find
         that the appellant  has  established  that  there  are  exceptional
         circumstances which would outweigh the public interest in deporting
         him.  To rebalance the scales in favour of  the  appellant  against
         deportation there must be very compelling  reasons  which  must  be
         exceptional and I do not find that in weighing up all the  relevant
         factors that the appellant has  established  that  very  compelling
         reasons exist to outweigh the public interest given the seriousness
         of the appellant's crime, the need to protect society against crime
         and the need for a deterrent policy."   [Emphasis added]

13. The appeal was dismissed.

Permission to appeal

14. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, arguing that  his  family
    members' evidence was not sustainably considered and that his  brother-
    in-law should have been asked whether he  was  willing  to  assist  the
    appellant in resettling in Sri Lanka.  Permission was  not  granted  on
    that ground.

15. Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman granted  permission  to  appeal,  but  his
    consideration of the second ground of appeal suggests that he may  have
    intended to refuse permission:

         "2.  The judge  might  have  considered  Dr  Farhy's  report  which
         appears in her list of documentary evidence at 3.2.  Not  only  (at
         [51]) on Article 3 (where she was unarguably right) but also on the
         question of whether there would be "very significant obstacles"  to
         his integration into Sri Lanka.  However this appellant having been
         sentenced to over 12 months' imprisonment  and  not  coming  within
         paragraph 399 of  the  Immigration  Rules  (or  the  equivalent  in
         Section 117C(5) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002) could only succeed by establishing this exception (the  judge
         having found in his favour on parts A and B).

         3.   Given the judge's findings on  family  support  and  what  she
         correctly says about Dr Farhy's findings at  [51]  and  bearing  in
         mind Section 12(2A) of the Tribunals  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
         2007, I do not consider it arguable that this was  an  error  which
         might lead to the judge's decision being set aside."

16. I have considered whether the  second  ground  of  appeal  discloses  a
    material error  of  law:  I  concur  with  Judge  Freeman  that  it  is
    unarguable.

17. The  evidence  of  what  would  be  available  in  Sri  Lanka  for  the
    appellant's claimed mental health problems, about which even  Dr  Farhy
    seems to have doubts, was slight, and there was  no  report  on  mental
    health facilities in Sri Lanka  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  nor
    before me. In addition, the appellant does have family members  in  Sri
    Lanka who for the reasons set out in the  decision  are  likely  to  be
    willing to support him on return.

18. The appellant has not demonstrated that he comes within Exception 1  in
    section 117C(4) of  the  2002  Act.   Although  he  has  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for most of  his  life,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did  not  err  in  considering  that  the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated that he was socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the
    United Kingdom, nor that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration in Sri Lanka on return.

19. The appellant's human rights claim is not such as to bring  him  within
    Exception 1 to the automatic deportation provision in section 32 of the
    2007 Act and the Judge did not err in so finding.

20. This appeal is therefore dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Signed:       Judith A J C Gleeson                        Date:  25  October
2018
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

