
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25320/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2020                              |On 28 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                            Dammar Bahadur Rajali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal.  His date of birth  is  29  August
    1976.  On 7 September 2018, he made an application for entry  clearance
    to the UK as the adult dependent child of his stepmother Gangi  Rajali.
    Her date of birth is 14  February  1947.   She  is  the  widow  of  the
    Appellant's father, Tul Bahadur  Thapa,  who  was  formerly  a  Ghurkha
    solider.  He died on 23 July 2012.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer refused  the  application  on  26  November
    2018.  The Appellant appealed against this decision.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lucas in a decision  that
    was promulgated on 18 September following a hearing at Taylor House  on
    3 September 2019.

 3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
    Judge Lucas by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes  on  28  January
    2020.  The matter came before me in  order  to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law when  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Appellant was represented at the hearing.  He relied  on  a  bundle
    containing 142 pages.   Counsel representing the Appellant relied on  a
    skeleton argument.

 5. The judge took into account the Appellant's  witness  statement  of  16
    August 2019.  His case is that he  is  the  son  of  a  former  Ghurkha
    soldier.  He has four siblings.   The  Appellant  was  born  after  his
    father's discharge from the British Army.  The Sponsor is his  father's
    second wife.  The Appellant's evidence was that she had raised him  and
    his sister as her own children.  He was not able to find employment  in
    Nepal.  His own biological mother had remained in Nepal because she did
    not wish to leave.  The Appellant lives with his brother, Amar, in  the
    parental home.  They are single and unemployed.  The Appellant is fully
    reliant financially on the Sponsor.  She has authorised him  to  access
    her bank account in Nepal.  They maintain contact.  She is now aged 72.
     Prior to the Sponsor coming  to  the  UK  in  2016  the  family  lived
    together.

 6. There was a statement from the Sponsor before the FtT. The judge  noted
    that  it   added  little  to  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  and
    replicated much of its content.  She attended the hearing  and  adopted
    her  witness  statement  as  her  evidence-in-chief.    During   cross-
    examination, she said that she had  lived  with  the  Appellant  before
    coming to the UK.  She said that Amar lived with his mother who is  now
    aged 80.  She said that the Appellant now lives alone in Nepal.

 7. The Appellant's case was advanced on the basis that he could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules with  regards  to  ex-Ghurkhas.   It  was
    submitted on the Appellant's behalf that the Sponsor should  have  been
    allowed to settle in the UK prior to 2016.  The  Appellant's  case  was
    that the Sponsor had raised him and he now lives in the parental  home.
    Both the Appellant and his brother have access to  the  Sponsor's  bank
    account.

 8. The judge made findings at paragraphs 27 to 38 which can be summarised.
     It was accepted that the Appellant's father was an ex-Ghurkha  soldier
    and that the Sponsor was his second wife and therefore the  Appellant's
    stepmother.  It was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  one  of  five
    siblings and that his biological mother  and  grandmother  continue  to
    live in Nepal.

 9. The judge found that there was an inconsistency in the evidence insofar
    as the Appellant and the Sponsor in  their  witness  statements  stated
    that the Appellant lives with his brother in  the  "parental  home"  in
    Gulm.  However, the judge found that "the Sponsor  appears  to  dispute
    this and stated that Amar, the brother of the Appellant  lived  with  a
    biological mother"based on the evidence before the FtT.

10. The judge found that irrespective of where  Amar  lives  there  was  an
    ongoing family unit within Nepal between the Appellant, Amar and  their
    biological mother.  The judge found that  "it  is  not  explained  what
    financial provision was left to the biological mother of the  Appellant
    and his sibling nor how she maintains herself  in  Nepal".   The  judge
    found at paragraph 31 that it "is not explained why the Sponsor did not
    bring him or any one of the other siblings to the UK in 2016".

11. The judge  noted  that  there  were  no  details  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's other three  siblings  in  Nepal  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence other than that in the witness statements  to  show  that  the
    Sponsor lived in the family  home  with  the  Appellant  or  his  other
    siblings prior to her migration to the UK or that the  Appellant  lived
    with her as opposed to his own mother. The judge found at paragraph  33
    that "indeed, in evidence, the Sponsor appeared  to  suggest  that  the
    brother of the Appellant did live with his mother".

12. The judge at paragraph 34 said "it is not explained why the Appellant -
    on his own - would seek to leave his own  biological  mother  in  Nepal
    when she is of advanced years to come to  the  UK  to  look  after  his
    stepmother.  The factual situation is implausible."  The judge accepted
    that there were some remittances between the Sponsor and the  Appellant
    in Nepal and that there is contact between them.   However,  the  judge
    did not accept that the remittances "mostly recent - and a single visit
    to Nepal represent  a  'real,  effective  and  committed'  relationship
    sufficient to engage Article 8 of the ECHR".

13. The judge found that there was a family unit in Nepal and none  of  the
    other siblings had chosen to relocate to the United  Kingdom.  Nor  has
    the biological mother of the Appellant.  The judge found that if  there
    are ongoing financial contributions there is no reason to  suggest  why
    the arrangement could not continue.

14. The judge went on to find at paragraph 38 "it is not accepted therefore
    that this claim activates Article 8 of ECHR".

The Grounds of Appeal

15. The grounds argue that the judge failed to consider  material  evidence
    of family life.  She did not take into account that the  Appellant  has
    access to the Sponsor's bank account.  The  judge  did  not  take  into
    account the Sponsor's oral evidence that the Appellant promised to look
    after her and that his brother had  taken  responsibility  for  looking
    after their biological mother.  The Appellant's evidence was that  they
    were very close  since  she  had  raised  him.   That  the  Appellant's
    biological mother lives in Nepal was not determinative of  whether  the
    Appellant has family life with the Sponsor.



The Law Relating to Ghurkhas and Adult Children

16. In the case  of  Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:
    weight) [2013] UKUT 567 the court made the following findings reflected
    in the headnote of the decision:-

         "(1) In finding that the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  historic
             wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be regarded as
             less than that to be accorded the historic wrong  suffered  by
             British Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal in  Gurung  and
             others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in  either  Gurkha
             or BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong is  to  reverse
             or otherwise alter the burden of proof that applies in Article
             8 proportionality assessments.

         (2)  When an Appellant has shown that there is family/private  life
             and  the  decision  made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
             interference with it, the burden lies with the  Respondent  to
             show that a decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
             Appellants will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility  of
             adducing evidence that lies within their remit and about which
             the Respondent may be unaware).

         (3)  What concerned the Court in Gurung  and  others  was  not  the
             burden of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a
             proportionality assessment. The Court held  that,  as  in  the
             case of BOCs,  the  historic  wrong  suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-
             servicemen should be given substantial weight.

         (4)  Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
             but for the historic wrong,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
             settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the
             outcome of the Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
             Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Secretary of State/ entry clearance officer consist solely  of
             the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

         (5)  It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha  (and  BOC)
             cases will not necessarily  succeed,  even  though  (i)  their
             family life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence  shows
             they would have come to the United Kingdom with their  father,
             but for the injustice that prevented the latter from  settling
             here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and
             above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration
             policy, which argue in favour of removal  or  the  refusal  of
             leave to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight
             in the  balance  in  the  Respondent's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad
             immigration history and/or criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
             sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
             Appellant's side of the balance."

17. In Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320  the
    Court of Appeal  identified  the  real  issue  under  Article  8(1)  is
    whether, as a matter of fact, an adult family member  has  demonstrated
    that he has a family life with his parents which existed at the time of
    their departure and has endured beyond it, notwithstanding their having
    left Nepal when they did.  There is no test of  "exceptionality".   The
    Court of Appeal said as follows:-

         "17. In Kugathas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31 Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph  17  of  his
             judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
             "support", in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective"
             to the word "support", then it represents ... the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life  implies".  Arden  L.J.  said  (in
             paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the "relevant  factors  ...
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of  family  life".  Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same  country".  In  Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA  Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

          1. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  the  Upper
             Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that
             the  judgments  in  Kugathas   had   been   "interpreted   too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence". It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

                  "61. Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                      reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012]
                      Imm. A.R.1], finding that a significant  factor  will
                      be whether or not  the  adult  child  has  founded  a
                      family of his own. If he is still single  and  living
                      with his parents, he is likely to enjoy  family  life
                      with them. ...".

             The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
             judgment in AA v United Kingdom  (in  paragraphs  46  to  49),
             which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

                  "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                      suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years
                      old, who resides with his  mother  and  has  not  yet
                      founded a family of  his  own,  can  be  regarded  as
                      having "family life"."

          1. Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in  Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case". In some instances, "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all  depends
             on the facts". The court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46),
             as "useful" and as indicating  "the  correct  approach  to  be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination  in
             Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy), including  its
             observation (at paragraph 62) that "[the]  different  outcomes
             in cases with superficially similar features emphasises to  us
             that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

          1. To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):

                  "24. I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                      referred lead to any difficulty  in  determining  the
                      correct approach to  Article  8  in  cases  involving
                      adult children. In the case of adults, in the context
                      of immigration control, there is no legal or  factual
                      presumption as to the existence or absence of  family
                      life for the purposes of Article 8. I point out  that
                      the approach of the  European  Commission  for  Human
                      Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not  include
                      any requirement of exceptionality. It all depends  on
                      the facts. The love and affection  between  an  adult
                      and his  parents  or  siblings  will  not  of  itself
                      justify a finding of a family  life.  There  must  be
                      something more. A young adult living with his parents
                      or siblings will normally have a family  life  to  be
                      respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a  family
                      life with his parents does not suddenly cease to have
                      a family life at midnight as he  turns  18  years  of
                      age.  On  the  other  hand,  a  young  adult   living
                      independently of his parents  may  well  not  have  a
                      family life for the purposes of Article 8."

18. The Court of Appeal in Entry Clearance Officer, Sierra Leone and  Kopoi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1511 Sales LJ with whom the other members of the  court
    agreed said at [17] - [19]:-

         "17. The leading domestic authority on the ambit of  'family  life'
             for the purposes of Article 8 is the  well-known  decision  of
             this court in Kugathas v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31;  [2003]  INLR  31.   The  court
             found that a single man of 38 years old who had lived  in  the
             UK since 1999 did not enjoy 'family  life'  with  his  mother,
             brother and sister, who were living in  Germany  as  refugees.
             At para. [14] Sedley LJ accepted  as  a  proper  approach  the
             guidance given by the European Commission for Human Rights  in
             its decision in S v United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196, at 198:

                  'Generally, the protection of family life under Article  8
                  involves cohabiting dependents, such as parents and  their
                  dependent, minor children.  Whether it  extends  to  other
                  relationships  depends  on  the   circumstances   of   the
                  particular case.  Relationships between adults,  a mother
                  and her 33 year old son in the present  case,  would  not
                  necessarily acquire the protection of  Article  8  of  the
                  Convention  without  evidence  of  further   elements   of
                  dependency,  involving  more  than  the  normal  emotional
                  ties.'

             He  held  that  there  is  not  an  absolute  requirement   of
             dependency in an economic sense for 'family  life'  to  exist,
             but that it is necessary for there to be  real,  committed  or
             effective support between family members in order to show that
             'family life' exists  ([17]);  'neither  blood  ties  nor  the
             concern and affection that ordinarily go  with  them  are,  by
             themselves or together', sufficient ([19]);  and  the  natural
             tie between a parent and an infant is probably a special  case
             in which there is no need to show that there is a demonstrable
             measure of support ([18]).

          1. The judgments of Arden LJ and Simon Brown LJ were  to  similar
             effect. Arden LJ also relied on S v  United  Kingdom  as  good
             authority and held that there is no presumption that a  person
             has a family life, even with members of his  immediate  family
             ([24]) and that family life  is  not  established  between  an
             adult child and his surviving parent or other siblings  unless
             something more exists than normal emotional ties, such as ties
             of dependency ([25]).

          1. Kugathas remains good law: see e.g. R (Britcits)  v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ,  [61]  and
             [74] (Sir Terence Etherton  MR),  [82]  (Davis  LJ)  and  [86]
             (Sales LJ). As Sir Terence Etherton MR pithily summarised  the
             position at [74], in order for family life within the  meaning
             of Article 8(1) to be found to exist, 'There must be something
             more than normal emotional ties."

19. Before the FtT there was an Appellant's bundle  containing  142  pages.
    There is an addendum bundle before me containing 75 pages.

The Evidence of the Appellant

20. The Appellant's witness statement is  at  pp  1-2  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  It is dated 16 August 2019.  His evidence can be summarised.

21. His father was married  to  his  mother  and  they  had  five  children
    together.   He  married  his  second  wife,  the  Sponsor,  before  the
    Appellant was born.  The Sponsor raised the Appellant and his sister.

22. In 2009 his parents heard about the new Immigration Rules for Ghurkhas.
     His father did not apply because of financial reasons.  At  that  time
    the Appellant was over 18.  His father wanted to raise  his  family  in
    the  United  Kingdom;  however,  he  could  not  afford  to  make   the
    application.

23. The Appellant's father passed away on 23 July 2012.  The Appellant told
    the Sponsor that he would take care of her in old age.   In  2015  they
    became aware that Gurkha adult children  were  being  allowed  to  join
    their parents.  The Appellant 's biological  mother  did  not  want  to
    leave Nepal because she was looking after her own mother.  The  Sponsor
    was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.   She  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 25 August 2016.  Before  she  came  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor were living together as a family  unit.   The  Appellant  lives
    with his brother Amar in the "parental house" in Gulmi.  He is  not  in
    touch with his other siblings.  He is fully reliant on the Sponsor.  He
    is close to her and she loves him as if he was her own  son.   She  has
    visited Nepal once during the last three years.  She is aged 72 and has
    health conditions.  She  does  not  have  anyone  here  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  They maintain close ties.  The Appellant is unemployed.

The Evidence of the Sponsor

24. The Sponsor's witness statement is at pp 3-5 of the Appellant's bundle.
     It is dated 1 August 2019.  Her evidence can be summarised.  She  gave
    oral evidence before the FtT.

25. Her husband was discharged from the British  army  on  25  April  1973.
    They married a year after his discharge.  He had five children from his
    first marriage.  They returned to his "ancestral home."   The  youngest
    two children (the Appellant is the youngest) were born after she  moved
    into the family home.  She raised them.    She  saves  money  from  her
    pension to send to Nepal to support  the  Appellant  and  his  brother,
    Amar.  They live together in her house in Gulmi.  They are  single  and
    unemployed.  The Appellant is fully dependant on  her  financially  and
    emotionally.  The Sponsor and the Appellant's first  wife  share  their
    late husband's pension.  The Sponsor has  opened  a  bank  account  and
    authorised the Appellant access to it.  She remains  in  close  contact
    with the Appellant and his brother.  She sometimes cries when she talks
    to him.  She has problems with her knee for which she takes medication.



Evidence of the Appellant's Biological Mother

26. There is a short letter of  12  September  2018  from  the  Appellant's
    biological mother.  Her evidence is that the Sponsor has  been  looking
    after the Appellant since he was a child and that she has no  objection
    to him joining her in the United Kingdom.

Submissions

27. Both representatives addressed me on the grounds and materiality.

28. In as far as the grounds were concerned, Mr Jerusum submitted that  the
    judge did not consider the evidence of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor.  If he did, there are no reasons  given  for
    not accepting the evidence.  In addition, he relied on the grounds with
    respect to economic support.

29. However, Mr Jesurum made very extensive oral submissions with reference
    to case law which strayed beyond the grounds of appeal.

30. He said that there was no issue taken in the decision letter that there
    being historic injustice and it is not an issue that the Respondent  is
    now permitted to raise.  In any event, the family  might  have  settled
    long ago.  The position is  that  the  Appellant's  father  might  have
    brought his second wife (the Sponsor) and the Appellant to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He said that the issue was whether they would or  might  have
    come to the United Kingdom but for the historic wrong.  He relied  [15]
    of the judgement in Patel v ECO, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17.

31. He said that there was no need to  show  that  support  was  necessary.
    There was evidence of poverty that was not challenged.   He  said  that
    there was no point taken about the failure of the Appellant to make  an
    application for entry clearance in 2016.  He said that it was not  open
    to the Tribunal to make an adverse finding about this  because  of  the
    difficult choices faced by such families.  In any event, this  was  one
    of a number of  matters  about  which  the  Appellant  was  not  cross-
    examined.  This was a matter not raised in the grounds.

32. He said that the evidence as set out in the Sponsor's witness statement
    was not challenged.  He relied throughout on  MS  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1548 to support a submission that it was  not  open  to
    the FtT to make adverse findings in the absence of the  Sponsor  having
    been cross-examined  on  matters.   He  specifically  referred  to  the
    finding by the judge  at  [29]  in  respect  of  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence and those at [33], namely, that that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show that the Sponsor lived with the Appellant prior to her
    coming to the United Kingdom or  that  the  Appellant  lived  with  the
    Sponsor as opposed to his own mother.  This was a matter not raised  in
    the grounds.

33. Mr Jesurum submitted that at [17] of Rai v ECO the Court of  Appeal  of
    relied on Kugathas, at [17] where the Court of Appeal set out the test.
     The test is disjunctive. Support has to be either real,  effective  or
    committed and not all three.  Thus, the  FtT  erred  at  [35]  when  he
    applied the test of "real, effective and committed". This was a  matter
    not raised in the grounds.

34. Mr Lindsay relied on the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer.   He
    said that this identified what was in issue.  It  is  clear  from  this
    that family life was the  issue.   The  burden  of  proof  was  on  the
    Appellant.  There was cross-examination  of  the  Sponsor.  It  can  be
    inferred that she was cross-examined about family life as this was  the
    issue in the case. She was not  asked  any  questions  in  evidence  in
    chief.  The judge set out the evidence relating to access to  the  bank
    account and the relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor. The
    judge was mindful of this evidence when making findings.

35. The judge properly identified that the  Appellant's  biological  mother
    lived in Nepal and that there was no evidence he did not live with her.
     He relied upon Ortega (remittal); bias; parental relationship)  [2018}
    UKUT 298.  He accepted that the Appellant may  have  a  strong  private
    life but that there is no obligation to allow the  Appellant  to  enter
    the United Kingdom to pursue a private life.  In respect of the test to
    be applied, and in response to Mr Jesurum's submission,  he  said  that
    support had to be real, committed and effective and  if  he  was  wrong
    about this that it  is  not  material  because  read  disjunctively  or
    conjunctively there in no material difference.  He said that the appeal
    was not capable of success  because  there  is  no  family  life.   The
    Respondent relied  on  the  decision  letter.   He  accepted  that  the
    paragraph concerning historic injustice was not crystal clear; however,
    in this it is not accepted that there  is  historic  injustice  and  if
    there is the decision is proportionate.

36. Mr Jesurum in response said that the finding of the judge at  [31]  was
    not a material consideration.  If there is family life,  any  delay  is
    immaterial.  He relied on Rai v Entry Clearance Officer at [37] -  [39]
    to support a submission that the problems in  making  applications  are
    common to all and it cannot be inferred from a delay that there  is  an
    absence of emotional bond.  He repeated that it was  not  open  to  the
    Respondent to dispute that the Appellant and the  Sponsor  were  living
    together in 2016.

37. The judge recorded the  evidence  in  respect  of  the  nature  of  the
    relationship and access to the Sponsor's bank account,  but  that  does
    not mean that he applied anxious scrutiny to the evidence.  The case of
    Ortega is not on point because it relates to section 117B  (6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  If the Appellant  has  a
    strong private life this must  amount  to  having  real,  effective  or
    committed support.  The decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
    respect  of  historic  injustice  is  an  attempt  to  gloss  over  the
    authorities.

38. He gave examples in support of his proposition that the Court of Appeal
    set out a disjunctive text at [17[ of Kugathas.

Error of Law

39. I find that the judge erred in law.  What is  said  at  [34]  indicates
    that he either did not take into account the Appellant's evidence about
    his relationship with the Sponsor or he did  not  accept  it.   If  the
    latter, he did not give reasons.  In  respect  of  the  Sponsor's  bank
    account and the evidence that the Appellant had  access  to  it,  I  am
    similarly persuaded that the judge, though having  accurately  recorded
    the  evidence,  did  not  take  it   into   account,   when   assessing
    proportionality.  The first error  is  material  because  I  cannot  be
    certain that had the judge engaged with the  evidence,  he  would  have
    reached the same conclusion.  I set aside the decision of the judge.  I
    heard full submissions from both parties and indicated  that  should  I
    find a material error, I intended to go on to remake the decision.

40. Mr Jesurum said that he wanted to  adduce  further  evidence  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor were in 2016 living together. If this was now
    an issue, he sought an adjournment  to  allow  him  to  submit  further
    evidence on the matter.  He argued that this was not a matter on  which
    the Respondent was entitled to rely, with reference to his  submissions
    relying on MS.

Conclusions

41. I deal firstly with the application to adjourn.  The  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was a response to the Appellant's  application,
    in support of which there was no  evidence  or  statements.   A  proper
    reading of that decision discloses that the Entry Clearance Officer did
    not accept that the Appellant had  established  family  life  with  the
    Sponsor.  There is a later decision of an Entry Clearance Manager of 26
    November 2018.  The Appellant had by then submitted further  documents;
    however, it was not accepted by the Entry Clearance Manager that he and
    the Sponsor had lived together before the Sponsor came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2016.  The evidence of phone calls between the Appellant and
    the Sponsor were said to be recent and short in duration.  There was no
    explanation for the delay in the Appellant having made an  application.
    The Appellant's age (42) is noted by the Entry  Clearance  Manager  who
    found it "likely that the appellant has enjoyed private  life  separate
    from the sponsor  for  a  considerable  time"  and  that  she  was  not
    satisfied  "that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor   share   emotional
    dependency, family or private life".

42. The evidence relied on by the Appellant after the decision of the Entry
    Clearance Manager was  lacking  in  necessary  detail.   There  was  no
    further evidence of the Appellant and the Sponsor  living  together  in
    2016.  There was a bare assertion by the Appellant that  this  was  the
    case.  The evidence in his  witness  statement  is  that  he  is  fully
    reliant on the Sponsor. He is close to her and she treats  him  like  a
    son.   However, this was simply a restatement  of  the  case  that  the
    Entry  Clearance  Manager  engaged  with  and  rejected.   Mr   Jesurum
    submitted that there was nothing to support  the  Sponsor  having  been
    cross-examined about matters that Mr Lindsay seeks to rely on and  thus
    the Appellant's evidence that he was living with the  Sponsor  in  2016
    must be accepted. I reject this.

43. The Sponsor was cross-examined. The judge recorded that  during  cross-
    examination she said that she lived with the Appellant  in  2016.  (She
    also said that the Appellant lived alone in Nepal  giving  rise  to  an
    inconsistency in the evidence). The Appellant in MS provided a detailed
    response to the RFRL relied on by the Secretary of State.  He  was  not
    cross-examined on this.  However, in this case the  issue  is  and  has
    always been whether there is family life between the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor.  The Respondent set out which parts of  the  Appellant's  case
    which were not accepted including that he was living with  the  Sponsor
    in 2016.  The witness statements and the Sponsor's evidence did not add
    anything further to the Appellant's case.  I do not have a copy of  the
    Record of Proceedings in order to  identify  the  questions  in  cross-
    examination.  The Appellant has not sought a copy of it.  There  is  no
    challenge to the finding of the judge at [33] in  the  grounds  on  the
    basis that it was a finding that the judge was not entitled to reach or
    that there was a procedural irregularity.  It  was  unarguably  a  live
    issue in the appeal before the FtT.

44. It is not necessary for the judge to set out all  matters  about  which
    the Appellant is cross-examined.  In any event, there was no concession
    made at the hearing.  The further evidence generated by  the  Appellant
    since the Entry Clearance Manager's decision was a bare assertion  that
    he and the Sponsor were living together.  There was no further evidence
    on the issue about which the Respondent was  obliged  to  cross-examine
    the Sponsor, having already made her position clear.

45. Fairness does not demand an adjournment  to  enable  the  Appellant  to
    submit evidence to plug holes  in  his  case  before  the  FtT  and  to
    undermine a lawful and sustainable finding of the Tribunal which he has
    not sought to challenge in the grounds.   The  Appellant  has  had  the
    opportunity to advance his case and provide evidence in support and  to
    engage with the issues  identified  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager.
    Moreover, the represented Appellant was  directed  to  file  and  serve
    further evidence on which he seeks to  rely  for  the  purpose  of  the
    hearing on 18 March.  He submitted an  addendum  bundle.   He  has  not
    served further evidence on  the  issue  relating  to  whether  and  the
    Sponsor were living together in 2016.  No such evidence was drawn to my
    attention by Mr Jesurum.

46. The judge was entitled to conclude that there was insufficient evidence
    of cohabitation in 2016.  This was a finding that was open to him.  The
    finding is not challenged in the grounds.  There is in my view no  need
    to go behind that finding.  It is not infected by  the  error  of  law;
    however, if I were to reconsider that issue, I  would  reach  the  same
    conclusion.

47. I find that the Appellant was raised by his biological mother  and  the
    Sponsor.  It is reasonably likely that they all  lived  together  as  a
    family when the Appellant was a child and maybe beyond then.  I do  not
    accept that the Appellant was raised exclusively by the Sponsor.  It is
    possible for him to have maternal relationships with  both  women  that
    could engage Article 8.  I accept that Ortega relates to  a  subsisting
    parental relationship in the  context  of  s117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Furthermore,  the  circumstances  in
    this case are different because they relate to a  polygamous  marriage.
    I find that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant  was  raised  by
    both women in the same household.

48. I accept that the Appellant receives money from the Sponsor and that he
    has access to her account.  However, the Appellant also lives with  his
    biological mother in Nepal who is  also  in  receipt  of  part  of  her
    husband's pension.  It is likely that the Appellant and his brother are
    at least, in part, reliant on money from both women some of  the  time.
    I accept that he may have had a parental relationship with the  Sponsor
    when he was a child.  However, I find that in 2016 there was no  longer
    a relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor which would engage
    Article 8.  Not only is there insufficient evidence  of  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor  living  together;  there  is  also  very  little  evidence
    explaining  what  the  Appellant  has  been  doing  since  he   reached
    adulthood, particularly considering that he was aged 42 at the date  of
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Office.  I have taken into  account
    the evidence at page  26  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  from  the  ward
    chairperson who says that the Appellant has "no any services,  business
    and employment and he has been fully cared financially and  emotionally
    by his step mother ... until now".  However, the evidence is lacking in
    detail.  I have taken into account the  evidence  of  unsuccessful  job
    applications in 2019.  The evidence does not adequately account for the
    entire  period  of  the  Appellant's  adult  life  which  is   not   an
    insignificant period of time.  All we know is that he did not get  into
    the army (when he was aged 18) and that he lived at home "most  of  the
    time" (see the Sponsor's witness statement at [7]) and that in 2019  he
    applied for several jobs but was not successful.  We also know that  he
    left school in year 10.  He is not highly educated, which supports what
    he says about having difficulty finding work.

49. The Appellant's age is  not  determinative  of  the  issue  dependency.
    However, in order  to  establish  that  the  Appellant  has  not  lived
    independently since reaching adulthood and was not living independently
    in 2016, I would reasonably expect there  to  be  further  evidence  of
    this.  In addition, the evidence of  remittances  and  telephone  calls
    relate to 2018  and  2019.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    establishes that the 42- year old Appellant, had not by at  least  2016
    severed parental ties with the Sponsor.  I am not satisfied  that  this
    Appellant has remained dependent on the  Sponsor  during  adulthood  or
    that he has always lived in the family  home  with  the  Sponsor.   The
    evidence is lacking about what the Appellant has  been  doing  for  the
    last 24 years.  I am not satisfied that the evidence  establishes  that
    he has lost contact with all other siblings  except  the  brother  with
    whom he lives.  There is no obvious reason why this should be the  case
    and there is no evidence explaining this.  I find that he still  has  a
    relationship with his biological mother with whom he lives. The Sponsor
    told the FtT that the Appellant lived alone but his evidence  was  that
    he  lived  with  his  brother.  The  evidence  before   the   FtT   was
    inconsistent, which undermines the credibility of the Appellant's  case
    generally. This was not addressed in the grounds of  appeal  or  by  Mr
    Jesurum.

50. I am satisfied that the Sponsor has been sending money to the Appellant
    at least since 2018.  This  is  supported  by  copies  of  remittances.
    There is an element of financial dependency between the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor.  The evidence is  not  sufficient  to  establish  that  it
    existed at the time the Sponsor left Nepal.  I agree  with  Mr  Jesurum
    that the reason for such dependency whether choice or necessity is  not
    relevant in itself; however, it may in my view  undermine  the  overall
    strength of the relationship if the Appellant  has  another  source  of
    income or means.  In  any  event,   the  evidence  does  not  establish
    economic dependency in 2016.  There is no evidence explaining the  lack
    of evidence of remittances or phone calls before 2018.

51. The evidence of emotional dependency or support in 2016 or at any  time
    is similarly lacking.  At [17] of Kugathas the Court of Appeal was  not
    seeking to set out a disjunctive test.   It  is  clear  from  a  proper
    reading of [16] and [17] of the decision that the Court  was  assessing
    what level of support is necessary and observed that any three  of  the
    adjectives used by Strasbourg jurisprudence represents the  minimum  of
    what family life implies.  The Court was not  setting  out  a  test  of
    three discrete types of support  that  could  amount  to  family  life.
    There was no distinction made  between  real,  committed  or  effective
    support.  Mr Jesurum was attempting to interpret a  case  as  though  a
    statute.  The test to be applied  is  that  set  out  at  [14]  of  the
    decision:-

         "14. Mr Tam relies in particular on the Commission's decision in  S
             v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196 At page 198 of  the  report,
             the Commission said:

                  "Generally, the protection of family life under Article  8
                  involves cohabiting dependents, such as parents and  their
                  dependent, minor children. Whether  it  extends  to  other
                  relationships  depends  on  the   circumstances   of   the
                  particular case. Relationships between  adults,  a mother
                  and her 33 year old son in the present  case,  would  not
                  necessarily acquire the protection of  Article  8  of  the
                  Convention  without  evidence  of  further   elements   of
                  dependency,  involving  more  than  the  normal  emotional
                  ties."

52. There is no evidence capable of  establishing  that  there  are  further
   elements of  dependency  between  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor.   Mr
   Jesurum's submissions focused on the legal authorities, but he was unable
   to identify any features of this case which would establish family  life.
   The evidence relied on was that of financial support including access  to
   the Sponsor's bank account. I accept  that  the  evidence  supports  some
   recent economic dependency and that  the  Appellant  has  access  to  the
   Sponsor's account in 2018 and 2019.  The Appellant relies on having lived
   with the  Sponsor  in  2016.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence
   establishes this.  Furthermore, the evidence does not  support  that  the
   Appellant has not lived independently at any time during his adult  years
   including in 2016.  In respect of the  details  of  the  relationship,  I
   accept that there is a genuine parental relationship.  The Appellant  and
   the Sponsor have a loving relationship akin to that of adult child and  a
   biological mother, but there is nothing more that would engage Article 8.
    There is no evidence of further elements of dependency,  involving  more
   than the normal emotional ties.

53. I appreciate that the Sponsor would like the Appellant to  help  her  in
   the United Kingdom.  She has some health  problems  and  obviously  feels
   very isolated without any family here.  However, the  decision  does  not
   breach the Appellant's rights under Article 8.

54. There was evidence that  economic  pressure  prevented  the  Appellant's
   father making an application after  discharge.   However,  there  was  no
   evidence explaining why the Appellant did  not  make  an  application  in
   2016.  The proposition that Rai established that it is not  necessary  to
   adduce evidence that the  Appellant  could  not  afford  to  pay  for  an
   application is not made out.  There was evidence in Rai that  the  family
   could not afford to make applications at the same time.  The evidence  in
   this case was that the family was poor and it may have been open  to  the
   judge to draw an inference from this that the Appellant could not in 2016
   afford along with the Sponsor to make an application, but that he did not
   do does not amount to an error of law.  In any event,  nothing  turns  on
   this.

55. Throughout submissions Mr Jesurum focussed on the legal  authorities  to
   advance the Appellant's case; however, the assessment of whether  Article
   8 is engaged is fact sensitive depending  on  the  circumstances  of  the
   particular case.  The evidence in this case was insufficient to establish
   family life.  The authorities relied on could not help the  Appellant  in
   the absence of sufficient evidence of family  life.   The  Appellant  has
   been represented throughout and given able to time to advance  his  case.
   The burden of proof rests on  him.  In  submissions  Mr  Jesurum  strayed
   beyond the grounds, raising issues that were not only without  substance,
   but that he was not permitted to argue.




56. The refusal letter is not clear about the  Respondent's  position  about
   historic injustice.  Nothing turns on this.  The appeal cannot succeed in
   the absence of family life.  However, I make the following  observations.
   It is credible that the Appellant's father would have wished to  come  to
   the United Kingdom after discharge from the army.  However, this case  is
   complicated because by the time that the Appellant was born,  his  father
   had two wives.  He may have been able to bring his children here but  not
   both wives.  Had he come to the United Kingdom after discharge  with  the
   Sponsor,  the  Appellant  may  not  have  been  born.   Had  he  made  an
   application whilst the Appellant was a child, enabling the  Appellant  to
   come here, this may have meant that he would have been separated from his
   biological mother.  Had he, in 2009, been  able  to  afford  to  make  an
   application, the Appellant would at that time have been  an  adult.   The
   issue is not straight forward.  Had the Respondent properly advanced  his
   case that there is no nexus in this case, the issue  may  not  have  been
   straight forward.  In any event, it was not an issue properly  raised  by
   the Entry Clearance Officer or Entry Clearance Manager or indeed the Home
   Office Presenting Officer at the hearing before the FtT.  It was not open
   to Mr Lindsay to now rely on it.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 26 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
