
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/25228/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 29 November 2018                   |On 12 December 2018                 |
|                                      |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 ALI BOUDALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal to the UT against  the  decision
    of FtT Judge McGavin, promulgated on 17 May 2018, dismissing his appeal
    on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant's case to the UT is stated in the note  of  argument  and
    motion to amend the grounds of appeal prepared  by  counsel,  dated  27
    November  2018.   He  contends  that  on  a  full   analysis   of   his
    communications with the respondent he had placed all required  material
    before  the  decision-maker  by  the  date  the  decision   was   made.
    Accordingly, the decision-maker should not have held that, for lack  of
    evidence,  he  failed  to  meet   the   suitability   and   eligibility
    requirements of the immigration rules, and the  judge  erred  at  [21],
    where she found that the application fell  to  be  refused  "under  the
    mandatory provisions of S-LTR.1.7" of appendix FM,  and  therefore  did
    not "proceed to consider the substance of that application".

 3. At [24], the judge said that she had not required to make any  findings
    under appendix FM as to the "genuineness  and  subsistence"  of  family
    relationships, but did "assume" for further  purposes  that  there  was
    family life.

 4. There is error here, although not quite on the lines contended.

 5. The FtT had before it an appeal on human rights grounds only.

 6. Appendix FM provides at paragraph EX.1 and EX.2 as follows:

         This paragraph applies if


             (a)


                  (i)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who -


                      (aa)  is under the age of 18 years, or was under  the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first  granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;


                      (bb)  is in the UK;


                      (cc)  is a British Citizen or has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least  the  7  years  immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and


                  (ii) taking into account their best interests as a primary
                  consideration, it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
                  child to leave the UK; or


             (b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK.


         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner.


 7. Mr Bryce accepted that if the appellant's application had been found to
    qualify for consideration in terms of the rules, it would not have  met
    the financial requirements, and would fall for  decision  in  terms  of
    paragraph EX.1.  He also accepted that the case has no feature which is
    not reflected in EX.1 but which would be relevant  to  a  consideration
    outside the rules, and that EX.1 is the measure of such a case, even if
    that stage is not reached from within the rules.

 8. In other words, whether  approached  from  within  the  rules  or  from
    outside, the case was the same.

 9. The real question is not whether the appellant complied with the rules,
    to reach EX.1 from within, but whether the FtT adequately resolved  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

10. The relevant issues as defined in EX.1 and EX.2 are touched on  in  the
    discussion from [21] onwards, but it is unsatisfactory that  there  was
    no decision on whether the evidence established family life  among  the
    appellant, his wife, their son, and his wife's two older children.  The
    respondent did not accept that there was.   The  decision  proceeds  by
    assuming family life, but as its existence,  quality  and  extent  were
    crucial to  assessing  proportionality,  the  judge  should  have  made
    findings.

11. The decision at [22] - [29] is oddly framed as resolving the case under
    the heading "paragraph 276ADE (1) private  life".   The  discussion  is
    much more about family life than about private life, and  error  should
    not be found on points of form alone, but  this  also  shows  error  of
    legal approach.

12. There was some criticism of the judge's finding at [25] that there  was
    "not very much contact" among the two older  children,  the  appellant,
    and his wife, as not reflecting the evidence.  However, it was for  the
    appellant to bring the materials on which the case was to  be  decided,
    and the finding was justified on taking that evidence, such as it  was,
    at its highest.  Any shortcomings here are the  responsibility  of  the
    appellant not the judge.  However, in view of the outcome, he will have
    a further opportunity to show whether there is  family  life  involving
    the older children to such meaningful extent as might help to make  his
    case.

13. There was also error in failing to refer to Part VA of  the  2002  Act,
    "Article 8 of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations", and to section
    117B in particular.  Again, that might be only a defect of form, if all
    relevant matters of substance  were  resolved,  but  express  reference
    would  have  brought  out  the  need  to  proceed  on   findings,   not
    assumptions.

14. The decision cannot safely stand as a resolution of the appeal on human
    rights grounds.  It is set aside, and stands only as a record  of  what
    was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate under section 12  of  the  2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

15. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge McGavin.

16. Parties should frame their cases at the next  hearing,  to  assist  the
    judge, according to the issues in terms  of  EX.1,  EX.2,  and  section
    117B.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            6 December 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




