
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25632/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2018                        |On 16th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                             Okilkhon Fattakhov
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Balroop of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan.  He was born on 2 June 1988.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 4 November 2016  to
    refuse his human rights claim.

 3. Judge Pedro (the judge) in a  decision  promulgated  on  17  May  2018,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  He found the  respondent's  decision
    was proportionate and that there were no  compelling  circumstances  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8.

 4. The grounds claim  the  judge  erred  because  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances.

 5. Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal on  6  July  2018.   He
    said:

         "It is arguable that the judge has attached insufficient weight  to
         the factors advanced on behalf of the appellant in the  context  of
         the complaint upheld by the OISC taking into account the chronology
         and the particular matters advanced at paragraphs 13 and 14 of  the
         permission application.  It is arguable that  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality exercise has been affected:"

 6. Mr Melvin handed up his Rule 24 response.  The appeal had turned on the
    appellant's private life outside the Immigration Rules and  there  were
    no compelling circumstances in that regard.  The judge made findings at
    [17]-[19] of the decision which were open to him on the evidence.   The
    issue was the negligence  on  the  part  of  the  appellant's  previous
    representatives which the judge took into account  as  indeed  had  the
    respondent in the decision.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. The judge found at [19] inter alia that the appellant:

         "... ... appears to have been looking  anxiously  from  about  2014
         onwards to find any means, merited or otherwise, by which he  could
         possibly extend his stay in the United Kingdom.

 8. Mr Balroop submitted that the judge gave no reasons  for  that  finding
    and more importantly, there was no basis for the same which highlighted
    the  mindset  of   the   judge   and   infected   his   assessment   of
    proportionality.

 9. There was a complaint to the OICS in terms of assessment of exceptional
    circumstances, however the Secretary of State  did  not  refer  to  the
    findings made by the OISC, which report found:

      a) the documents supplied in support of the  application  were  mainly
         academic records.  There did  not  seem  to  be  any  documents  to
         support the Article 8 claim [29];

      b) EU Migration were unable to  provide  further  information  on  the
         advice and services provided to the appellant [30];

      c)      there was no evidence that the appellant  was  made  aware  in
         writing that he did not meet the requirements of FLR.FP that it was
         likely to be refused [33] there was an attendance note of a copy of
         refusal letter by post but no evidence that that was done [36].

10. The appellant sought advice in relation to  obtaining  a  CAS  for  his
    outstanding application.  He was not advised in relation to his Tier  4
    application which was refused with a right of appeal.  Instead, he  was
    advised to vary his application to an Article  8  application  with  no
    merit and  to  compound  matters  further,  when  the  application  was
    inevitably refused and certified, the appellant was not informed.

11. The appellant was not advised to request more time from the  respondent
    to obtain a CAS or appeal the decision to refuse.  He was not given the
    opportunity to re-apply  as  a  Tier  4  Student  when  his  Article  8
    application was refused because he was not informed  until  he  was  an
    overstayer of three months' duration.  Although the fault  was  not  on
    the part of the respondent, the grounds argue  that  the  circumstances
    created an unjustifiably harsh consequence for the  appellant  and  his
    family.  The grounds claim that S.117B is not limited to five  criteria
    and all circumstances must be considered.  Further, if the  appellant's
    circumstances were properly considered they could have  outweighed  the
    public interest.

12. Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13. I have considered  [29]  of  Mansur  (Immigration  advisor's  failings:
    Article 8) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 274 (IAC):

         "29. Mr Duffy submitted that the appellant's 'lack of  culpability'
             reduces the weight to be placed on that  public  interest.   A
             lack of  culpability  is,  however,  a  necessary  but  not  a
             sufficient factor.  Even where the person concerned is not  to
             be taken as sharing the blame with his or her  legal  adviser,
             it will still be necessary to show that the adviser's  failure
             constitutes a reason to qualify the public  interest  in  firm
             and effective immigration control."

    Mr Balroop's submission was that, as  expressed  at  [13]-[14]  of  the
    grounds, the appellant's representative's negligence  was  such  as  to
    qualify the public interest.  In  particular,  that  the  circumstances
    were considered by the respondent for "exceptional  circumstances"  for
    Article 8 but not for whether the appellant  could  have  achieved  ten
    years' lawful residence.

14. It is worth considering the headnotes of Mansur:


         "(1) Poor professional immigration advice or other  services  given
             to P cannot give P a stronger form  of  protected  private  or
             family life than P would otherwise have.


         (2)  The correct way of approaching the matter is  to  ask  whether
             the poor advice etc that P has received constitutes  a  reason
             to qualify the weight to be placed on the public  interest  in
             maintaining firm and effective immigration control.


         (3)  It will be only in a rare case that an adviser's failings will
             constitute such a reason. The weight that would otherwise need
             to be given to that interest is not to be reduced just because
             there happen to be immigration advisers who offer poor  advice
             and other services. Consequently,  a  person  who  takes  such
             advice will normally have to live with the consequences.


         (4)  A blatant failure by an  immigration  adviser  to  follow  P's
             instructions, as found by the relevant professional regulator,
             which led directly to P's application for leave being  invalid
             when it would otherwise have been likely to have been granted,
             can, however, amount to such a rare case."

15. The respondent took into account the appellant's poor service from  his
    representatives  under  "exceptional  circumstances".   There   was   a
    reference to the completion of ten years' lawful service and the  claim
    that the appellant's current representatives considered the gap was due
    to the negligence of EU Migration Services such that it  is  inaccurate
    to say that the judge failed to consider the same.  See  in  particular
    [16]-[19].  These were issues put to the judge at  the  hearing  by  Mr
    Balroop and in that sense, the grounds amount to nothing  more  than  a
    restating of the appellant's case.

16. The judge's comments at [19] of his decision which I have  referred  to
    at [7] above have been quoted  out  of  context.  The  judge  did  give
    reasons for what he said at [19]. He took into account the OISC and the
    appellant's immigration history. The comments he made  regarding  which
    Mr Balroop complains (see [7] above)  show  no  adverse   "mindset"  or
    "infection". The complaint in that regard is not made out and discloses
    no error of law.

17. The judge did not err in his analysis. He carried out  a  comprehensive
    and careful assessment of all of the evidence put before  him  but  for
    the reasons he set out, he did not find the  appellant's  circumstances
    to be exceptional.  That was a finding he was entitled to  come  to  on
    the evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

18. The judge did not materially err in his decision which shall stand.

Anonymity direction not made.


Signed                              Date 14 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
