
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/25465/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6th April 2018                         |  On 1st May 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             GHANAMBIHAI NADESAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Seehra of Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Sweet made
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9th October 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 29th  June  1937.   She
    applied to come to the UK as an adult dependent relative under Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended but was refused  on  25th
    October 2016.

 3. The requirements for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative are
    set out in Section E-ECDR of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The
    relevant paragraph is E-ECDR.2.5 which states that the  appellant  must
    be unable, even with the practical and financial help of  the  sponsor,
    to obtain the required level of care in  the  country  where  they  are
    living because:

      a) it is not available and there is no person in their country who can
         reasonably provide it; or

      b) it is not affordable.

 4. The appellant did not argue that care  was  not  affordable.   She  did
    however submit that it was not available.

 5. She has six children.  Two are in the UK, one  is  in  Canada,  one  in
    Switzerland, and one in Australia.  She has one son in  Sri  Lanka  who
    lives in Colombo and who is not on good terms with  her.   She  suffers
    from a number of medical conditions including arthritis,  hypertension,
    numbness, hearing impairment, memory problems and walks with  a  Zimmer
    frame.  Her husband, who used to be her carer, died in May  2016.   She
    remains in the family home which is in a town right  in  the  north  of
    Jaffna.

 6. The judge was not satisfied that there  was  sufficient  evidence  that
    care for her was not available.  He said that she currently  relies  on
    help from her neighbours and frequent visits from family members.

 7. He then wrote:

         "It was submitted that the appellant  and  her  late  husband  have
         employed servants in the past but they have proved to be unreliable
         and untrustworthy.  There was also a suggestion  that  because  the
         appellant speaks Tamil and does not speak Sinhalese, she  will  not
         be able to access care homes, where the Tamil language is not used.
          I am not satisfied that sufficient enquiries have  been  made,  or
         evidence provided, as to the unavailability of  such  care  in  Sri
         Lanka.  For these reasons I am not persuaded that she can meet  the
         requirements of Appendix FM in respect of  entry  clearance  as  an
         adult dependent relative".

 8. So far as Article 8 was concerned, he said:

         "Nor do I accept that she should  succeed  under  Article  8  ECHR,
         because she has lived in Sri Lanka  all  her  life  with  her  late
         husband and other family members, and there is no reason why  those
         family members cannot continue to make visits to her and/or arrange
         suitable care for her in her home country.  Her  circumstances  are
         not exceptional or compelling, nor would there be any breach of any
         claimed Article 8 ECHR rights by this decision.  I  therefore  also
         reject her claim under  Article  8  ECHR  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules".

The Grounds of Application

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had given insufficient reasons for rejecting the evidence given by  the
    sponsor in relation to care available  in  Sri  Lanka.   There  was  no
    finding that the witnesses lacked credibility and no reasons given  why
    their evidence was insufficient.

10. Second, there was no Razgar-style assessment of  Article  8.   All  the
    appellant's children live abroad save for one  son  from  whom  she  is
    essentially estranged.   Even  though  they  are  all  adults,  she  is
    physically and emotionally dependent upon her children.   The  evidence
    before the judge was that the present arrangements of  frequent  visits
    from far-flung family members could  not  continue  and  there  was  no
    suitable care available for her  which  could  meet  her  physical  and
    emotional needs.

11. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Osborne  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 15th January 2018.

Submissions

12. Ms Seehra relied on her grounds.  She submitted that clear evidence was
    given in relation to the appellant's medical problems  and  no  adverse
    credibility findings were made.  There was  strong  evidence  from  the
    appellant's doctor which confirmed  the  extent  of  her  disabilities.
    Witness evidence from both the sponsor and her husband had  been  given
    to the effect that there was no care available for the appellant except
    in Colombo where she would face language difficulties since she  was  a
    Tamil speaker.  The judge had simply  given  insufficient  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence which was before him.

13. Second, the Article 8 analysis  was  wholly  inadequate.   The  judge's
    brief  consideration  lacked  any  Razgar-style  assessment   and   was
    inadequate.  The  evidence  established  that  there  was  family  life
    between the appellant and her adult children and the judge  had  simply
    failed to engage with the arguments  which  might  establish  that  the
    refusal was disproportionate.  Ms Seehra  relied  on  BRITCITS  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 368 at paragraph 59 where Sir Terence Etherton MR said:

         "Second, as is apparent from the Rules and the Guidance, the  focus
         is on whether the  care  required  by  the  ADR  applicant  can  be
         reasonably provided  and  to  the  required  level  in  their  home
         country.  As Mr Sheldon confirmed  in  his  oral  submissions,  the
         provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both  from
         the  perspective  of  the  provider  and  the  perspective  of  the
         applicant, and the standard of such care must be what  is  required
         for that particular applicant.  It is  possible  that  insufficient
         attention has been paid in the past to these considerations,  which
         focus on what  care  is  both  necessary  and  reasonable  for  the
         applicant to receive in their home country.   Those  considerations
         include issues as to the accessibility and geographical location of
         the provision of care and the standard of care.  They  are  capable
         of embracing emotional and psychological requirements  verified  by
         expert medical evidence.  What is reasonable is, of course,  to  be
         objectively assessed".

14. Mr Tarlow accepted that  the  reasoning  might  have  been  more  fully
    expressed but submitted  that  the  grounds  in  essence  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the decision.  The judge was plainly aware of all  of
    the relevant issues, including the health of the appellant and the care
    available for her and had reached a decision open to him.



Findings and Conclusions

15. This determination would have been less vulnerable  to  appeal  if  the
    judge had set out the evidence more  fully  and  had  provided  a  more
    detailed analysis of it.  Nevertheless, on the evidence before  him,  I
    am not persuaded that it is unsustainable.

16. The appellant is an 80 year old woman.  The medical  report,  which  is
    dated less than a month after her husband died, states that her  doctor
    is concerned about  her  physical  and  psychological  wellbeing.   The
    appellant  had  been  neglecting  her  medications  and  not  regularly
    attending clinics.  Perhaps this is not surprising  in  the  few  weeks
    after her husband died.  It is clear however from the letter  that  the
    appellant does have access to  medical  care  both  local  clinics  and
    hospitals.  She takes regular medication  for  hypertension.   However,
    her kidney function is normal  and  whilst  she  suffers  from  hearing
    impairment and memory problems they are  not  such  as  to  impede  her
    ability to speak to her daughter daily online.

17. She clearly has mobility issues.  Nevertheless, there are  many  family
    members who are able to help her.  She has six children,  one  of  whom
    lives in Colombo.  Her son there says that he regrets that he is unable
    to help his mother because he lives in a small two  bedroom  flat  with
    his wife and two children.  He said that he believes  that  his  mother
    would not prefer to be looked after by him because she did not  approve
    of his marriage choice and they hardly communicate.  His  comment  that
    he feels sorry that he could not help  his  mother  does  not  indicate
    complete estrangement.  She also has four surviving  brothers,  one  of
    whom lives locally and  another  in  Colombo  and  two  brothers-in-law
    locally and two sisters-in-law  in  Colombo.   Although  there  are  no
    details of nieces and nephews it  is  likely  that,  with  three  local
    brothers/brothers-in-law there are  near  relatives  available  nearby.
    She also has neighbours who have been  living  next  door  to  her  for
    years.

18. It would appear that the appellant has had  difficulty  with  dishonest
    servants in the past.  However, this is a close family with significant
    financial resources.  The appellant does not argue that she  would  not
    be able to pay for care.   She  says  that  there  are  no  care  homes
    locally.  The judge said that he  was  not  satisfied  that  sufficient
    enquiries had been made or evidence provided as to  the  unavailability
    of such care in Sri Lanka.  This, it seems to me, was a conclusion open
    to him on the evidence.  The witness statements  say  that  the  family
    researched them and "could only see care homes in Colombo" but that  is
    some way from establishing that there is no provision for care  of  the
    elderly in northern Sri Lanka.  I entirely accept that it would be  the
    norm for families to provide such care  but  the  evidence  before  the
    judge was that there were some family members  who  lived  locally  and
    others who make great efforts to visit her as often as they are able.

19. This is a human rights appeal and not a determination  of  whether  the
    appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Whilst  the
    judge could have explained his reasoning more  fully,  I  am  satisfied
    that his conclusion that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
    of Appendix FM in respect of entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative is sustainable.  That has to be the  starting  point  for  the
    assessment of the proportionality of this refusal.

20. So far as Article 8 is concerned, any  defects  in  the  judge's  brief
    reasoning is not material.

21. I do not doubt that there is family life between the appellant and  her
    children, both in the UK and elsewhere, since the appellant is  clearly
    frail and requires emotional support from her sons and daughters. It is
    clear that they are in extremely regular contact.  The appellant is not
    financially dependent upon them, since she has resources  of  her  own,
    but I accept that in her present situation  there  are  more  than  the
    normal emotional ties between the appellant and her children.

22. There is no doubt that the appellant herself, with or without financial
    assistance from her children, is in a position to pay for care  in  her
    home town.  The fact that she has had problems  with  servants  in  the
    past does not mean that it would not be  possible  for  her  to  employ
    someone to look after her.  If money is not an issue,  and  it  appears
    that it is not,  physical  care  can  reasonably  be  provided  to  the
    required level.  So far as emotional  care  is  concerned,  I  entirely
    accept that both the appellant and her children would much prefer to be
    with each other in the closing years of her  life.   That  is  entirely
    natural.  However, the appellant does have some close relatives  nearby
    who could provide companionship.  The appellant has five  children  and
    three siblings who live abroad but who clearly visit as often  as  they
    can. She also has a son in Sri Lanka. Moreover, there  are  significant
    considerations set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act which go against
    the appellant.  She does not speak English and would be  a  significant
    burden on the public purse were she to come here.

23. Accordingly, the judge did not materially err  in  law.   His  decision
    stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 30 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
