
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25014/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|19 February 2020                              |On 20 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     WF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented - Sponsor appears


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State, but for
convenience I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born on 19 October 2007.  She made
an application on 27 February 2018 for entry clearance pursuant to
paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") for settlement as the
child of a parent present and settled in the UK.  That application was
refused in a decision dated 30 November 2018.

The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 3 September
2019 resulting in the appeal being allowed.  This is the Secretary of
State's appeal against that decision.

The FtJ's Decision

The FtJ identified the issues in dispute as being of 'sole responsibility'
(para 297(i)(e)) and whether there were serious and compelling family or
other considerations making the appellant's exclusion from the UK
undesirable (para 297(i)(f)).

The FtJ summarised the basis of the refusal of entry clearance and the
basis of the appellant's claim to be entitled to entry clearance.  At [11]
- [12] he identified the documentary and other evidence before him,
including witness statements.  He summarised the oral evidence between [14]
and [28].  He set out in detail the parties' submissions.

In making his findings the FtJ referred to various authorities, both in
relation to the application of the Rules and in relation to Article 8.

He made the following findings.  He found that the evidence of the
appellant's father (sponsor) VF, his wife (the appellant's stepmother) FT,
and that of the appellant's paternal grandmother, TC, along with the
documentary evidence provided, did not establish on a balance of
probabilities that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellant.
He gave a number of reasons for coming to that conclusion.  In summary,
they are as follows:

The sponsor had left the family when she was an infant and she had never
lived with him.

No court or other documents were produced to show that the sponsor had
legal custody or responsibility for the appellant.

Organisations like the appellant's school and her church, and her doctor,
could and should have been able to provide documents evidencing who has
parental control.

The sponsor's mother said that she made the decisions with regard to the
appellant's upbringing.

Given that the sponsor knew exactly why entry clearance had been refused,
he did not find plausible the excuse for the failure to produce bank
records, the explanation being that it was an attempt to keep the bundle as
short as possible.  The FtJ said that he would have expected to see all
bank records showing payments made for school fees, doctor's bills,
maintenance, costs for food and clothing, and such other items.  He would
also have expected to see invoices and receipts from the organisations who
were paid.

He would have expected to see a witness statement from whoever received the
bank transfers but no details or evidence was produced.

All the statements were very light on detail as to how the sponsor has sole
responsibility.  No specific examples were given in the written evidence.
In his closing submissions the sponsor only spoke of the decision to
educate the appellant in English.

The appellant produced no evidence that met the balance of probabilities
standard that the socio-political position in Cameroon justified a grant of
entry clearance.

The letter from the appellant's mother was not very detailed.  He expressed
concern that the appellant's grandmother said that the appellant had lived
with her maternal grandmother until 2012 but the letter from the
appellant's mother was silent on that detail.

Although he accepted that the appellant's mother has leave to remain in
Poland until 7 September 2021, it was not shown that her mother plays no
part in the direction of her life.

The XL spreadsheet was not explained at all in the witness evidence or
skeleton argument.  As a document, it had no provenance and had virtually
no evidential value.  (The XL spreadsheet was said to be of transactions
between 2012 and 2015, highlighting payments to the appellant).

The photographs that have been produced may have shown contact between the
sponsor and the appellant but do not establish sole parental control.

The FtJ did accept, however, that the sponsor is the biological father of
the appellant, a matter which was not disputed.  He also accepted that the
sponsor maintained regular contact with the appellant via electronic means
and regular visits to Cameroon.

At [47] he said this:

"I find that, on balance, the witnesses were not credible on the issue of
sole parental control and serious and compelling reasons, because, although
I am sure they were genuine in their expressed love for the Appellant and
in their wish to have the Appellant join her father in the United Kingdom,
their written and oral evidence and the documents did not go far enough to
establish on the balance of probabilities that the sponsor has continuing
control and direction in important decisions in the Appellant's life.  I
should stress that I am not saying that the sponsor or any of the witnesses
were being untruthful."

Next, at [49], referring to the decision in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole
responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 the FtJ concluded that the
appellant had not shown on a balance of probabilities that her mother had
abdicated any responsibility for her and that her grandparents were merely
acting at the direction of the sponsor, and that her mother was otherwise
totally uninvolved in the appellant's upbringing.  This was not a situation
in which the mother and/or grandparents were doing nothing other for the
child beyond the bare fact of living with her on reasonably good terms (as
described in Alagon v ECO, Manila [1993] Imm AR 336).

As regards para 297(i)(f) (serious and compelling family or other
considerations), and referring to the decision in Mundeba (s.55 and para
297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC), he found that there was no evidence of
neglect or abuse and no unmet needs that should be catered for.  He said
that he saw no compelling medical evidence about the appellant.  He further
found that there were stable arrangements for the appellant's physical
care.

In the same paragraph, the FtJ said that the assessment involved
consideration of whether the combination of circumstances was sufficiently
serious and compelling to require admission to the UK.  He found that the
best interests of the appellant are best served by being with both, or at
least one, of her parents and that continuity of residence was another
factor that needed to be considered.  He concluded that the best interests
of the appellant are to be with her biological father, her sister and her
stepmother.  He then said at [50] that:

"As her father and sister are British citizens and cannot be compelled to
leave the United Kingdom, I find that the appellant's appeal should succeed
on this ground."

He thus concluded that the appellant had shown, on a balance of
probabilities, that there were serious and compelling family or other
considerations which made the appellant's exclusion undesirable.

The FtJ then referred to T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica
[2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC) to the effect that although s.55 of the Borders,
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 did not apply to children who are
outside the United Kingdom, the spirit of the statutory guidance should be
applied.  He found that the best interests of the appellant were to be
reunited with her father and half-sister in the United Kingdom.

The FtJ next turned to s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  He found that there was no evidence that the
appellant could speak English, apart from the written and oral evidence of
members of her family who want her to be granted entry clearance.  He said
that a letter from the school would have been enough.  He also found that
the appellant had not shown that she would not be dependent on State
benefits.

In considering para GEN.3.2(2) and Article 8 outside the Rules, and
referring to various authorities, the FtJ said that he had taken into
account the rights of the appellant's father, half-sister and stepmother.
He concluded that the interference with the appellant's right to respect
for her private or family life was not proportionate to the legitimate aim
sought, although he said that he had given that legitimate aim considerable
weight.  The adverse findings were outweighed by the family life that would
be established by the appellant with her family in the UK when weighed
against her family in Cameroon.  He referred again to the appellant's best
interests.  He also said that he took into account "the best interests of
the Appellant's half-sister, father and stepmother" and found that the
desirability of them developing a relationship with the appellant
outweighed the public interest on its own, or in combination with the other
Article 8 factors raised on behalf of the appellant.  He then said that:
"There are no insurmountable obstacles on my findings of fact."

Lastly, at [57] he concluded as follows:

"I find that the decision appealed against would cause the United Kingdom
to be in breach of its obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR because the
Appellant has shown exceptional circumstances as set out in my findings
above, and refusal would not result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for
the Appellant such that refusal of her application would not be
proportionate" (sic).

The Grounds and Submissions

In summary, the Secretary of State's grounds contend that the FtJ failed to
apply the decision in Mundeba in terms of the best interests of the
appellant.  Likewise, in relation to what was said in SG (child of
polygamous marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC), when concluding that
there were serious and compelling family or other considerations making the
Appellant's exclusion undesirable.

Similarly, the FtJ had failed to identify the serious and compelling
factors which he found would make the appellant's exclusion undesirable.
The grounds point out that the FtJ found that there were no present issues
with the appellant's current care in Cameroon, the sponsor has never lived
with the appellant, and there was no evidence to demonstrate that he has
any parental rights or legal custody for her.  The FtJ had failed to attach
"the appropriate weight" to the importance of the appellant's continuity of
residence and current care arrangements.  The FtJ's decision implies that
the FtJ felt that the educational advantages and the economic betterment of
the appellant in the UK amount to the compelling circumstances making her
exclusion undesirable.

Further, it is argued that the FtJ did not provide any reasons to support
the finding that it was in the best interests of the appellant to live in
the UK with her father, half-sister and mother other than that they are
British citizens and cannot be expected to leave the UK.  Again, in the
context of the appellant having never lived with her father, the sponsor,
and he not having any legal custody or parental responsibility for her, the
FtJ erred.  The best interests of the appellant in this appeal are to
remain in Cameroon with the continuity of the care arrangements already in
place.

In her submissions, Ms Fijiwala relied on the grounds.  It was submitted
that the FtJ's decision is devoid of any reasoning in terms of why the
appellant could not remain in Cameroon in the circumstances in which she
presently lives.  It was also relevant that the FtJ dismissed the appeal in
terms of sole responsibility.  That was inconsistent with the later finding
that there were serious and compelling circumstances making her exclusion
undesirable.

Although the FtJ had assessed the appellant's best interests as requiring
her to be admitted to the UK, a child's best interests are but one factor
to be taken into account.  The matters that the FtJ found at [50], for
example no evidence of neglect or abuse, or unmet needs, and so forth, all
needed to be taken into account.

In his arguments before me, the sponsor referred to the skeleton argument
that he had prepared for the hearing.  That skeleton argument refers to the
decisions in Mundeba and SG.  Reference is made to Article 8 and the issue
of the need for there to be a legitimate aim.  To summarise, the skeleton
argument contends that there is no public interest in Article 8 terms in
the appellant's exclusion.

The sponsor pointed out that the appellant was not living with any parent
and they were seeking to exercise their right to family life.  It was
argued that the appellant's best interests are not served by living with a
grandparent.  Her best interests needed to be considered first.  There was
no public interest or legitimate aim in refusing her entry clearance.

I was referred to the decision in UT (Sri Lanka) v The Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1095, in particular at [24] in
terms of the best interests of a child.  In that paragraph it states that:

"Finally, any specialist decision maker approaching this case would know
that the best interests of the children were a distinct, primary
consideration.  What is in the best interests of the children is also not
dependent on the public interest but needs to be decided in the context of
where the parents are expected to be: see EV (Philippines) v Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, at [58]."

It was also submitted that the appellant should not be punished for the
fact that her parents are not together because they do not get along,
citing KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.

I have also taken into account the written closing submissions provided by
the sponsor which, in addition to the matters already referred to in the
skeleton argument and his oral submissions, refer to the socio-political
situation in the English-speaking regions in Cameroon.

The sponsor argued that even if there is any error of law in the FtJ's
decision, the error of law is not material and does not require the
decision to be set aside.

Assessment of error of law issue

The FtJ clearly gave detailed consideration to the appellant's appeal and
referred to relevant authorities.  However, I am satisfied that the
respondent's grounds, for the most part, are made out.

In the first place, the FtJ concluded that the appellant had not
established that the sponsor has had sole responsibility for the appellant.
 His findings in that respect, amongst other things, included that the
sponsor left the family when she was an infant, she has never lived with
him and that there are no court or other documents to show that he has
legal custody or responsibility for her.  He concluded that the appellant
had produced no evidence that showed, on a balance of probabilities, that
the socio-political position in Cameroon justified a grant of entry
clearance, and he concluded that the appellant had not shown that her
mother, who lives in Poland, played no part in the direction of her life.
Those findings on sole responsibility were relevant to the issue of whether
there were serious and compelling family or other considerations making the
appellant's exclusion undesirable, albeit that it must be the case that
that subparagraph of the Rules is an alternative basis a grant of entry
clearance, and upon which an appeal may succeed.  That is not to say,
however, that the earlier findings in relation to sole responsibility are
not relevant.  They plainly are.

When the FtJ went on to consider serious and compelling family or other
considerations under para 297(i)(f), he found that there was no evidence of
neglect or abuse and no unmet needs of the appellant that needed to be
catered for.  There was no compelling medical evidence in respect of the
appellant and there were stable arrangements for the appellant's physical
care.

However, in concluding at [51] that the appeal should succeed under para
297(i)(f), the FtJ said as follows at [50.5]:

"The best interests of the Appellant are best served by being with both or
at least one of her parents.  Continuity of residence is another factor
that I have to consider.  A change in the place of residence where a child
has grown up for a number of years when socially aware is important.  I
find that the best interests of the Appellant are to be with her biological
father, her sister and her step-mother.  As her father and sister are
British citizens and cannot be compelled to leave the United Kingdom, I
find that the Appellant's appeal should succeed on this ground."

In other words, it is clear that the FtJ equated the appellant's best
interests, without more, with the conclusion that there were serious and
compelling family or other considerations making her exclusion undesirable.
 Even on the assumption that the FtJ was entitled to conclude that her best
interests were served by leaving the country in which she has lived all her
life and where she has a caring and stable upbringing, that does not
automatically mean that there are serious and compelling family or other
considerations making her exclusion undesirable.

At [34] of Mundeba, it says as follows:

"In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more than the parties
simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain.  'Compelling' in the context
of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicates that considerations that are persuasive
and powerful.  'Serious' read with 'compelling' together indicate that the
family or other considerations render the exclusion of the child from the
United Kingdom undesirable.  The analysis is one of degree and kind.   Such
an interpretation sets a high threshold that excludes cases where, without
more, it is simply the wish of parties to be together however natural that
ambition that may be."

Thus, in Mundeba it was said that the threshold for finding serious and
compelling family or other considerations is a high one. I respectfully
agree with that analysis.  It is not possible to conclude on the facts as
found by the FtJ, that there were either 'serious' or 'compelling' family
or other considerations, let alone both, which is what is required.

The effect of the sponsor's arguments is to suggest that where a child is
not living with a parent and has a parent in the UK, that is sufficient to
meet the requirements of the Rules.  Self-evidently, with reference to para
297(i)(f), that is not the case.  There has to be more than the mere fact
of one parent being present and settled in the UK.

In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in his
conclusion in respect of para 297(i)(f).  That is quite apart from the
inconsistency that is apparent between [47] and [50] and [51].  The latter
two paragraphs find that there are serious and compelling family or other
considerations, but at [47] the FtJ, after assessing the issue of sole
parental responsibility, found that "the witnesses were not credible on the
issue of sole parental control and serious and compelling reasons"
(emphasis added).  It seems, therefore, that at [47] the FtJ actually
concluded the opposite of what he found at [50] and [51], although
admittedly not using the precise phraseology of para 297(i)(f).

It is not entirely clear why, given that the FtJ allowed the appeal under
the Rules with reference to para 297, he went on to consider the appeal
with reference to para GEN.3.1 - 3.3, which applies where the requirements
of the Rules under Appendix FM or Part 9 of the Rules are not met.  Para
297 is neither within Appendix FM nor Part 9 of the Rules.  Regardless of
that, even if otherwise GEN.3.2 would apply, it would only apply where the
Rules are not met.  Similarly, there was no need for the FtJ to consider
Article 8 outside the Rules in circumstances where he had concluded that
the requirements of the Rules were met.

In any event, I am satisfied that the same legal error that I have
identified in terms of the FtJ's reasoning with reference to para 297
applies in terms of his findings in relation to Article 8.  The conclusion
that the refusal of entry clearance would amount to a disproportionate
interference with family life is infected by the error of law in relation
to para 297.

The only additional reasoning to be found in the FtJ's Article 8 assessment
is in the conclusion that the best interests of the appellant's half-
sister, father and stepmother are to be taken into account, along with the
desirability of them developing a relationship with the appellant.  That,
he concluded, outweighed the public interest.  However, the appellant does
not need to be in the UK for the relationship to be developed between her
and any of the persons identified by the FtJ, albeit that a long-distance
relationship is plainly not the same.  In any event, the Article 8
conclusion is infected by the error of law which I have identified.

Lastly, it is not clear what the FtJ meant at [56.5] when he said that:
"There are no insurmountable obstacles on my findings of fact".  That
conclusion does not appear to relate to any of the FtJ's findings and is
not in any event a relevant consideration.

In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the FtJ's decision must be set
aside for error of law.  It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that in
those circumstances the decision could be re-made on the basis of the
evidence before the FtJ (to which I would add, taking into account the
written arguments on behalf of the appellant).

    Re-making the decision

The FtJ found that the appellant had not established that the requirements
of para 297(i)(e) (sole responsibility) were met.  His conclusions in that
respect are not infected by the error of law and therefore stand.

As regards para 297(i)(f) (serious and compelling family or other
considerations), none of the evidence put before the First-tier Tribunal
establishes that that requirement of the Rules is met and there was no
additional material put before me.  The findings made by the FtJ which are
not infected by the error of law, even accepting his conclusion in relation
to the appellant's best interests, do not reveal the serious and compelling
family or other considerations necessary for the Rule to be met. He found
that there was no evidence of neglect or abuse and no unmet needs of the
appellant that needed to be catered for.  There was no compelling medical
evidence in respect of the appellant and there are stable arrangements for
the appellant's physical care. As I said at [35] above, it is not possible
to conclude on the facts as found by the FtJ, that there are either
'serious' or 'compelling' family or other considerations, let alone both,
which is what is required. The necessary high threshold is not demonstrated
on the evidence.

So far as Article 8 is concerned, the issue is one of proportionality.  The
appellant was found by the FtJ, at least by implication, to have family
life with the sponsor in the UK. I accept that the decision represents an
interference with his right to family life with her.

Although the sponsor sought to persuade me that there was no legitimate aim
in refusing entry clearance, that argument, with respect, is misconceived.
The maintenance of immigration control is a feature of the legitimate aim
of the economic wellbeing of the country, as has long been recognised.  I
need say no more about that argument.

So far as the appellant's best interests are concerned, I do not accept the
proposition that her best interests are to leave Cameroon and come to the
UK.  She is living in a stable, loving environment with which she is
familiar and where she has lived since birth.  Decisions about her welfare,
upbringing and day-to-day life have been made by her grandparents, with
whom she lives.  Whilst she maintains contact with the sponsor and he
visits her in Cameroon, the appellant has never lived with the sponsor.
Whilst I accept that ordinarily it is in a child's best interests to live
with a parent, that does not necessarily always follow.  Stability and
continuity of residence are important considerations.

Even if it could be said that the appellant's best interests are to leave
Cameroon and come to the UK to live with the sponsor and other family
members, those best interests are not determinative of the appeal.  They
are a primary consideration but not a paramount consideration.

In the proportionality assessment, the fact that the appellant does not
meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules is a weighty factor to be
taken into account.  Sole responsibility does not rest with the sponsor and
there are no serious and compelling family or other considerations which
make her exclusion undesirable.  I cannot see that there are any other
considerations in this case, not catered for within the requirements of the
Rules, which make the decision to refuse entry clearance a disproportionate
interference with the right to family life of the appellant or the sponsor,
or indeed of her half-sister (even if it could be said that she has family
life with her).

In those circumstances, I am not satisfied that the decision represents a
breach of Article 8.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.  Its decision is set aside and the decision is re-made,
dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 6/04/20

