
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25700/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunals |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th September 2018                   |On 05th October 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Hall, promulgated on 15th November 2017, following a  hearing
    at Birmingham on 7th November 2017.  In the determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant whereupon the Respondent  Secretary
    of State subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and  was  born  on  1st
    December 1986.  He appealed against a decision of the Respondent  dated
    5th November 2016, refusing his application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK as the spouse of a British citizen.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has undergone an Islamic  marriage  on
    14th July 2012, and a civil marriage  on  7th  November  2012,  with  a
    British citizen, who originally  is  from  Pakistan,  but  has  been  a
    naturalised British citizen since 12th December 2013.  The couple  have
    a son born on 18th June 2015 who is also a British citizen.  The reason
    why the Respondent had rejected the Appellant's application was on  the
    basis that he had exercised deception to obtain an ETS English language
    certificate.  The Appellant had sat two such tests at  Colwell  College
    in Leicester.  The first was on 21st August 2012 and the second on 18th
    September 2012.

The Judge's Findings

 4. Judge Hall concluded that, having heard the recording in  the  Tribunal
    itself of the test, for the September 2012 occasion, it was accepted by
    all that this recording did not refer to the Appellant.  This being so,
    the Appellant was unable to provide "an innocent explanation" as to why
    his test scores in relation to September 2012 were invalidated  because
    of the use of a proxy test-taker (paragraph 42).   However,  the  judge
    also found that the Appellant had not submitted the September 2012 test
    result with  any  application  for  leave  to  remain  (paragraph  44).
    Therefore, whatever the position in  relation  to  the  September  2012
    test, it was not a  material  issue  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    application.  However, the August test result was  the  one  which  was
    submitted in the Appellant's October  2012  application  for  leave  to
    remain as an unmarried partner (paragraph 44).  Yet, the judge was firm
    in his conclusion that, "it has not been proved that  the  August  2012
    certificate was obtained by deception"  (paragraph  46).   Accordingly,
    the Respondent Secretary of State could not have discharged the  burden
    of proof in relation to paragraph 322(2) because it had not been proved
    that the Appellant had made any false representation in the application
    or failed to disclose any material fact for the  purpose  of  obtaining
    leave to remain.

 5. Even so, the judge did go on to say, as far as the September 2012  test
    was concerned, that, "I found that the Appellant took part in a planned
    deception in relation to the ETS test in September 2012.  The Appellant
    allowed a proxy to take the test on his behalf which  is  an  extremely
    serious matter".  This was despite the fact that "the Appellant did not
    subsequently use  the  ETS  test  certificate  obtained  by  deception"
    (paragraph 57).

 6. The judge held that the Appellant could  not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules in relation to his private and family life (paragraph 53) because
    he could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE.  However,  the  Appellant  would
    succeed under free-standing Article 8 jurisprudence.  This was  because
    "it is not the case that the Appellant entered the UK  unlawfully.   He
    entered with leave as a student and subsequently  was  granted  limited
    leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen" (paragraph 56).  In
    addition, the Appellant had a son who was a "qualifying  child  because
    he is a  British  citizen"  and  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  "the
    Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his
    son" (paragraph 59).  The judge went on to conclude that there were "no
    adverse factors in the sponsor's immigration history" (paragraph 63).

 7. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. In the grounds of application, the Appellant appealed on the basis that
    the judge was wrong to have  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  used
    deception with respect to the September 2012 test  (although  this  was
    not material to the application he  had  made).   This  appeal  by  the
    Appellant  was  dismissed  by  the  Tribunal  on  21st  December  2017.
    However, at the same time,  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  also
    appealed the decision of Judge Hall on  the  basis  that  it  had  been
    allowed, when it ought not to have been.  The basis  of  the  challenge
    was that the judge had failed to adequately consider that the Appellant
    had a poor immigration history given his  finding  that  deception  had
    been used to obtain an English  language  certificate  irrespective  of
    whether it was submitted in support of the  application  under  appeal.
    Obtaining leave to remain by deception is a  criminal  offence  and  is
    evidence of criminality, even if there is no conviction as yet.

 9. On 4th July 2018, permission to appeal was granted  to  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to challenge the decision of Judge M A Hall.

10. On 8th August 2012, the Appellant's Counsel,  Mr  M  Brooks,  furnished
    extensive and detailed grounds by way of a Rule 24 response,  objecting
    to the grant of permission.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 11th September 2018, Ms Aboni, appearing on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon the grounds of
    application.  She submitted that the judge found that the Appellant had
    used deception in September 2012.   When  the  Appellant  had  appealed
    against that finding, IJ Holmes had, on 21st December  2017,  rejected
    that application, and found that Judge M A Hall had properly  concluded
    that the Appellant had used a proxy in the language test on his  behalf
    in September 2012.  If that was the case, then the decision of IJ Hall,
    in allowing the appeal, could not be sustained.  This was  particularly
    given that he had come to  the  conclusion  that,  "I  found  that  the
    Appellant took part in a planned deception"  (paragraph  47).   If  the
    Appellant had exercised deception, even in September 2012 with  respect
    to a test which was not material  to  the  application,  this  was  the
    commission of a criminal offence.  There were no  powerful  reasons  to
    render it reasonable for family life to continue from abroad.

12. For his part, Mr  Brooks  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  entered
    legally as a student.  He had subsequently married.  He had  even  been
    granted an extension of stay on the basis of his marriage to a  British
    citizen.  Against this background, it was incongruous now to  not  give
    the Appellant a further extension of leave to remain on the basis of  a
    more permanent grant, which was the natural next step for him.  Second,
    although much has been made of the September 2012 test, any "deception"
    inherent in that  was  not  material  to  the  Appellant's  immigration
    application.  This was important because if one looks at paragraph  322
    of the Immigration Rules, it makes it clear that the deception  has  to
    be used.  It was not in this case.  Third, there was a British  citizen
    child.  The child was entitled to remain in the UK with access  to  his
    Appellant father.  Mr Brooks relied upon his skeleton argument to  make
    the point that the Respondent had not even identified any error of law,
    still less a material error of law.  It was not clear at all how it was
    said that the judge  had  misdirected  himself.   He  referred  to  the
    generalised and non-specific nature of the grounds, which he said  only
    served to show that the Respondent  was  simply  disagreeing  with  the
    decision, but was unable to point to any specific error on the part  of
    the judge within the decision.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

14. First, the Respondent states that the judge ought to  have  given  more
    weight to the deception.  This was quite a different matter from saying
    that the judge gave absolutely no weight to the deception.  Given  that
    this was so, what weight the judge gives to a "deception" is  a  matter
    for the judge, to be exercised judicially.  There is nothing to suggest
    that  Judge  Hall  did  not  do  exactly  that.    If   anything,   the
    determination shows a meticulous and highly thoughtful approach to  the
    evidence before the Tribunal.  In the circumstances, this  was  nothing
    more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.  The point  is  not
    bettered by saying that deception is a criminal  offence,  because  the
    burden and standard  of  proof  is  significantly  higher  in  criminal
    matters and it cannot be said, on the basis of simply what  appears  in
    the determination here, that the deception exercised here equates to  a
    criminal conviction.  In point of fact, the judge correctly  identifies
    the  weight  to  be  given  to  cases  of  criminality  and  very  poor
    immigration history (see paragraph 52).

15. Second, the judge considers the proportionality of  family  life  being
    made to continue from abroad under Section 117B(6).   The  judge  found
    that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    British citizen child.  He had a genuine and  legally  valid  marriage.
    He had in fact been granted an extension of stay precisely on the basis
    of his marriage.   The  Section  117B  factors,  when  weighed  in  the
    balance, did not, according to the judge, demonstrate that the  balance
    of considerations fell in favour of the Secretary of State against  the
    Appellant.  It is not at all clear  how  the  judge  is  said  to  have
    misdirected  himself  in  law  with  respect  to  the   proportionality
    exercise.

16. Finally, insofar as it has been said that  the  Appellant  could  apply
    from overseas to join his British citizen child and his wife, it is not
    for the judge to speculate as to the outcome of any  such  application,
    and as to whether this would be temporary or more long-term.  Moreover,
    the availability of an entry clearance application  has  little  or  no
    bearing on the reasonableness of the removal of a child  under  Section
    117B(6).  Ultimately, this was a question of proportionality,  and  the
    judge decided, in a comprehensive and detailed determination, that  the
    balance of considerations fell in favour of the Appellant.  There is no
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th September 2018
