
                               [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/25423/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 November 2019                        |On 14 November 2019              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between


                                     AH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel, instructed by Immigration
                    Aid
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal V A Cox (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated  on  5
         February  2018,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the
         respondent's decision of 3 November 2016 to refuse  his  Article  8
         based human rights claim.


Background


      2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born in  March  1986.  He
         entered the UK on 15 February 2010 pursuant to a grant of leave  to
         enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student. He was granted  further  leave
         in the same capacity, but  this  was  curtailed  on  or  around  18
         September 2014 on the basis that he fraudulently obtained  a  TOEIC
         English language test certificate from Educational Testing Services
         (ETS) in respect of a test taken on 18 September 2012  by  using  a
         proxy  tester.  Permission  to  proceed  with  a  judicial   review
         challenge to the curtailment decision was  refused  on  30  October
         2014, and then by the Court of Appeal on 30 March 2015.


      3. The appellant married FA, a British citizen, on 19  November  2014.
         He made a human rights application based on his  relationship  with
         FA on 22 May 2015, which was refused on 16 July 2015. The appellant
         did not exercise his right of appeal in respect of  this  decision.
         He made a further application for leave to remain on  human  rights
         grounds on 18 December 2015. His first child with FA was born on  5
         August 2016. The respondent refused the further human rights  claim
         on 3 November 2016. The decision relied on the appellant's use of a
         proxy tester to obtain his TOEIC  certificate.  This  decision  was
         appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  appellant's
         second child with FA was born on 9 September 2017.


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. The judge had before her a bundle of  documents  containing,  inter
         alia, witness statements from the appellant and FA, copies of their
         children's birth certificates and medical documents relating to the
         appellant, his wife and children.


      5. In his oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant
         confirmed that his parents remained in Bangladesh, that  he  had  a
         sister who was studying in Bangladesh and a brother  who,  at  that
         stage, was due to enter the UK as a student. His wife had no family
         in Bangladesh. The appellant stated that FA would not  relocate  to
         Bangladesh and he did not want to take  any  risks  is  taking  his
         children to Bangladesh (Although the risks were not identified). In
         her oral evidence FA stated that she visited  Bangladesh  when  she
         was 15 or 16 years old, that she did not like the country, and that
         she would not  return  to  Bangladesh  as  it  was  too  warm.  The
         appellant stated that his wife's family did  not  initially  accept
         him but that he had now been accepted.  In  her  oral  evidence  FA
         stated that, although her parents loved her, they  provided  little
         practical assistance, they were not  happy  that  she  married  the
         appellant and that they do not accept  the  appellant.  When  asked
         about her parent's relationship with her two children FA said  that
         her parents do not give them attention. "She said that  they  would
         say hello to the children from far away and that it was quite sad."
         In his oral evidence the appellant claimed that his wife  had  back
         pains, that she could not lift  things  and  that  she  received  a
         strong version of paracetamol. He stated that their second son  had
         been hospitalised for 7 or 8 days and that he had  seizures  caused
         by hormone difficulties and vitamin D problems. His older  son  was
         said to have eczema. In her oral evidence FA said she  had  regular
         appointments with her doctor regarding her back problems  and  that
         she forgot things. At the time of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
         she was not working and received social entitlement  benefits.  She
         claimed to have  received  physiotherapy  and  that  the  appellant
         undertook the cooking, cleaning and looked after the children.


      6. The judge  summarised  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  the
         respondent's   decision,   and   the    submissions    from    both
         representatives. The judge considered the ETS  deception  issue  at
         [46] to [68] and found that the appellant had  obtained  his  TOEIC
         certificate by deception. Although this aspect of the decision  was
         subsequently challenged it was  not  the  subject  of  a  grant  of
         permission to appeal and this was confirmed by the  order  made  by
         Lord Justice Males sealed on 12 March 2019.  Mr  Syed-Ali  did  not
         seek to argue that the judge erred in law in his  approach  to  the
         ETS deception issue. In reaching her conclusion on  the  use  of  a
         proxy tester the judge made other findings based on or relating  to
         the credibility of the appellant and FA. The judge found there  was
         no evidence that FA had suffered a "critical  illness"  during  her
         pregnancy [56], that the  evidence  relating  to  the  relationship
         between the appellant and FA's  parents  was  inconsistent  [57]  &
         [58], and that the evidence relating  to  FA's  backpain  had  been
         exaggerated [59] & [60].

      7. At [69] the  judge  found  that  there  were  no  very  significant
         obstacles to the  applicant's  reintegration  in  Bangladesh  under
         paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules, and at [71] she reminded
         herself that the best interests of  the  children  were  a  primary
         consideration. At [73] &  [74]  the  judge  stated  that  the  best
         interests of the children were to  live  with  both  their  parents
         given their young age and that  the  appellant's  conduct  did  not
         impact on the best interest's assessment. At [75] the  judge  noted
         that the best interests of the children could be outweighed by  the
         cumulative effect of other factors, and at [76] she stated that the
         best interests of the children to be with their parent did not mean
         that the family unit had to remain in the UK.

      8. At  [77]  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  children  were
         generally healthy and that, although there  had  been  some  infant
         illness that included a hospital admission, there were  no  serious
         health issues. In reaching this conclusion the  judge  specifically
         referred to the medical documentation relating  to  the  vitamin  D
         issue and the  hormone  concerns  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
         youngest son.

      9. At [80] judge stated that she had regard to the considerations  set
         out in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,
         and at [81],  with  specific  reference  to  s.117B(6),  the  judge
         reminded herself that the  public  interest  did  not  require  the
         appellant's removal as he was not  the  subject  of  a  deportation
         order.

     10. At [83] the judge noted FA's evidence that  she  and  her  children
         would not leave the United Kingdom.

             There is no question the mother tells  me  that  she  and  the
             child [sic] will leave the United Kingdom and whilst that is a
             matter for her I have considered the matter on the basis  that
             the Respondent's decision will she tell  me  mean  the  family
             will be separated.

     11. At [84] the judge stated,

             Strong or powerful reasons are required to outweigh a  child's
             best interests. It does not equate to  blaming  the  child  to
             make a decision that means the father will  leave  the  United
             Kingdom and the mother and children may choose to remain. They
             are I remind myself both British citizens.

     12. At [85] the judge considered that contact  maintained  between  the
         appellant and his children and wife by visits and electronic  means
         of communication did not equate to life with their parent and  that
         there would be an inevitable burden on the appellant's wife if  she
         became a single parent. At  [87]  and  [88]  the  judge  took  into
         account, when undertaking her proportionality assessment, the  fact
         that the appellant was unable to meet the Suitability  requirements
         of the immigration rules and his use of deception. Then at [89] the
         judge concluded,


             I  find  that  the  decision  of  the   Appellant   [sic]   is
             proportionate and that the best interests of the children  are
             outweighed by the cumulative effect of the other factors.


     13. The judge then found that there were  no  factors  outside  of  the
         immigration rules that could  constitute  compelling  circumstances
         sufficient to allow the appeal outside the immigration rules  [90].
         At [91]  the  judge  considered  the  decision  in  SF  and  others
         (Guidance, post-2014 Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC)  but
         concluded that the  facts  of  the  present  case  were  materially
         different given that FA would remain in the  UK  to  care  for  her
         children. At [92] the judge accepted that  the  appellant  and  his
         wife were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  and  that  he
         played an active role in the  lives  of  his  children.  The  judge
         however found that the respondent's decision did not place  the  UK
         in breach of its obligations under  Article  8  and  dismissed  the
         appeal.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the remittal from the Court of Appeal

     14. The appellant obtained permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
         In granting permission Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott-Baker
         found that the judge was entitled to her findings relating  to  the
         use of a proxy tester to obtain the TOEIC certificate, but that the
         judge  arguably  gave  insufficient  reasons  to  depart  from  the
         principles in SF (which relied on guidance issued by the  Secretary
         of State - Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family Migration -
         Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and
         Private Life, 10 year Routes" - when assessing  the  reasonableness
         of expecting British citizen children to leave the EU).


     15. In a  decision  promulgated  on  17  September  2018  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Grimes dismissed  the  appeal.  Lord  Justice  Males
         however granted the appellant permission to appeal to the Court  of
         Appeal in a decision dated 8 March 2019  and  sealed  on  12  March
         2019. The Order read, in material part,

                  1. The FTT was entitled to find  that  the  applicant  had
                     used  deception  in  obtaining   his   English-language
                     certificate. There is no error of law here in the  UT's
                     dismissal of his appeal on  this  issue  and  certainly
                     none which would justify a 2nd appeal to this Court.


                  2. However, the FTT found that the  applicant  is  married
                     (albeit  he  married  in  2015,  at  a  time  when  his
                     immigration status was known  to  be  uncertain)  to  a
                     British citizen, with 2 young sons who are also British
                     citizens,  that  his  relationship  with  his  wife  is
                     genuine and subsisting,  that  he  and  his  wife  live
                     together, he plays an active role in the  life  of  his
                     children, that his wife and  children  will  remain  in
                     this country if he is required to go to Bangladesh, and
                     that contact by means of  modern  electronic  means  of
                     communication does not equate to life  with  a  parent.
                     Moreover this is  not  a  deportation  case  where  the
                     applicant has committed criminal offences.

                  3. Although the FTT said that it had taken account of  the
                     children's best interests (which were to be  with  both
                     their  parents)  as  a  primary  consideration,  it  is
                     arguable  that  it  gave  no  real  reasons  why  those
                     interests were outweighed by the appellant's  deception
                     in  obtaining  his  English-language  certificate,  not
                     least as there appears to be no issue as to his current
                     fluency. That was despite a recognition by the FTT that
                     strong reasons were required to outweigh a child's best
                     interests.

                  4. The UT  held  that  the  FTT  had  taken  all  relevant
                     considerations  into  account  and  that  the  decision
                     reached was open to the FTT of the  evidence.  However,
                     the  UT  did  not  explain  why  the  children's   best
                     interests were outweighed and if it is correct that  no
                     such reasons are contained in the  FTT  decision,  that
                     does not take the matter further.

                  5. In these circumstances the question arises  whether  on
                     the facts summarise in para 2 above it was open to  the
                     tribunal to find that  the  children's  best  interests
                     were outweighed by the applicant's deception  with  the
                     consequences of that decision are that the family  will
                     be broken up contrary to  the  best  interests  of  the
                     children who are British citizens.

                  6. I give leave limited to this issue  which  in  my  view
                     merits a second appeal.

     16. In a consent order sealed by the Court of Appeal  on  25  September
         2019 the appeal was allowed and the decision of  the  Deputy  Judge
         was set aside for the reasons set out  in  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         grant of permission. The matter was remitted to the Upper  Tribunal
         for an error of law hearing limited only to issues that led to  the
         First-tier Tribunal granting the appellant permission to appeal  to
         the Upper Tribunal.

Submissions at the remitted hearing

     17. Mr Syed-Ali produced a skeleton argument for the remitted 'error of
         law' hearing. That skeleton made no reference to the decision in SF
         and Mr Syed-Ali did not rely on that decision in  his  submissions.
         He invited  me  to  consider  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  KO
         (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and submitted that the judge erred in  law
         in considering  the  appellant's  own  behaviour  when  determining
         whether it was reasonable to expect his children to leave  the  UK.
         Given that FA said she would not relocate to Bangladesh, and  given
         that the children were both British citizens, Mr Syed-Ali submitted
         that it was not reasonable, in a real-world context, to expect  the
         children to leave the UK as they would forego the benefits of their
         British citizenship and they would be separated from their  mother.
         Mr Syed-Ali further submitted that there had been no  consideration
         of the children remaining in the UK in the assessment of their best
         interests. Mr Melvin accepted  that  the  judge  made  no  specific
         reference to the issue of reasonableness with respect to  s.117B(6)
         of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  although
         mention had been made of s.117B(6) at  [81].  Mr  Melvin  submitted
         that the judge's proportionality assessment covered all the  issues
         that would have been considered in  the  reasonableness  assessment
         under s.117B(6), but he accepted that, following KO, there  was  no
         scope for the judge to have  accorded  weight  to  the  appellant's
         deception when assessing the issue of reasonableness.


     18. There had been no application to adduce new  evidence  pursuant  to
         rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008
         and Mr Syed-Ali informed me that there had been no material  change
         in circumstances relating to the  appellant,  his  wife  and  their
         children other than the fact that FA was now in employment and  was
         in receipt of funds sufficient to meet the  financial  requirements
         of Appendix FM, and that the children were now  older,  the  oldest
         child now being at school. Both parties were  content  from  me  to
         remake the decision based on the evidence before me should I find a
         material error of law. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     19. I am satisfied that the judge's decision does  contain  a  material
         error of law. I am guided in this conclusion by  reference  to  the
         grant of permission by Lord Justice Males  and  the  terms  of  the
         agreed consent order. Whilst the judge was  demonstrably  aware  of
         the need to identify the best interests of the children, and whilst
         she identified the relevant public interest factors  at  play,  she
         failed to give any clear or legally adequate reasons why she  found
         that  the  children's  best  interests  were  outweighed   by   the
         appellant's deception. Entwined with the inadequacy of the  judge's
         reasoning  was  her  failure  to  consider  whether  it  would   be
         reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. Nowhere  in  her
         decision does the judge consider whether it would be reasonable  to
         expect the children to leave the UK as a separate  assessment  from
         the general public interest factors, most particularly the  conduct
         of their father. Whilst the judge  does  make  brief  reference  to
         s.117B(6) at [81], nowhere in her decision does she  undertake  the
         reasonableness assessment required by that section. To  the  extent
         that the  judge  may  have,  by  means  of  necessary  implication,
         undertaken a reasonableness assessment, she has done so as part  of
         a full and wide-ranging Article 8 proportionality  assessment  that
         included relevant public interest factors such as  the  appellant's
         conduct ([82] et seq, and  particularly  at  [87]  and  [88]).  The
         Supreme Court  have  however  clarified  that  this  is  the  wrong
         approach in law  when  assessing  reasonableness  under  s.117B(6).
         Following KO, the assessment of whether it is reasonable to  expect
         a child to leave the UK, both with respect to the immigration rules
         and s.117B(6), must be considered without reference to the  conduct
         of the parent and is, on its face, free-standing ([17] of  KO).  To
         the extent that the judge failed to  undertake  the  reasonableness
         assessment pursuant to s.117B(6), and to the extent that  she  took
         into account irrelevant factors even if she  did,  by  implication,
         undertake a reasonableness  assessment,  the  decision  contains  a
         material error of law requiring it to be set aside.

Remaking the decision

     20. There  has  been  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  primary  factual
         findings, and, as stated in paragraph 17 above, there has  been  no
         application to adduce further evidence by either party. I therefore
         proceed to remake the decision based on  the  facts  found  by  the
         judge and in light of the further points identified by Mr  Syed-Ali
         at paragraph 17 of this decision relating to FA and the appellant's
         children. In remaking the decision I remind myself that the  burden
         of proof in respect of Article 8 human rights appeals rests on  the
         appellant and  that  the  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of
         probabilities.


     21. It was not suggested by Mr Syed-Ali that the  judge  erred  in  her
         approach to and findings in respect of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
         the immigration rules. Given that the appellant was  23  years  old
         when he entered the UK, has family members  including  his  parents
         still living in Bangladesh, has no language issues and is  in  good
         health, there is clearly no basis upon which I could conclude  that
         he would encounter very significant obstacles to  his  integration.
         Given that the appellant and FA are in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship the appellant could not meet any of  the  requirements
         of Appendix FM as the parent of a child in the UK. Given  that  the
         appellant could not meet the Suitability requirements  of  Appendix
         FM, he could not be granted leave to remain under either the 5-year
         route to settlement or the 10-year route to settlement as a partner
         under Appendix FM.

     22. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         (the 2002 Act) provides:


             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.


             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b are better able to integrate into society.


             (4) Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.


             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.


             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

     23. The appellant's two children are now 3 years old and 2  years  old.
         In EV (Philippines) &  Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ  874  (at  [35])  the  Court  of  Appeal
         explained that a decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of
         children will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their  age;
         (b) the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long  they
         have been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;
         (d) to what extent they have become distanced from the  country  to
         which it is proposed that they  return;  (e)  how  renewable  their
         connection with it may be;  (f)  to  what  extent  they  will  have
         linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting  to  life  in
         that country; and (g) the extent to which the course proposed  will
         interfere with their family life or their rights (if they have any)
         as British citizens.

     24. The first head note of Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting
         children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 reads, "As  a  starting
         point it is in the best interests of children to be with both their
         parents and if both parents  are  being  removed  from  the  United
         Kingdom then the starting point suggests that so  should  dependent
         children who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
         to the contrary." Headnote (ii)  reads,  "Lengthy  residence  in  a
         country other than the state of origin can lead to  development  of
         social cultural and educational ties that it would be inappropriate
         to disrupt, in the absence of compelling reason  to  the  contrary.
         What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
         present policies have identified seven years as a relevant period."
         Headnote (iv) of the same case indicates, "Apart from the terms  of
         published policies and rules, the Tribunal notes that  seven  years
         from age four is likely to be more significant to a child that  the
         first seven years of life."

     25. I consider  and  apply  the  principles  enunciated  in  the  above
         decisions in  assessing  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
         children under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
         2009. Both children are British  citizens.  They  are  consequently
         entitled to a plethora of rights and benefits including  access  to
         the NHS, free primary and  secondary  education,  the  support,  if
         needed, from local and central authorities, and the  assistance  of
         the British Embassy if they are outside  the  UK.   The  children's
         nationality remains a significant factor, as  does  that  of  their
         mother.

     26. Both children are very young. There is no evidence that  they  have
         establish sperate private lives outside of their  immediate  family
         unit. Mr Syed-Ali informed me that the oldest child is  at  school,
         although he is only 3 years old.  I  am  nevertheless  prepared  to
         accept that the oldest child does attend some  type  of  schooling.
         There is however nothing before  me  to  indicate  the  nature  and
         extent of any private life established  by  the  oldest  son  as  a
         result of his schooling.

     27. Whilst accepting that the youngest son had some  illness  involving
         Vitamin D and hormone concerns that required hospital admission the
         judge found, having considered the medical evidence, that  the  two
         children were generally healthy. I  have  independently  considered
         the medical documents and concur with the judge's  assessment.  The
         youngest son was admitted to  hospital  16  days  after  his  birth
         suffering from  seizures  that  were  attributed  to  a  Vitamin  D
         deficiency. He was discharged a week later following treatment  and
         with a follow up  appointment.  There  is  no  significant  further
         evidence suggesting that either of the appellant's two sons suffers
         from any significant medical issues. There is no  medical  evidence
         relating to the absence of adequate medical treatment in Bangladesh
         for the youngest son.

     28. It is in the best interests of the children  to  remain  with  both
         their parents. Given that the children were both born in the UK and
         are familiar with their current  accommodation  and  location,  and
         given their entitlements arising from their British citizenship,  I
         find that their best interests are to remain in the  UK  with  both
         their parents. Whilst the best interests  of  the  children  are  a
         primary consideration, they are not a paramount consideration.

     29. I now consider  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children  to  leave  the  UK.  The  headnote  of  JG  (s   117B(6):
         "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT  00072  (IAC)  Rev  1,
         considered in light of the guidance provided in KO (Nigeria) [2018]
         UKSC 53, states that section 117B(6) requires a court  or  tribunal
         to hypothesise that the child in question would  leave  the  United
         Kingdom, even if this is not likely to be the case, and ask whether
         it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to  do  so.  I  remind
         myself that FA's accepted evidence was that neither she nor her two
         children will actually leave  the  UK  (see  [83]  of  the  judge's
         decision; see also paragraph 2 of the Order made  by  Lord  Justice
         Males and sealed by the Court of Appeal on 12 March  2019,  setting
         out the First-tier Tribunal's findings  of  fact).  The  First-tier
         Tribunal therefore found as a  fact  that  FA,  who  is  a  British
         citizen, and who therefore has a right of abode, will remain in the
         UK. I must therefore determine whether it would be  reasonable  for
         the children to leave the UK in circumstances  where  their  mother
         will, on the accepted evidence, remain in the UK, even though  this
         is a matter of choice for her, and even though this  will  lead  to
         the fracturing of the family unit (  see  GM  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
         [2019] EWCA Civ 1630, at [43] and [44]).

     30. On the hypothetical basis that the  children  leave  the  UK  I  am
         satisfied that it would be unreasonable to expect them  to  do  so.
         This is because it would lead to the separation of two  very  young
         children from their mother in circumstances  where  the  First-tier
         Tribunal has already found  (and  it  is,  in  any  event,  readily
         apparent) that contact by electronic means of  communication  "does
         not equate to life with a parent" ([85] of  the  judge's  decision;
         paragraph 2 of the Order made by Lord Justice Males). There  is  no
         question that there  exists  family  life  between  the  two  young
         children and their  mother,  or  that  there  is  likely  to  be  a
         significant negative impact on  the  emotional  well-being  of  the
         children  if  they  are  separated  from  their  mother.   If   the
         appellant's two children were to  accompany  him  and  relocate  to
         Bangladesh the emotional bonds of love and dependency  between  the
         children and their mother could not be replicated  remotely.  I  am
         mindful that the appellant is someone who  has  used  deception  in
         obtaining his TOEIC certificate. He  is  not  however  someone  who
         liable to deportation, and the reasonableness test in KO  (Nigeria)
         [2018] UKSC 53 requires me to focus on the position of the children
         and not the conduct of the appellant.


     31. Having found, applying s.117B(6), that it would not  be  reasonable
         to expect the appellant's  two  young  children  to  leave  the  UK
         because this will result in the separation  of  a  mother  and  her
         children, and given that s.117B(6) is self-contained (KO  (Nigeria)
         [2018] UKSC 53, at [22]), I find that the appellant's removal  from
         the  UK  would  constitute  a  disproportionate  interference  with
         Article 8. I consequently allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and requires the decision to be set aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's  Article  8  human  rights
appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                                  12 November 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
