
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/25062/2018
                                                               HU/25061/2018
                                                               HU/25060/2018
                                                               HU/25059/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Sitting at Birmingham CJC            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 11th May 2021                 |On the 17th June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHEPHERD


                                   Between

                                   FIB (1)
                                   MB (2)
                                   FAB (3)
                                   MAZ (4)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Sponsor as a Litigant in Person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Office


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") and, as
the Appellants are minors and their Sponsor has been granted refugee
status, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until a
Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the Appellants are granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them
or any member of their family.  This direction applies amongst others to
all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellants are all minors and nationals of Pakistan.  They are the
    biological children of the Sponsor, NA, and were born as follows:


      a. FIB born 8 September 2010 (aged 10)


      b. MB born 1 February 2009 (aged 12)


      c. FAB born 4 August 2006 (aged 14)


      d. MAZ, born 22 December 2004 (aged 16)


 2. The Sponsor arrived in the UK in 2011 on a student visa. He is in a
    relationship with [SN]. He was recognised as a refugee by letter dated
    28 November 2017 and has been granted leave to remain in the UK until 8
    September 2022.


 3. The Appellants, via the Sponsor, made applications on 14 September 2018
    for entry clearance to the UK under Immigration Rule ("IR") 352D to
    join the Sponsor as the pre-flight children of a refugee. Their
    applications were refused by the Respondent by letters dated 29
    November 2018 written in substantially the same terms (together "the
    Refusal Letter"). The decisions were maintained following a review by
    the Entry Clearance Manager on 4 March 2019. The Appellants' linked
    appeals against those decisions were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Lodge for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 22 August
    2019.


 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 6
    January 2020.  He noted that the central issue was whether the
    Appellants had formed an independent family unit but there was also the
    issue of whether First Tier Judge Lodge had accepted that the
    Appellants' biological mother was living with them and the Sponsor when
    the Sponsor left Pakistan; if so, whether they still lived with her;
    and even if they did, whether they had formed an independent family
    unit since the Sponsor had left. On 3 June 2020 the Respondent conceded
    that the grounds of appeal had merit and that a fresh assessment was
    needed as to whether the children had established an independent family
    unit and therefore met the requirements of IR 352D.


 5. In an error of law decision promulgated on 4 September 2020, Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt found the decision of Judge Lodge was vitiated by a
    material error of law and must be set aside.  She decided that as the
    issues remaining to be determined were narrow, the appeal was to be
    listed for a resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal to remake the
    decision.


 6. The matter was listed for a resumed face to face hearing before us on
    11 May 2021, sitting at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. The
    Sponsor attended as representative for the Appellants. Mr Bates
    attended on behalf of the Respondent. The Sponsor gave oral evidence in
    Urdu via the interpreter, Mr Azhar Riaz, whom the Sponsor confirmed he
    understood.


The Respondent's decision


 7. The Refusal Letter stated that the applications made by the Appellants
    were refused because the Respondent could not sufficiently determine on
    the evidence provided whether the Appellants were dependant on the
    Sponsor or had formed an independent family unit with their aunt,
    siblings and grandparents in Pakistan. The Respondent noted that,
    although there were a number of letters and witness statements to
    support the claim that the Appellants have lived with their paternal
    grandparents and their aunt since birth, there was no mention of the
    Appellants' relationship with their mother.  The Respondent said the
    evidence of contact between the Appellants and their Sponsor was
    comprised of a series of missed calls, one-word messages and repeat
    calls made in quick succession and that there was insufficient evidence
    of money transfers demonstrating that the Sponsor had supported the
    Appellants for the entire period since he had fled Pakistan. As such,
    it said, the requirements of IR 352D had not been met.


The appeal before us


 8. The only ground of appeal available to the Appellants pursuant to
    s.84(2) of the 2002 Act is that the Respondent's decision is unlawful
    under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.   The burden of proof is upon
    the Appellants to show, on the balance of probabilities, that they have
    established a family and/or private life, and that the refusal of leave
    to enter interferes with that right. It is then for the Respondent to
    justify any interference caused. The Respondent's decision must be in
    accordance with the law and must be a proportionate response in all the
    circumstances.


The issues


 9. At the outset of the hearing before us, Mr Bates confirmed the
    Respondent's acceptance that the Appellants are the biological children
    of the Sponsor and that they were part of his household at the time he
    left Pakistan. Mr Bates confirmed that whether the Appellants' mother
    had left in 2010 was still a live issue.


10. It was agreed by the parties that the sole issue is whether the
    Appellants have formed an independent family unit for the purposes of
    paragraph 352D(iii) of the IR. If this rule is met, then the decision
    to refuse clearance would be disproportionate for the purposes of
    Article 8 ECHR. If the rule is not met, the Tribunal will have to
    consider whether the refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter is in
    breach of Article 8 ECHR.


11. We have had regard to all the oral and documentary evidence and
    considered the submissions even where not specifically mentioned.


12. Full notes of the oral evidence and submissions are set down in the
    record of proceedings. The main points arising from the oral evidence
    were as follows:


Sponsor's oral evidence


13. The Sponsor confirmed his mother,  the  Appellants'  grandmother,  with
    whom the Appellants live, is almost illiterate, she can only read basic
    Urdu and sign her signature. As to  how  she  was  able  to  write  her
    witness statement in English, the Sponsor said the official language in
    Pakistan and all paperwork is done in English; once a witness statement
    is dictated in Urdu or English, it is written down and read to you  and
    you sign, there is normally nothing on it to indicate it has been  read
    back to you in a language you have understood.


14. The Sponsor said he was still legally married to the children's
    biological mother; there is a set procedure in Pakistan whereby you
    need to go to the Union Council which has a reconciliation body before
    which both parties need to appear to get a final divorce. As regards
    whether he is married under Islamic law to his partner in the UK, the
    Sponsor said yes, you can have four wives, but according to Pakistani
    records, there is only one wife (the children's' mother); he was aware
    you could only have one wife in the UK.


15. He confirmed the children's mother left the family home on 21 October
    2010 when his youngest child was 6-8 weeks' old; she left because there
    were problems over a division of land. He said the children's mother
    was his cousin, his maternal uncle's daughter; his mother and father
    are also cousins. He said, "according to our culture, we don't marry
    with our own free will and we also don't live together as per our own
    will, it is the decision of the families, we don't marry for love". He
    said in his culture, women take the side of their own immediate family
    and the children's mother chose to side with her own parents. As to
    whether the mother said anything about the children's care when she
    left, the Sponsor said, "the children are always the father's in
    Pakistan, so she said the children are yours, you take care of them".


16. The Sponsor said he did not know the mother's address after she left
    him, and he had never tried to find out where she went because of the
    animosity. He said that when his mother applied for a guardianship
    certificate, the court in Pakistan sent a summons to the children's
    mother's last known address which was not complied with, so two adverts
    were placed in the national newspapers telling her of the grandmother's
    application for guardianship of the children. He said the address for
    the mother stated in the application for guardianship was her last
    known address; this is the one address for everyone who lives in the
    village. He said there are no street or house names, you get one
    address, everyone knows everyone there, so it is the same address for
    his own family's home and that of his maternal uncle.


17. The Sponsor confirmed his maternal uncle/the father of the children's
    mother lived in the same village about 5-7 minutes' walk from his
    family's house; the uncle had always lived there; the Sponsor last saw
    him in around 2010 on the land where they were making the division,
    before the children's mother left. The Sponsor said he did not know
    where his wife went when she left him, but he was pretty sure she did
    not go to her father's house because he thought he would have seen her
    had she gone there. He confirmed he did not try and contact her because
    of the issue of the land causing a lot of grief and the matter went to
    the police.  He said this is why she chose to walk away from her
    children.


18. As to why, if she chose her own parents over her children, she did not
    go to her parents, the Sponsor said she only had her father.  Her
    mother and father had divorced, and her mother was re-married and
    living with her husband in Lahore which was quite far away.  He said
    his wife could have gone to Lahore. He said her parents separated a
    long time ago, before his own childhood and before he and his wife were
    married. He said his wife spoke to her mother, but he had never visited
    his wife's mother.


19. The Sponsor confirmed he lost contact with his children and his mother
    between 2015-2017 because SN's parents found out about their
    relationship and started harassing his children "based on honour-based
    violence". He said his mother was an old-fashioned person and was
    annoyed with him because SN had already been forced to marry her
    cousin; when the Sponsor's mother came to know that he was living with
    a married woman and doing an un-Islamic act, she stopped contacting
    him, having moved to a new house from the area due to the harassment
    she was receiving from SN's family. As regards whether the children had
    suffered any specific threats or attacks, the Sponsor simply said they
    left because of the harassment, SN's family were demanding a daughter
    in place of the daughter he had taken. During the period when there was
    no contact, the Sponsor said the children had some savings which they
    were using to support themselves and his father was in the army, so
    they were in receipt of his pension.


20. The Sponsor said that after he came here in 2011, he had chosen tutors
    for the children and did so again after regaining contact with the
    children in 2017. He said he now makes all the decisions in relation to
    their tutors, religious education, schooling, curricular activities,
    their gym memberships etc.


21. When asked about a letter dated 14 May 2018 from a private tutor named
    Asma saying the grandmother is the only one who picks up and drops off
    the children, and is the only person contacted regarding progress and
    in case of emergency, the Sponsor said he chose the tutor and the
    grandmother has to do the pick-up and drop-offs because he is not
    there; he sends money to the grandmother who then pays the tutor; the
    tutor would not know he had chosen her. He said he and his mother had a
    consultation about tutors in the area and this one was selected because
    she was female and after the Sponsor discussed subjects with his
    children. The Sponsor said the letters from schools confirm he is in
    direct contact with the children's education providers.


22. The Sponsor said since he left Pakistan, the children have always lived
    with his parents and one of his sisters.  His parents are both very ill
    and his sister helps take care of the children as she lives in the same
    household. He said he was living with all of these people together
    before he left, but at a different address. He said the children have
    had to move schools over the last few years as a result of moving
    house; he had chosen the new schools. He said he spoke to his mother
    before he left about caring for the children but at that time there was
    no plan to bring the children to the UK.


23. As to whether either of his parents had worked at any point since he
    left in 2011, the Sponsor said they have agricultural land from which
    they receive money, they rent out a house and receive an income from
    that and he sends them expenses every month for the children. As to
    whether the grandparents and aunt would have enough money without his
    assistance, the Sponsor said yes, for themselves, but not for the
    children as it is very expensive in Pakistan.


24. As to the relationship with his current partner, the Sponsor said he
    thought it started in 2010; he knew her before the children's mother
    left but formed the relationship after this. He said he left when he
    did in 2011 because he had formed a physical relationship with [SN] and
    there was a date set for her to go and live with her husband whom she
    was forced to marry; she didn't want to go as she was no longer a
    virgin, and had they found out about this, she would have been killed
    and it would have had consequences for him as well.


The submissions


25. We heard submissions from both  parties,  which  are  recorded  in  the
    record of  proceedings  and  which  we  have  carefully  considered  in
    reaching our decision. It serves no purpose  to  burden  this  decision
    with a lengthy recital of those submissions.





Respondent


26. Essentially, Mr Bates relied on the Refusal Letter and Entry Clearance
    Manager Review ("Review") which raised the issue around a lack of
    evidence regarding the whereabouts of children's mother. He submitted
    the Sponsor is not a credible witness and that we should attach little
    weight to the evidence in the form of letters and statements in the
    Appellants' bundle and to his assertions concerning the cultural and
    legal norms in Pakistan i.e. that it would be usual for a daughter to
    side with her own family, that children default to the care of the
    father, and that he and the mother needed to be in front of a council
    to divorce. Mr Bates said the Respondent does not accept these
    assertions absent any background evidence to support them.


27. Mr Bates submitted that his own experience was that generally in
    Pakistan, when a daughter marries into another family, her loyalties
    are to that family; he said the Appellants' mother would have had care
    of the children as minors, for her sons up to age 7, and for her
    daughters up until puberty, although he accepts these are not hard and
    fast rules.


28. Mr Bates submitted the Sponsor's credibility is an issue.  He said
    although the children are entitled to rely upon paragraph 352D of the
    IR, the Sponsor came here on a student visa but has since entered into
    an Islamic marriage with his partner, with whom he has a child; this
    arrangement could explain why he was evasive about the whereabouts of
    the children's mother and is not being candid about the situation.


29. Mr Bates submitted we should attach little weight to the typed
    statement from the Appellants' grandmother, being someone whom the
    Sponsor says is largely illiterate. He said the explanation provide by
    the Sponsor of how such statements are made is not supported by
    objective material.  He said the fact that much of the evidence is in
    surprisingly good English (and, concerning the children's statements,
    uses legalese) goes to the reliability of the documents and the weight
    we can attach to what is said in them. Mr Bates said he did not go as
    far to suggest the statements and letters relied upon by the Appellants
    are fraudulent or not genuine, but it is a question of the weight we
    should attach to them, and their reliability. He said the Appellants'
    case really relies upon the credibility of the Sponsor and his
    evidence.


30. Mr Bates submitted that the other evidence relied upon barely makes any
    mention of the Appellants' mother.  He said the authors of the
    statements and letters confirm they have known the Sponsor for a long
    time and by extension, should have known about the children's mother,
    as she disappeared from the family home where she lived with the
    children, Sponsor and her in-laws, only a few weeks after giving birth.
    He submitted, on balance, it is unlikely that a mother would have
    abandoned her youngest child within 6-8 weeks of giving birth. He
    referred to the Sponsor saying that this came about due to a dispute
    over a land issue; that his wife did not go to her father's house in
    same village but went to her own mother who had divorced and remarried
    and lived some distance away. He submitted this was an unlikely chain
    of events.


31. Mr Bates submitted that although the Sponsor claims in his evidence
    that without his financial support, his mother, father and sister would
    be unable to support the children and their education, such that it is
    essential that he fulfils that role, the Sponsor also accepts there was
    a gap between 2015-2017 where he had no contact with the Appellants and
    was clearly not supporting them; during that period the only people
    doing so were his parents and potentially his sibling(s). Mr Bates
    submitted we should reject the Sponsor's evidence that his family would
    be unable to care for and educate the children without the Sponsor's
    financial support; they have done so in the past and are able to do so
    in the future.


32. Mr Bates submitted the Sponsor left Pakistan when his youngest child
    [FIB] was only a few months' old such that the only family she has
    known is with her grandparents and aunt, and potentially the mother. Mr
    Bates submitted on the Sponsor's account of events, the Appellants'
    grandmother chose to sever ties for a period of time with the Sponsor,
    saying this was due to the harassment the family were being subjected
    to in Pakistan. Mr Bates submitted that although the family may have
    been subjected to some harassment such that the family chose to
    relocate, if, as the Sponsor indicated, the grandmother took exception
    to his relationship in the UK and chose not to have contact with him,
    she would have taken on sole responsibility and control for the
    children earlier because there does not appear to be anyone else who
    could have done so.


33. Mr Bates submitted we should find the Sponsor not to be a credible
    witness and that the Appellants have failed to discharge the burden of
    proof that they have not formed an independent family unit.


Appellants


34. The Sponsor drew our attention to the wealth of statements and letters
    provided by a number of individuals and submits the evidence clearly
    establishes that he is involved in the Appellants' lives, sends them
    money and gives instructions to his mother. He said the letters from
    the local council and chairman are official letters, which all verify
    this. As regards the documents being in English, he said the
    guardianship certificate and police letters are also in English, that
    is the official language, and all official letters are in English. He
    drew our attention to the police survey report and the guardianship
    certificate and submitted these are both official documents issued by
    the authorities and were undeniable evidence to which we can attach due
    weight.


35. The Sponsor submitted that it is the documentary evidence that matters
    here, and if he had any documentary evidence that proved the children
    were living with their mother, there is no reason why he would not have
    disclosed that. As regards the period where he lost contact with his
    children and the reason for that, the Sponsor said mobile phones have
    only recently become commonplace in Pakistan, and they were not
    frequently available during the relevant period between 2015 and 2017.
    He submitted that during that time, his family were in a state of shock
    and panic and were moving from one place to another; that is the reason
    why his contact with them had stopped.  He submitted his father retired
    in 1990 and when contact was lost, they had to survive on whatever
    means they had, whether at a poverty level or a higher level, they had
    no other option. His father's pension as retired army personnel was
    limited.  He submitted his father is now about 70 and is about to die,
    he needs personal assistance 24/7.


36. As regards where the Appellants' mother went, the Sponsor said he was
    unable to confirm that she went to her mother's, but his evidence is
    that it was possible that she went there; as far as his family were
    concerned, when she left her young baby, she could have gone anywhere.
    He submits he has Islamically divorced her, but there is no legally
    recognised divorce as they had to appear before the reconciliation body
    to obtain one, which they could not do in her absence.


37. The Sponsor submitted that, contrary to what is said by the Respondent,
    this is not a "sole responsibility" case, but a refugee family reunion
    case and there is no sole responsibility test.


38. The Sponsor submitted that the Appellants' social, psychological and
    emotional needs are such that they need to be with him.  He submits he
    has provided extensive evidence of his relationship with the
    Appellants; they have a good standard of English because they have been
    taught in English from their first class onwards. He submitted that,
    looking at the evidence in the round, the evidence establishes the
    children are with his mother and are living with her as a pragmatic
    necessity, not by choice and because they are very young. He submitted
    that they are all under 18 and unmarried, and they have no choice as to
    where they can live.


39. The Sponsor said he relied on the cases set out in his skeleton
    argument; the Appellants are his children, and it is his right that
    they should live together. He said the Respondent is bound under the
    Refugee Convention to facilitate family reunion and not complicate
    things. He said his children should be allowed to live with him, and it
    is in their best interests to do so as his mother and father are both
    aged and ill, and, especially during the pandemic, they are at high
    risk and cannot go outside. He submitted that the appeals should be
    allowed with costs.


40. After hearing submissions from the parties, we reserved our decision
    and informed the parties that our decision would follow in writing.
    Here follows that decision, to which we have both contributed.


Discussion


Legal Framework


41. The Appellants have appealed the Respondent's decisions to refuse their
    application for entry clearance, under s.82 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the ground that the decisions are
    unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  The Appellants must
    satisfy us on the balance of probabilities that Article 8 ECHR is
    engaged. If we find that it is, the burden shifts to the Respondent to
    establish that the decisions are proportionate.


42. Although the Appellants' ability to satisfy the IR is not the question
    to be determined, it is capable of being a weighty factor when deciding
    whether the refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing
    immigration control.  As set out by the Court of Appeal in TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, compliance with the rules would
    usually mean that there is nothing on the Respondent's side of the
    scales to show that the refusal of the claim could be justified. At
    paragraphs [32] to [34], the Senior President of Tribunals confirmed
    that where a person meets the rules, the human rights appeal must
    succeed because 'considerable weight' must be given to the Respondent's
    policy as set out in the rules.  Conversely, if the rules are not met,
    although not determinative, that is a factor which strengthens the
    weight to be attached to the public interest in maintaining immigration
    control.


43. Paragraph 352D of the IR states as follows:


         Requirements for leave to enter or remain as the child of a refugee


         352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
         parent who currently has refugee status are that the applicant:


         (i) is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
         granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and


         (ii) is under the age of 18; and


         (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
         civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and


         (iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum at
         the time that the person granted asylum left the country of their
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and


         (v) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by virtue
         of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article 1F of the
         Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in their own right;
         and


         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom entry
         clearance for entry in this capacity.


44. The Appellants fall for consideration under 352D because their
    applications were made on the basis that they were under 18 at the time
    of application and the Sponsor has been granted refugee status in the
    UK.  As we noted at the outset, the sole issue before us is whether the
    Appellants have formed an independent family unit.


45. As the Appellants are under 18, adhering to the spirit of section 55 of
    the of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (as they are
    outside the UK) requires us to have regard to the need to safeguard and
    promote their welfare.


46. Under section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    when determining whether a decision would be unlawful on the basis that
    it breaches the right to respect for private and family life, when
    considering the question whether an interference with a person's right
    to respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2),
    we must have regard in particular to the considerations listed in
    section 117B.


47. The burden of proof is on the Appellants to prove the facts they allege
    and so far as the IR are concerned, the standard is the balance of
    probabilities.


Findings and Conclusions


Engagement of Article 8 ECHR


48. It was not suggested by Mr Bates that the Appellants do not enjoy a
    family life with the Sponsor.  The Respondent accepts that the
    Appellants are the Sponsor's biological children and that they were
    part of his household at the time he left Pakistan.


49. We find the Sponsor has sufficiently demonstrated that he and the
    Appellants enjoy family life together and that Article 8 is engaged.
    We find that the decision to refuse the Appellants leave to enter has
    consequences of such gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8.
    We accept that the interference is in accordance with the law, and that
    the interference is necessary to protect the legitimate aim of
    immigration control and the economic well-being of the country.  The
    issue in this appeal is whether the interference is proportionate to
    the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  The importance of,
    and weight to be given to immigration control has been underscored by
    Parliament in s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    (as amended) as referred to above.


Rule 352D


50. Broadly put, insofar as is relevant to our decision, paragraph 352D of
    the IR requires that the Appellants are under 18, are not leading an
    independent life, are unmarried and have not formed an independent
    family unit; and were part of the family unit of the Sponsor when the
    Sponsor left Pakistan in 2011.


51. No issue has been raised as to the Appellants' ages.  They are all
    minors. It is accepted that the Sponsor has refugee status and that he
    is biologically related to the Appellants. We note that the Sponsor was
    recognised as a refugee as the dependant of his partner SN, who had
    been granted asylum, without his evidence being tested in a Tribunal.


Is the Appellant's mother absent?


52. It is useful for us to begin by considering the claim made by the
    Appellants and the Sponsor that the Appellants' mother left the family
    in 2010 and that her whereabouts since are unknown. The Appellants'
    grandmother states in her statement dated 8 April 2011 that the
    "Sponsor separated with appellants mother on 21-10.2010", without any
    further elaboration or further reference to the Appellants' mother.


53. The statutory declaration made by the Appellants' grandfather on 21
    June 2019 claims the Sponsor separated from his wife (the Appellants'
    mother) in 2010.  The grandfather claims the children were abandoned
    and left in the care of the Sponsor and that the Appellants' mother has
    not met with them since 2010, neither has the family heard anything
    about her.  He claims that in their community, when couples separate,
    it is considered to be a declaration of "war" and the woman's side
    consider the children to be children of the enemy.  He confirms that he
    is not in a position to look after the Appellants because of his own
    health related issues and other commitments.


54. The Appellants' aunt who we refer to as [SP] has provided a statement
    in which she simply states; "I confirm that children are living without
    their both parents.  Children mother is not living with their children
    (appellants) since 2010 and father is in the UK".


55. The Sponsor's partner [SN] has made a statement dated 27 April 2021.
    She states that when the Sponsor entered her life, she knew that he was
    a father of four children, and he was a single parent because the
    Appellants' mother left them in his care and separated.


56. We have a number of letters and statements in the evidence before us
    that make the bare assertion that the Appellants have been living with
    their grandparents, and without their mother since 2010.  Their content
    is vague and devoid of any details such that we attach little weight to
    that evidence. Examples are as follows:


      a. Letters in manuscript written by [FAB] and [MAZ] in June 2019 (when
         aged 13 and 11 respectively).  [FAB] was only 4 in 2010 and [MAZ]
         was 2.  Neither child makes any reference to their mother, but both
         confirm they are living with their grandparents and siblings.


      b. A supporting letter from Gulla Abbasi dated 8 April 2021 confirming
         the Appellants are living without their mother and father and are
         looked after by their grandmother.


      c. Letters from Raja Mehmood, Vice Chairman of UC Mandi Bhalwal, The
         Sarai Alamgir District, dated 20 August 2018 and 20 November 2020.
         He states that he knows the Sponsor and his family personally.  He
         states the Sponsor and his wife separated in 2010 "because of
         property/land disputes between the families", and that since the
         Sponsor's departure from Pakistan his four children have remained
         under the care of their grandmother "without their real mother".


      d.  A letter from Muhammad Daud Khan dated 16 May 2018 who states he
         personally knows the Appellants are living without their mother and
         father but with their grandparents and an aunt.


      e. A letter from Memoona Rashid dated 15 September 2018 saying she has
         known the Sponsor since 2005 as a class fellow and good friend,
         they visited each other houses prior to Memoona's departure from
         Pakistan in 2010, at which point all the children were part of the
         Sponsor's family unit and household. Since the Sponsor has been in
         the UK, they have been in contact.


      f. A letter from Asghar Ali, a General Councillor, dated 17 August
         2018.  He confirms that he knows the Sponsor and his family
         personally, and that the Sponsor used to live with his four
         children, parents and siblings until he left for the UK in April
         2011.


      g. Two letters from Raja Zulqarnain, who claims to have responsibility
         for collection of fixed agricultural revenue. In his first letter
         dated 20 August 2018, he states that he knows the Sponsor and his
         family as residents of the same village, and the Sponsor lived with
         his four children in the ancestral home until he left for the UK in
         April 2011, following which his children were left in the care of
         their grandmother.  In a subsequent undated letter, he adds that
         the Sponsor separated from his wife "because of land disputes with
         his in-laws".  He states the Appellants are living with their
         grandparents and an aunt, and that "I know they are living without
         their real mother".


      h. A letter from Tazeem Akhtar, an employee of the Health Department
         dated 20 August 2018, in which she claims she personally knows the
         Sponsor and his family and that she had been providing designated
         services to the Sponsor's family and his children, until they left
         the ancestral home in 2015.


      i. A letter from Ch. Jiger Muhammad Shakir dated 12 May 2018 which
         says he is a teacher and had been teaching [FAB] and [FIB] who were
         enrolled by their grandmother; the grandmother is the only person
         who drops off and picks up the children to and from the institution
         and is the contact person regarding their progress and in case of
         emergency.


      j. A letter from Ijaz Ahmad dated 20 August 2018 who confirms that he
         last provided a vaccination to the Appellants' mother on 14 June
         2010 and 14 July 2010.  He last provided a measles vaccination to
         [FAB] on 15 September 2019 at the family home in the presence of
         her grandmother.


      k. A letter from Imam Jamroz Khan dated 20 August 2018 in which he
         confirms that he personally knows the Sponsor and his family. He
         confirms all four children were part of the Sponsor's family until
         the Sponsor left for the UK and after that, the Appellants'
         grandmother was responsible for them.


      l. Two letters from Asma Bukhtawar.  The first dated 14 May 2018
         confirms that she is a private tutor and has been teaching the
         Appellants for two hours a day.  She states the children are living
         with their grandparents and an aunt without their mother and
         father. In that first letter she states "All the matters regarding
         tuition fee and time have been settled by children's grandmother.
         She is the only person who provides pick and drop to the children.
         She is also the only contact person regarding the children's
         progress and in case of emergency."  In a subsequent letter dated
         25 November 2020 she refers to the Appellants' grandmother and
         states "she is the only person who provides pick and drop to the
         children. She is also the key contact person regarding the
         children's progress and in case of emergency.  In that second
         letter she adds "Children father [the Sponsor] also keeps in
         contact with me regarding children progress."


      m. Letter from the Principal of Sajid Memorial Public High School
         dated 21 August 2018 confirming [MAZ] was enrolled under the
         guardianship of his father on 29 May 2010 and 31 March 2011, and
         [MB] and [FIB] by their grandmother on 3 April 2014 and 30 May 2014
         and that the Sponsor paid the fees directly.


      n. Letter from the Deputy Principal of Madrisa Tul Madina Lilbinnat
         dated 25 November 2020 confirming [FIB], [MB] and [FAB] were
         enrolled by their grandmother.  She confirms their mother is not
         living with them and their grandmother is their "Carer/Guardian".


57. We have considered the evidence set out in the statements and letters
    before us in the round, together with the evidence of the Sponsor.  We
    are not satisfied that the evidence establishes that the Appellants'
    mother did leave the family home in 2010 as claimed.  It is incredible
    that she would have simply left the family home leaving her four
    children in the way claimed by the Sponsor.


58. The fact that there are a number of individuals that are all prepared
    to say that the Appellants have lived without their mother since 2010
    is not sufficient to establish that this is the case, especially where
    the authors of the letters and statements provide very little, if any,
    information regarding the breakdown of the Sponsor's relationship with
    his wife and where the wife went in 2010, despite the two families
    living in the same area, and despite claims that the authors knew the
    Sponsor's family personally.  The Sponsor's wife was the daughter of
    his maternal uncle who also lived in the same area, and it is likely
    that the authors of a number of the letters would have known her
    whereabouts. It is not clear how the authors of the school letters
    would know that the children were living without their mother beyond
    the authors having been told that by the Sponsor or his family. We find
    that the bare assertions set out in the letters and statements are, in
    truth, an attempt by the Sponsor to bolster the claim that his wife
    left the family home in 2010.


59. We attach little weight to the evidence of the Appellants'
    grandparents.  The statements of the grandmother are in English and
    signed by her in Urdu.  She is said to be illiterate. In her statement
    of 21 May 2018, she says "I can't read or write and also unable to
    operate latest gadgets, so we have been in contact with [Sponsor] via
    mostly voice calls". However, there is nothing in her statements that
    suggest they have been translated or read to her before they were
    signed or that they were signed in the presence of an interpreter.  The
    statements of the Sponsor's parents barely mention the children's
    mother, the breakdown of the Sponsor's relationship with his wife or
    the considerable impact that her, and later the Sponsor's leaving, is
    likely to have had upon the family.  Their statements do not refer to
    the land dispute or indeed any reason for the mother leaving, despite
    the fact that the land dispute is likely to have had an impact upon the
    Sponsor's mother too. She is the sister of the Sponsor's father-in-law.




60. Even if they all lived together prior to 2010, the grandparents went
    from being peripheral carers to being the primary carers of the
    children, one of whom was a very young baby at the time. Beyond the
    claim that the Appellants' mother left the home because of a 'land
    dispute' we have no credible evidence or explanation as to why she
    would simply abandon her young children and make no attempt whatsoever
    to see or contact them again. There is no evidence before us of any
    attempt made by the Sponsor or the Appellants' grandparents to
    establish contact with the Appellants' mother, and we do not accept
    that the Sponsor would have failed to make even the most basic of
    enquiries to establish where she had gone, given the family connections
    and proximity within which both families lived.


61. [SN] has provided a statement dated 27 April 2021 in which she claims
    that when the Sponsor entered her life, she knew that he was the father
    of four children and was a single parent because the Appellants' mother
    left them in his care.  [SN] was not called to give evidence and her
    evidence has not been tested in cross-examination.  [SN] had previously
    provided a letter from Dr Amy Au-Young, a Consultant Perinatal
    Psychiatrist dated 5 July 2019 who says she is "currently" working with
    [SN] as her Consultant Psychiatrist.  Dr Amy Au-Young simply states;
    "..attending court would be very challenging and may be too
    traumatising for her.." but there is no further information since about
    any underlying mental health diagnosis or treatment. We note from a
    document headed "CA3 Children's Further Assessment" dated 13 May 2016
    (although the date is not entirely clear as it is a poor photocopy) in
    the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal that SN had been diagnosed
    with psychotic symptoms which could be trigged by discussing her
    history. However, there is no up-to-date medical evidence before us
    regarding the health of [SN] and no explanation for her failure to
    attend and give evidence before us on 11 May 2021, almost two years
    after the letter from Dr Amy Au-Young.  The statement of [SN] regarding
    the Appellants' mother is in the vaguest of terms and we attach little
    weight to her evidence.


62. We find it odd that the letters from the children used phrases such as
    "I want to live with my father for my social, psychological, mental,
    physical and emotional growth and development", noting the Sponsor used
    a very similar phrase in his closing submissions. This phraseology,
    which one would not expect from children, together with their letters
    being in very good English cause us to find on balance that the Sponsor
    was likely largely responsible for the content of these letters rather
    than them being evidence free from manipulation of the true position of
    the Appellants.


63. We accept the submission made by Mr Bates that there is no objective
    background material before us to establish that English is the official
    language of Pakistan such that it is the norm for it to be used in all
    official documents. In direct contradiction of the Sponsor's assertion,
    the newspaper extracts provided by the Sponsor are not in English, and
    the Appellants' bundle also contains copies of the 'Application for
    Grant of Guardianship Certificate' and a 'Security Survey' together
    with translations.  The fact that those official documents are not in
    English and required translations undermines the Sponsor's claim that
    it is the norm for English to be used on all official documents.  In
    the absence of any objective background material, we do not accept the
    Sponsor's assertions as to his inability to obtain a divorce in
    Pakistan nor Mr Bates' assertions as to the age to which children are
    usually cared for by their mothers in Pakistan.


64. The Sponsor's mother applied for guardianship of the Appellants in
    2019, eight years after the Sponsor left Pakistan and four years after
    the remaining family's first move away from the village. We have been
    provided with a copy of the grandmother's application and a
    translation.  The Sponsor confirmed at the hearing that the house moves
    required changes of school and the letter from Sajid Memorial High
    School supports this by stating that three of the Appellants were
    issued with School Leaving Certificates in February 2015. The Sponsor
    in his 'written argument' states that his mother applied for a
    guardianship certificate because she faced difficulties without it
    "especially two appellants are in secondary school and their awarding
    body needs real parent or real guardians' signature". The application
    itself states the reason for it being made was "Applicant has been
    facing problems with the minor's school, NADRA office and passport
    office". On balance, we find the Sponsor's explanation for the
    certificate being obtained is not entirely truthful. We find it more
    likely that it was obtained because the Sponsor thought it looked like
    persuasive 'official' evidence of the children's mother being absent.
    We find the application for a guardianship certificate is again an
    attempt to persuade us that the Appellants' mother left the family home
    and has played no role in the Appellants' lives since 2010. In this
    respect:


      a. The timing of the application is of some concern.  We note it was
         made on 20 September 2019, shortly after Judge Lodge had dismissed
         the First-tier Tribunal appeal on 22 August 2019.


      b. The Sponsor produced several further documents concerning the
         application, being: a petition for guardianship dated 20 January
         2020 referring to it being an 'amended petition'; two newspaper
         adverts (which we discuss below); a certificate of guardianship
         dated 8 February 2020 and a surety bond dated 8 February 2020.  The
         petition adduced is an 'amended' petition.  We have not seen the
         original petition filed when the application was made; nor do we
         know why there was a need for it to be amended or what the
         amendment was.


      c. We have been provided with copies of two newspaper adverts with
         translations.  The first is from a newspaper dated 30 September
         2019 addressed to the "Public at Large" and required anybody who
         had an objection to the application to approach the court on 4
         October 2019 at 08:00.  The second is from a newspaper dated 2
         December 2019 addressed to the Appellants' mother and states,
         "service of the summons to the respondent is difficult" and informs
         that she must attend the court on 09/12/2019 at 09:00.  We have
         been provided with the originals of the newspaper adverts.  The
         second advert has quite clearly been tampered with. Part of the
         advert has been cut away and a piece of paper stuck on to the
         reverse so that a date of 12-12-19 appears in the advert, which in
         any event is also at odds with the translation of 09/12/2019.


      d. We note that both newspaper adverts pre-date the 'amended' petition
         of 20 January 2020 and there is no evidence before us of any
         attempt made by the Appellants' grandmother or the Court to bring
         the amended petition to the attention of the Appellants' mother.


      e. The guardianship certificate states the "Date of Decision" to be
         20.01.2020.  That is the same date as the date of the amended
         petition.  The guardianship certificate appears to have been issued
         simply upon the basis of the 'Statement of Facts' set out in the
         amended petition dated 20 January 2020 and there is no evidence of
         any attempt having been made by the Court to verify the accuracy of
         the matters set out in the amended petition.  There is no evidence
         before us that the Court made its decision to grant a guardianship
         certificate after having heard any evidence from the Appellants'
         grandmother or other witnesses or having had the opportunity of
         having the content of the petition probed in any way.


      f. Overall, we attach little weight to these documents.  At their
         highest, they establish that the grandmother is recognised as a
         legal guardian, not that the Appellants' mother is absent.


65. The translations of the documents that are before us are wholly
    unsatisfactory.  The Practice Direction of the Immigration and Asylum
    Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, as most
    recently amended by Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President of Tribunals on
    18 December 2018 provides, at [8.2], that the best practice for the
    preparation of bundles is that where the document is not in the English
    language, a typed translation of the document signed by the translator,
    and certifying that the translation is accurate, must be inserted in
    the bundle next to the copy of the original document, together with
    details of the identity and qualifications of the translator.  The
    translations that we have in the papers before us are not signed by the
    translator, or certified as being accurate.  Neither are the details of
    the identity and qualifications of the translator set out.  Given our
    serious concerns about the newspaper advert that we have set out, we
    are not prepared to accept the translations are accurate without proper
    compliance with the Practice Direction.


66. There are other inconsistencies in the evidence that we have taken into
    account in our assessment of the credibility of the Sponsor and the
    extent to which we can attach weight to the evidence of the Appellants'
    grandparents and aunt in particular.  We note the Sponsor at the
    hearing said his sister is helping his parents to care for the children
    because they are both very ill and she lives in the same household.
    However, his sister's statement says "I am helping my mother in looking
    after the appellants and also in other matters at the moment. I live in
    my own home with my husband and am not available full time any more".
    The Sponsor also said his father needs 24/7 care and yet his father's
    statement says he is "taking care of my agricultural land and cattle
    farms" indicating he is still working. These inconsistencies negatively
    affect the Sponsor's credibility.


67. Overall, we do not find it proved on the balance of probabilities that
    the children are living without their biological mother, nor do we
    accept the Sponsors' explanations as to why she left.  We find it
    likely that she is still a part of the Appellants' lives and that they
    are part of a family unit with her and the Sponsor's parents and, for a
    time, his sister.


68. The question is then, whether the Appellants, together with their
    mother, grandparents and aunt, have formed an independent family unit.







Independent family unit


69. The cases of MI (paragraph 298 (iii); "independent life") Pakistan 2007
    UKAIT 00052 and NM (Leading an independent life) Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT
    00051 put forward by the Appellants both concern the formation of an
    independent life, not an independent family unit. MI does not assist us
    particularly but NM, although focussing on 'independent life' in
    respect of (then) IR 197 is relevant in saying:


         "[Headnote] Where a child (who may be over 18) is seeking limited
         leave to remain as the child of a parent with limited leave, in
         order to establish that he is not "leading an independent life" he
         must not have formed through choice a separate (and therefore
         independent) social unit from his parents' family unit whether
         alone or with others.  A child who, for example, chooses to live
         away from home may be "leading an independent life" despite some
         continuing financial and/or emotional dependence upon his parents."


         ...


         [12] First, there is the underlying purpose of para 197 (and other
         similar rules such as paras 243, 274 and 298) which is to maintain
         the family unit between parents and their children when the former
         come to the UK with limited leave to enter or remain.   It allows
         children to remain part of the family unit in which they lived
         abroad with their parents (or sole surviving parent or one with
         sole responsibility).  At least at the point of application (and
         most likely decision) the child must by virtue of para 197(ii) be
         under the age of 18.  As such, the rule clearly contemplates the
         situation where, usually at any rate, the applicant (on entry) is a
         child who is naturally part of the family unit headed by its parent
         or parents.  Thus, paragraph 197 is properly seen as a rule
         providing for the continuation of "family unity".   The difficulty
         arises when applying the provision post-entry to a child who is now
         an adult but to whom the rule can still be applied providing he is
         unmarried, has not formed an independent family unit and is not
         leading an independent life.  However, the underlying purpose of
         the rule is the same - the continuation and maintenance of the
         "family unit" with the parents.


         [13] Second, there is the context of the phrase itself as it
         appears in para 197(iii).   The child must be "unmarried", have not
         formed an independent family unit" or, as are concerned with in
         this appeal, "not [be] leading an independent life".  Clearly,
         these are three distinct possibilities but, in our view, they have
         a common feature.  A child who has married or formed his own
         independent family has separated from the family unit of his
         parents.  He has formed his own social unit with others.  It seems
         to us that the third possibility also requires the same element of
         "separation"; the formation of a separate (and therefore
         independent) social unit from his parents' whether alone or with
         others, for example a girlfriend or boyfriend.  The rule does not
         require that the child must be independent of everyone; just that
         he must be independent of his parents.  At that point, the
         underlying purpose of para 197 of maintaining the family unit with
         the parents is no longer engaged.  Further leave to remain should
         now be a matter of the child satisfying the Immigration Rules on
         his own right rather than as a component of the social unit of
         which he is no longer part.


         [14].    Mr Tranter submitted that it was a matter of assessing the
         nature of the choices made by the child.  To an extent we agree.
         It is not enough that the child does make choices about his life,
         for example to take up employment.  This, like other choices made
         by the child, may be factors to be taken into account but the
         crucial issue is always to ask whether the child has, through
         choice, separated from his parents' family to form his own social
         unit, whether alone, by marrying or as part of his own independent
         social unit.   Consequently, a child who leaves his parents' home
         and sets up home alone can properly be said to be "leading an
         independent life".   This is not the same as saying he must no
         longer be dependent upon his parents or is no longer part of their
         family.  He clearly is the latter even if living alone and
         "independently" of them.  The family ties remain even if the family
         unit headed by the parents has now split up.  Likewise, even if
         living his own independent life he may be financially dependent (at
         least in part) on his parents, for example they may help him set up
         his separate home and, perhaps, even help him with his rent or
         mortgage for a period until he has found his feet financially.
         But, in our view such a person may still be seen as "leading an
         independent life".  Financial or emotional dependence is not, in
         this context, the antithesis of "independence".   Again, these are
         relevant factors to be taken into account but no more."


70. The Appellants' other proffered case of BM and AL (352D(iv); meaning of
    "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT 00055 held that what comprises a
    'family unit' for the purposes of (then) rule 352D(iv) is a question of
    fact. It is of limited assistance in terms of ascertaining the meaning
    of 'independent' family unit in circumstances where it has been
    accepted that the Appellants were part of the Sponsor's family unit
    before he left Pakistan.  Having said that, we find the following
    paragraphs to be noteworthy:


         "[27] We regard the issue as to what is a "family unit" for the
         purposes of para 352D(iv) as a question of fact.  In many cases it
         will be clear that a child was part of a family unit with an asylum
         seeker in his country of habitual residence.  The child will have
         lived with the asylum seeker and perhaps another partner.
         Alternatively if there has been separation the reason for that
         separation may well be associated with the claim of persecution and
         a child might still remain part of the family unit from which the
         potential refugee had been temporarily separated.  Here no such
         claim is made."


         [28] If on the other hand the separation is the result of social
         choice by the parties and a separate family unit based upon the
         mother is created, it will be correspondingly harder to establish
         that a child is in reality a part of two different family units.
         This will be especially so if the child is young and the
         consequence will be separation from the mother rather than family
         unity as envisaged by the UNHCR handbook."


71. The facts in BM and AL were that the Sponsor came to the UK with his
    current partner and their son, after which the Sponsor was recognised
    as a refugee. Applications were made for his two children, who never
    lived with him and were the product of his affairs with other women, to
    come to the UK as pre-flight members of his family unit. Their
    applications were refused, and these refusals were upheld on appeal by
    both the First Tier and the Upper Tier Tribunal, on the basis that the
    applicants had never been part of the Sponsor's family unit.  At the
    time of leaving his country, the Sponsor had been living with his
    current partner and their son, who were able to join him in the UK some
    years later. He was therefore found to have a family unit with only
    these people, and not the applicants, despite there being a
    relationship between the Sponsor and applicants in terms of contact and
    financial assistance.


72. The authorities referred to by the Appellants do not address the
    central issue that we are concerned with, although it is clear that a
    fact sensitive assessment is required.  Paragraph 352D IR makes
    provision for family reunion so that children under the age of 18 may
    join a parent granted asylum as long as the child has not inter alia
    formed an independent family unit.  A fact-specific assessment is
    required, and we must consider whether the particular circumstances in
    which the Appellants live, are such that they can be said to have
    formed an independent family unit.


73. We have found that the Appellants' mother is still a part of the
    Appellants' lives. We accept that the Appellants' grandparents and
    (initially) their aunt in Pakistan have also played a significant role
    in the Appellants' lives and have done so since the Sponsor left them
    in 2011. The Sponsor confirms he fled Pakistan in 2011 with his current
    partner because they had committed an 'un-Islamic act' and formed a
    relationship together in breach of their respective marriages to other
    people. Since being in the UK, the Sponsor and [SN] have had children
    together.


74. The Sponsor confirmed at the hearing that when he left Pakistan, he had
    no plans for the Appellants to join him in the UK in the future and
    handed their care to his mother, their grandmother. Although we accept
    the Appellants may live with their grandparents, we find they do so
    along with their mother. We find the Sponsor did not need to have any
    plans for the Appellants to join him in the UK because they remained in
    Pakistan as part of a family unit with their mother, and grandparents.


75. We accept, save for a period between 2015 and 2017, the Sponsor has
    maintained regular contact with the Appellants and has provided some
    financial support, but we reject his evidence that he has been the one
    directing their lives. We accept Mr Bates' submission concerning the
    nature of the evidence of phone and message contact between the
    Appellants and Sponsor. We note there is some evidence of money
    transfers and gifts from the Sponsor and that he paid some school fees.




76. The Sponsor confirmed at the hearing that there was a total lack of
    contact between 2015 and 2017, which is confirmed by the grandmother's
    witness statement dated 21 May 2018.  We also have the two statements
    made by Asma Bukhtawar.  In the first statement of 14 May 2018, she
    said the grandmother is the only person who provides "pick and drop to
    the children" and she is also the only contact regarding the children's
    progress and in case of emergency.  She makes no reference to any
    contact with the Sponsor.  In her second statement dated 25 November
    2020 she said the Sponsor also keeps in contact with her regarding the
    children's progress. We attach little weight to this evidence in the
    absence of any explanation from her as to why she did not refer to the
    contact with the Sponsor previously.  Her second statement was made
    after the First-Tier Tribunal decision dismissing the Appellants'
    appeal on 22 August 2019. On balance, we find that it is the
    Appellants' family in Pakistan (i.e. their mother and grandmother in
    particular) that make the decisions as regards the Appellants'
    education and are the primary point of contact and care for them.


77. We accept the appellant is not required to establish he has 'sole
    responsibility' for the appellant.  That is not the test.  In the end
    we must be satisfied that on balance, the Appellants have not formed an
    independent family unit.  There is force in the submission made by the
    Sponsor that the narrow interpretation adopted by the Respondent would
    mean that no child of a refugee who has been left in the care of
    another family member would qualify under the family reunion rules.  A
    fact sensitive assessment is required. With this in mind and when
    looking at the case in the round, we find that the Appellants have
    formed an independent family unit separate from the Sponsor.  On the
    facts and findings we have made, we do not accept the Appellants have
    separated from their mother.  They were part of a family unit with her
    prior to the Sponsor's departure from Pakistan and we find they have
    'formed an independent family unit' with her, since the Sponsor's
    departure.


78. The Appellants remain as part of an independent family unit with their
    mother.  Being so young, the Appellants were not capable, at the time
    of the Sponsor leaving, of choosing to form a separate family unit.
    Rather, the separation of the family unit was caused by the positive
    act of the Sponsor choosing to leave them and come to the UK with his
    current partner. His departure, using a student visa, was planned in
    advance, and the Sponsor says he had no plans to bring the Appellants
    to the UK at a later date.  The Sponsor's separation from the
    Appellants was not temporary.  He chose to leave his family unit that
    then comprised of the mother, the Appellants, the grandparents and
    aunt, in favour of a new life with his current partner, with whom he
    has since had children.


79. The fact that the Sponsor assists the Appellants financially and is in
    some form of continued contact with them is not sufficient to persuade
    us on balance that the Appellants have not formed an independent family
    unit. Furthermore, there was a gap between 2015 and 2017 when the
    Sponsor did not financially support or contact the Appellants. During
    this period, the Appellants' family unit was entirely self-sufficient.
    There is no evidence that the Appellants had any unmet needs during
    that period. We do not accept the Sponsor's explanation that the lack
    of contact during this period was due to mobile phones being scarce in
    Pakistan. His evidence is internally inconsistent with his claim that
    his mother is an old-fashioned woman who was not happy with what the
    Sponsor had done, and that was the reason why contact ceased.


80. In any event, the Appellants' grandmother, with the consent of the
    Sponsor, has now also secured a certificate of guardianship.  The
    position now is that not only were the Appellants left by the Sponsor
    in Pakistan when he left in 2011, but with the consent of the Sponsor,
    the children are now also part of an independent family unit with their
    grandmother.


81. On balance, we therefore find the requirements of IR 352D(iii) are  not
    met because the Appellants have formed an independent family unit  with
    their mother and grandparents, the aunt having left the family home  at
    some point.





Best interests of the children

82. As above, the Section 55 duty  requires  immigration  functions  to  be
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    Appellants' welfare as they are children.

83. The starting point is that it is in the Appellants' bests  interest  to
    be with at least one of their parents. Since we have found their mother
    is still with them and never left, it is in  their  best  interests  to
    stay with her in Pakistan.  We find she is likely to  have  been  their
    primary carer.  We find the Sponsor has exaggerated the role played  by
    his parents in the roles of the children and the belated steps taken to
    obtain a guardianship certificate to be nothing more than an attempt to
    bolster the Sponsor's claim that the Appellants'  mother  left  without
    trace in 2010.   Alternatively,  the  grandmother  has  now,  with  the
    consent of the Sponsor, secured a guardianship certificate  recognising
    the important role she plays in the lives of the Appellants.   Even  on
    the Appellant's own case, she has been  the  stable  figure  throughout
    their lives and we find it would be in their  best  interests  to  stay
    with her. The Appellants have only ever lived in Pakistan and  will  be
    familiar with the culture and language  there.  There  is  insufficient
    evidence of the grandparents being in such a poor state  of  health  to
    persuade us  on  balance  that  they  are  unable  to  look  after  the
    Appellants; indeed we  have  found  the  evidence  of  the  grandfather
    indicates that he is still working and much of the documentary evidence
    shows that the grandmother drops off and picks up the  Appellants  from
    school so must be reasonably fit and well.

84. We note from the "CA3 Children's Further Assessment" referred to  above
    that the Sponsor and SN's child was subject to a child protection  plan
    after it was identified that SN had slapped the child across the  face.
    It details how SN had been  diagnosed  with  psychotic  symptoms  which
    could be trigged by discussing her history. We have  already  discussed
    the evidence of Dr  Amy  Au-Young  from  2019.  There  is  insufficient
    evidence on which to make any findings about SN's present mental state.
    We mention this purely because it  indicates  the  possibility  of  the
    environment available in the UK being in contrast to that in  Pakistan,
    where there is no evidence to show any ill treatment or lack of care of
    the Appellants, such that it would be in their best interests to remain
    there.

85. We find on balance it would  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellants to live in the UK away from everything they have ever  known
    and when they appear to be being well cared for and are all  in  stable
    education.  We  acknowledge  that  this  has  an  impact   upon   their
    relationship with the Sponsor because  they  are  physically  separated
    from him.  However, we have found that the Appellants  have  formed  an
    independent family unit with their mother.  As Mr  Bates  submits,  she
    has no entitlement to enter the UK under the family reunion  provisions
    because the Sponsor is no longer in a relationship with  her.   If  the
    Appellants join their father in the UK, that will result in them  being
    separated from their mother and other close  family  members  who  have
    played a significant role in their lives.  We see  no  reason  why  the
    Sponsor cannot continue to support the Appellants financially from  the
    UK.  We find on balance it is in  the  Appellants'  best  interests  to
    maintain the status quo.

Conclusion on the Immigration Rules and Best Interests

86. We have found the Appellants  do  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and it would not be in their best interests  to  come
    to the UK.  We therefore turn to Article 8.

Article 8

87. We have found that Article 8 ECHR is engaged.

88. The impact of the refusal decision means that such family life  as  the
    Appellants and Sponsor do and could enjoy, will be interfered  with  by
    their continued separation.

89. Addressing the Razgar test, the interference is in accordance with  the
    law and necessary in the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the
    country. We therefore need to  consider  whether  the  interference  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim  of  having  efficient  immigration
    controls.

90. We have considered the case of GM (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 which included  the  following
    observations about the test to be applied:

      a. the test for  an  assessment  outside  the  immigration  rules  was
         whether a fair balance was  struck  between  competing  public  and
         private interests;

      b. that proportionality test was to be applied to the circumstances of
         the individual case.

91. Taking s.117B into consideration:

      a. it is in the public interest that the  Appellants  are  financially
         independent. No issue has been  raised  by  the  Respondent  as  to
         whether the Sponsor could adequately provide for the  Appellant  in
         terms of finance and accommodation. In any event,  this  factor  is
         neutral in the balance.

      b. it is in the public interest that the Appellants can speak English.
         As children, they are exempt from the requirement and  this  factor
         is also neutral.

      c. the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
         interest.  We have found  that  the  Appellants  do  not  meet  the
         requirements of the immigration rules.

      d. We have found it is in the Appellants'  best  interests  to  remain
         with their mother and grandparents as a family unit in Pakistan.

92. We have conducted a balancing exercise and have had regard  to  factors
    that weigh in favour of the Appellants  and  Sponsor.   We  acknowledge
    that the refusal of the application is such  that  the  Appellants  are
    unable to live with one of their biological parents.  However,  if  the
    Appellants are reunited with the Sponsor, they would lose  the  benefit
    of  their  relationship  with  their  biological   mother   and   their
    grandparents and aunt, all of whom we accept have played a  significant
    role in the lives of the Appellants.  Weighing the balance, we find the
    interference to be proportionate.

93. Accordingly, we conclude that the refusal decisions  are  proportionate
    and dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision


94. We dismiss the appeal on the basis that the refusal of entry  clearance
    does not breach section 6 Human Rights Act 1998  (based  on  Article  8
    ECHR).


95. An anonymity direction is made as the Appellants are the children of  a
    person who has been recognised as a refugee.


Signed   L. Shepherd                Date:     14 June 2021

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shepherd




