
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25215/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2018                           |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                lebohang [m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, of Counsel instructed by Messrs A C
Gilead Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Gribble who in a determination promulgated on 3
    January 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal for leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds on the basis that he was  entitled  to  indefinite
    leave to remain as he had ten years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in
    Britain.

2.   The appeal was listed  for  21  December  2017.   On  18  December  the
    appellant's solicitors had sent a fax to the Tribunal stating that  the
    appellant had suffered a vicious attack the previous day.  Attached  to
    the letter were three photographs which I have  seen  showing  horrific
    injuries to the appellant's face.  After a request from the Tribunal  a
    sicknote stating that the appellant was not fit for work because  of  a
    hand fracture was faxed through.  This was sent by the GP referral unit
    of the hospital which the appellant had attended.

3.   There was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing and the judge decided to determine the appeal on the  basis  of
    the evidence before him.  There is now before me  a  letter  requesting
    that the appellant attend the Maxillo Facial Unit of the John Radcliffe
    Hospital on 12 January, that letter being dated 9 January 2018.

4.   The grounds of appeal asserted that the  judge  should  have  adjourned
    the appeal.  Ms Pal argued that the reality  was  that  the  judge  had
    reached the only conclusion that he could have  reached  on  the  human
    rights claim which was that the appellant did not qualify for leave  to
    remain either within or outside the Rules.  The appellant who  had  had
    leave to remain as a student and then as a carer had  entered  a  civil
    partnership in 2012 with a man who had  died  three  years  later.   It
    appears there a human rights claim made because the  claim  related  to
    the appellant's relationship with his dead partner's family.

5.   While there is considerable merit in the arguments put  forward  by  Ms
    Pal that the appellant's appeal could not succeed the reality  is  that
    in my view  the  evidence  put  forward  on  the  application  for  the
    adjournment was overwhelming given the nature of the injuries and  what
    I will consider to be the likely subsequent trauma that  the  appellant
    would have suffered  which would mean that he would not be able to give
    his best if any evidence at a hearing and that therefore it  could  not
    be said that he would have had the fairest possible hearing.   While  I
    consider that the  appellant's  solicitors  should  have  attended  the
    hearing and repeated their request for the  adjournment  and  indeed  I
    consider that the appellant could also have attended and indicated  why
    he could not attend.  I consider that it is appropriate  that  I  remit
    this appeal for a further hearing on  all  grounds  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

6.   I am fortified in that decision when I  note  that  the  appellant  had
    been asked to attend a hearing in October 2017 and that he had attended
    with Counsel but that the hearing had been adjourned  then  through  no
    fault of his own because of a lack of court time and that it  had  then
    been relisted for 21 December.  The appellant had therefore  shown  his
    willingness to attend the hearing.

7.   I consider that the judge erred in law in not  adjourning  the  hearing
    and I therefore set aside his decision.

8.   I direct that the appeal now be listed for a  further  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]                      Date: 11 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
