










Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/25155/2018;

                                                               HU/25161/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 16th September 2019                |On 27th September 2019          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                Mrs Yumna [N]

                                      &

                                 Mr Sher [S]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Greer of Counsel

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McAll promulgated on the  17th  June  2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellants' claims based on Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Owens on 20th August 2019. Thus the case appeared before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

    Immigration background

 4. The appellants had married in Pakistan in 2011.

 5. They had entered the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  student,  Mrs  [N],  and  her
    dependent,  Mr  [S]  with  leave  to  remain  until  30th  March  2013.
    Thereafter their leave was extended with leave to expire  on  the  13th
    June 2015.

 6. On the 27th November 2014 a decision was taken to curtail  their  leave
    with leave due to expire on the 26th January 2015. The licence  of  the
    sponsoring college had been revoked and accordingly the  leave  of  the
    appellants had been curtailed in line.

 7. On the 21st January 2015 both appellants applied for  leave  to  remain
    based on human rights grounds, described as  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances. That application did not raise any issue relating to the
    completion of the course of study undertaken by the appellants.

 8. The exceptional compassionate circumstances related to the  loss  of  a
    child. Prior to the curtailment of leave Mrs [N]  had  become  pregnant
    but sadly had lost the child after 18 weeks of pregnancy. The child had
    been born prematurely on the 21st November but had died,  according  to
    the decision of Judge Sharkett. [In the  leave  it  is  suggested  that
    there was a planned termination].  The  child  was  buried  at  Everton
    Cemetery on the 26th November 2014. As a result  of  the  loss  of  the
    child Mrs [N] became depressed and required  counselling  sessions  and
    medication to deal with her grief and depression.  No reference is made
    to Mr [S] having any significant symptoms.

 9. It is not clear whether at the time of  the  curtailment  the  decision
    maker was aware of the tragic death of the child.

10. By refusal letter dated the 11th March 2015 the respondent refused  the
    appellants'  applications  based  on  human  rights.   The   appellants
    appealed.  The appeals were heard by Judge Sharkett on 30 July 2015. By
    decision promulgated on 25 August 2015 the applications were allowed. A
    copy of the decision by Judge Sharkett has been included in the papers.



11. Judge Sharkett noted:-

      a) That it had been less than one year since the loss of the child and
         the loss of the child had been a most painful  experience  for  Mrs
         [N].

      b) that Mrs [N] was still in the grieving  process  and  visiting  the
         grave gave Mrs [N] some comfort.

      c) that inevitably as the appellants move through the grieving process
         there would come a time  when  they  would  have  to  return  to  a
         semblance of normality.

      d) that the appellant, Mrs [N], was in the  acute  stage  of  grieving
         over the loss of her child given that less than a year  had  passed
         since the loss  and  that  amounted  to  exceptional  circumstances
         warranting a grant of limited leave

12. The appellants were, in line  with  the  decision  of  Judge  Sharkett,
    granted a period of further leave which was due to expire on 10  August
    2018.

13. On 24 July 2018 both appellants applied for further  leave  based  upon
    their family and private life established in the United Kingdom and the
    exceptional compassionate circumstances still prevailing over the  loss
    of the child, the mental anguish of Mrs [N] and her mental state.

14. In the meantime the appellants had had a child, who was aged about 1 at
    the time of the hearing before Judge McAll.

15. Those applications were refused by the respondent on  5  December  2018
    and it was against those decisions the appellants were appealing.

16. After hearing on 31 May 2019 by decision promulgated on  17  June  2019
    Judge McAll dismissed the appellants' appeals.

17. It was against that decision that the appellants are now appealing. The
    Upper Tribunal Judge notes in the grant of leave  that  the  appellants
    were still seeking further leave to remain on the basis of the  current
    grieving state.

    Consideration

18. In paragraphs 21 to 26 Judge McAll has looked at  claims  made  by  the
    appellant in respect of their ties to  Pakistan  and  has  given  valid
    reasons for finding that the  appellants  continue  to  have  ties  and
    family members in Pakistan. The  judge  was  also  satisfied  that  the
    appellants were healthy, relatively young and relatively well-educated.
    The appellants had lived most  of  their  lives  in  Pakistan.  He  was
    satisfied that they would be able to find work in Pakistan.  The  judge
    was satisfied that the appellants have  cultural  and  social  ties  in
    Pakistan which they had established during the first 26  and  28  years
    that they had lived there prior to coming to the United Kingdom

19. The judge went on  to  note  that  the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules. The judge took account of the findings by IJ
    Sharkett and  specifically  noted  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    required a further period of grieving at a time that was very close  to
    the loss of their child. The judge acknowledged that at that  time  Mrs
    [N] had required the support from mental health professionals.

20. Since that time however as set out in paragraph 29  Mrs  [N]  had  been
    able to reduce her medication and  she  had  not  required  counselling
    since 2015. In acknowledging that Mrs [N] had not required  counselling
    the judge had however noted that Mrs [N] was stating that she  had  not
    been getting anything from the counselling in terms of helping  her  to
    overcome her grief and depression.  The  judge  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant would always feel the loss of the child and a sense of sorrow
    and that tending the child's grave did provide some degree  of  comfort
    to the appellants. He acknowledged during the hearing that they  became
    distressed at the thought of not being able to visit  their  daughter's
    graveside. The judge was satisfied that that distress was genuine.

21. Thereafter the judge has gone on and  carefully  examined  all  of  the
    facts in respect of the appellants. The judge has given  valid  reasons
    as to why the decision taken by the respondent is in the  circumstances
    justified and as such would not constitute a breach of anyone's  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR. The judge took account of the family  ties
    that the appellants' had in Pakistan. The fact that  Mrs  [N]  was  not
    receiving  counselling  and  had   reduced   her   medication.   Whilst
    acknowledging that the appellants did receive some comfort from tending
    the grave  of  their  child,  the  judge  taking  account  of  all  the
    circumstances was  satisfied  that  the  decision  was  proportionately
    justified. The judge has properly considered all the  facts  and  fully
    justified the findings of fact.

22. Those were findings of fact that the judge was entitled to make on  the
    evidence. In the circumstances there is no error of law in the approach
    that the judge has taken with regard to the appellant's appeal. For the
    reasons set out I find that there is no material error  of  law  and  I
    uphold the decision to dismiss both appeals.

    Notice of Decision

23. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 18 September 2019



